<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-1</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B039-110</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh73.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015153 text/html 145597
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:49:25 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:35 GMT
Content-length: 145409
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh73.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Data Management Briefs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1252 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>Assessing the role of drug companies</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(816 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Working for the Common Good</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2612 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>The Scientific Method</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(689 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Newsline</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(773 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>The Big Get Bigger in Latest Clearinghouse Consolidations</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(772 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Idaho CHIN Wins Big in New Round of Federal Grants</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1065 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Digest</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(673 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>Earning the Public Trust</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1493 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>"What Role Will Speech Recognition Play in Health Care?"</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2499 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>The market leader sticks with today's technology</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(228 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>The next generation of software</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(776 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>A Healthy Year For Electronic Claims Growth</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1977 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>Facing the Outpatient Coding Challenge</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2146 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>Putting the Pieces Together</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3351 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>Information technology essential to HMO's disease management strategy</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(535 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Data Management Briefs


* Columbia Pharmacy Solutions, the Greensburg, Pa.-based pharmacy benefits
manager for Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp., has entered a preliminary agreement
with MedE America Corp., Mitchel Field, N.Y., to roll out an electronic
prescription program.  Columbia/HCA, the nation's largest investor-owned
hospital chain, plans to market the program to other providers nationally.

* The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, The Mayo Foundation, The Midwest Rural
Telemedicine Consortium and Texas Children's Hospital have contributed $5,000
each to create The Center for Telemedicine Law.  The Washington, D.C.-based
resource center was designed to explore legal issues that could present
barriers to the increased use of telemedicine nationwide.  Providers, vendors
and others interested in telemedicine issues are invited to join the center
for annual membership fees ranging from $3,500 to $7,000.

* IDX Systems Corp., a Burlington, Vt.-based practice management software
company, has filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange
Commission to offer more than four million shares of stock at $15 to $17 per
share.  The company is expanding into the clinical information services area
and is testing its Clinical Information System, which automates information
gathering related to treatment.

* The Visible Woman-a three-dimensional, computer-generated female
"cadaver"-has joined her male counterpart on the Internet as part of the
ongoing Visible Human Project by the National Library of Medicine.  Created
from thousands of images collected with radiographic and photographic
techniques, the Visible Woman will enable scientists and medical professionals
to view and study female anatomy in detail.  Information on the project is
available at the National Library of Medicine's World Wide Web page
(http:\\www.nlm.nih.gov).

* Donald Simborg, M.D., a pioneer in electronic health information software,
has joined with two partners to form KnowMed Systems, a Berkeley, Calif.-based
company that will create a data entry and display product that physicians can
use as a replacement for paper charts.

* CIS Technologies, Tulsa, Okla., is the third claims clearinghouse to obtain
national accreditation of its EDI services from the Electronic Healthcare
Network Accreditation Commission.  Since the program began in early 1995, The
Halley Exchange, Bartlett, Ill., and Synaptek, Oklahoma City, also have been
accredited.

* Systems Plus Inc., the Mountain View, Calif.-based publisher of The Medical
Manager physician practice management software, and PCS Health Systems Inc., a
Scottsdale, Ariz.-based pharmacy benefit manager, have agreed to jointly
develop PCS Link.  The software package will give physician users of The
Medical Manager access to two PCS services, Rx Inquiry and Rx Authorization,
for electronically filing prescriptions.

* Visteon Corp.  is the new name for EMed Systems Corp.  The Orlando,
Fla.-based company has introduced BigVision, an ambulatory care software
system for large medical groups that covers clinical, financial and
operational information.  Visteon also closed a $4 million venture capital
financing arrangement with InterWest Partners and Canaan Partners.

* James Pickering, formerly vice president of managed care at National
Electronic Information Corp., Secaucus, N.J., has been named president of
Med-Link, Kendall Park, N.J.  He succeeds Anil Kapoor, who remains with the
company as vice president of administration.

* Managed Care On-Line, a Modesto, Calif.-based on-line service for health
care professionals involved with managed care, has introduced a comprehensive
database of almost 200 managed care and health care-related World Wide Web
sites.  The web site for the service is located at http:\\www.mcol.com.

* HPR Inc., Boston, and Resource Information Management Systems, Naperville,
Ill., have formed an alliance to broaden the market for HPR's Episode Profiler
and Patterns Review software to include RIMS' third-party administrator and
self-insured employer clients.  The HPR software tracks services physicians
provide during the course of care for specific illnesses, as well as general
physician practice patterns.

* Fred Rothenberg & Associates Inc., developers of EZ-Cap managed care
software, has merged with Resource Health Partners, an Exton, Pa.-based health
care software company.  Rothenberg will operate as a unit of Resource Health
Partners.

n PeopleSoft Inc., Pleasanton, Calif., and Shared Medical Systems Corp.,
Malvern, Pa., have entered an agreement under which SMS will market, sell,
install and support PeopleSoft's client/server general accounting, materials
management and human resources/payroll software to SMS' customers and
prospects.

* Phamis Inc., Seattle, developer of the Lastword health care information
system, will distribute a point-of-care critical care information system from
Picis S.A.

* Advanta Systems Inc., a Rockville, Md.-based managed care company, has
changed its name to Amisys Managed Care Systems Inc.  The move is in reaction
to a challenge to the Advanta trademark.  The renamed company planned an
initial public stock offering for December.

* 3M Health Information Systems, Murray, Utah, has introduced a pre-release
version of 3M Coding Reference Software, which will be available early this
year for use with the company's new 3M Coding and Reimbursement System for
Windows.  The software provides on-line coding reference materials linked to
coding pro-cesses in the Windows-based system.  The company also has
introduced 3M All Patient Refined Diagnosis-Related Groups Software, Version
12.0.

* The American Medical Association, Chicago, has endorsed PulseCard, Overland
Park, Kan., as its preferred vendor for card processing services.  PulseCard
will offer electronic credit card processing services to all 475,000 AMA
members as well as 125,000 affiliated members.

* Dynamic Healthcare Technologies Inc., Maitland, Fla., has announced
DynamicVision, a multimedia, client/server electronic health records system,
will be available in June.  The cornerstone of the system is International
Business Machines Corp.'s document imaging software, Medical RecordsPlus/400.

* Lawson Software, Minneapolis, has signed an agreement to integrate and
resell Dallas-based Sterling Software's Gentran EDI software for AS/400 and
Unix platforms with Lawson's enterprisewide business applications.

* Emtek Health Care Systems Inc., Tempe, Ariz., has signed a cooperative
marketing agreement with Medasys Digital Systems Corp., Norcross, Ga., to
market Dx Multimodality, Medasys' medical imaging product, as part of Emtek's
Continuum 2000 clinically based hospital information system.

* Intelus, a Rockville, Md.-based health information management systems
vendor, has been acquired by SunGard Data Systems Inc., a Wayne, Pa.-based
computer service and application software company.  Intelus has introduced
ChartFlo 2000 Clinical Data Management, a client/server, Windows-based system
with modules for medical records abstracting, utilization review, quality
assurance, risk management, infection control and other clinically related
departments.

* Clinitec International Inc., Horsham, Pa., has formed an alliance with
NYNEX, New York, as part of the NYNEX Telemedicine Solutions program.
Clinitec produces NextGen, a pen-based electronic medical records system for
medical practices and provider networks.

* HealthVision Corp., Santa Rosa, Calif., has signed an agreement with
Software Technologies Corp., Braintree, Mass., to remarket STC's DataGate
interface engine as part of its Care Vision Patient Focused Management System,
a computerized patient record/clinical information system.

* Context Software Systems Inc., Burr Ridge, Ill., has introduced CodeLink for
Windows.  The program provides a complete listing of ICD-9-CM, CPT and HCPCS
codes with specialty-specific links between procedure and diagnosis codes.

* Dairyland Computer and Consulting, Glenwood, Minn., has signed an agreement
with Pace Health Management Systems Inc., West Des Moines, Iowa, to market
Pace's Clinical Information System.  The system will enable Dairyland to offer
a clinical pathway/managed care system that captures and reports patient
information from the point of care.

* Micro Healthsystems Inc., West Orange, N.J., has changed its name to US
Servis Inc.  The new name is intended to reflect the company's strategy to
provide comprehensive management services to physician delivery systems and
outpatient networks affiliated with integrated delivery systems.  Also, the
company has transferred stock and warrants in exchange for the Chicago-based
Frontenac Co.'s investment of $6 million.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Assessing the role of drug companies


Health care provider and payer organizations offer mixed reviews about the
entrance of pharmaceutical companies into the disease management market.

Some hail the companies' decisions to provide disease management services,
saying the corporate backing gives credence to the movement and brings the
drug companies' strong information systems and research capabilities to the
field.  Others complain that pharmaceutical companies' so-called disease
management initiatives are only thinly veiled sales and marketing strategies
to sell more of their products and, because of that, their efforts can't be
trusted.

While it remains to be seen whether these hopes or fears are exaggerated, it's
clear that consolidation and the growth of managed care are affecting
pharmaceutical companies' strategies.

Diversification effort

Many drug companies have merged in recent years to form pharmaceutical giants.
These include Glaxo Wellcome Inc., formed in early 1995 by the merger of Glaxo
Inc.  and Burroughs Wellcome; Bristol-Myers Squibb, the result of the merger
of Bristol-Myers and Squibb; and the acquisition of Upjohn Co.  by Pharmacia
AB.

In addition to this horizontal integration, the companies are seeking to
vertically integrate to lessen their dependence on drug sales and to evolve
into health services companies.

As purchasers increasingly question drug costs and seek lower prices, the
pharmaceutical companies are diversifying into many new areas to find new
sources of revenue.  Many have started disease management initiatives to meet
payers' business demands.

For example, Glaxo is seeking to fashion its disease management initiative so
that it encompasses care management, delivering services "beyond just the
period of illness," says Pieter Muntendam, M.D., director of healthcare
management for the Glaxo Research Institute, Research Triangle Park, N.C.  In
that way, Glaxo can play a role in integrating care delivery for specific
diseases, such as asthma and cancer, and provide valuable coordination between
providers and patients, even those recuperating at home, he says.

Pharmaceutical companies are initiating disease management programs so they
can play a role sooner in the care delivery process.  In that way, they're
more likely to share in capitated managed care payments as a value-added
service provider, rather than just supplying the drugs and being dependent on
providers for payment.

Drug makers have expertise in developing treatment plans and in educating
physicians and patients on the proper prescribing and utilization of drugs.
Also, they have experience conducting large-scale studies, and data from those
efforts is often large enough to support outcomes research.

Although some of the companies' diversification efforts hold the promise of
further bolstering disease management research, they're raising red flags
about the drug makers' motives.

Several pharmaceutical companies have acquired pharmacy benefits managers in
recent months, both to vertically integrate and to gain access to the millions
of covered lives the pharmacy benefits managers represent.  Eli Lilly and Co.
has acquired PCS Health Systems, Merck & Co.  purchased Medco Containment
Services, and Smith Kline Beecham acquired Diversified Health Care Services.

With data on millions of people from the benefits managers, pharmaceutical
companies believe they will have huge amounts of information, both clinical
and financial, from which to build evidence-based disease management programs.
Also, pharmaceutical companies plan to use the existing electronic networks of
pharmacy benefits managers when building their disease management programs.

Some managed care organizations are turning to pharmaceutical companies for
disease management services, or they may enter joint ventures to develop
studies on disease management.  For example, Avon, Conn.-based Value Health
Inc., a provider of specialty care management programs, is working on disease
management initiatives with Pfizer Inc.  and Johnson & Johnson.  Value Health
executives say they see the ventures as ways of diversifying into new areas of
medical services.

Limiting factors

Many large HMOs and integrated delivery systems will use their own information
systems to develop disease management programs, rather than turn to the
pharmaceutical giants, says Richard Kipp, senior consulting actuary for
Millman & Robertson, a Radnor, Pa.-based consulting firm.

The market for large-scale disease management may be limited for at least two
reasons.  First, many providers contend that treatment protocols, a basic
building block of disease management programs must be developed by those who
will use them, namely the doctors.  Second, as programs are developed for
diseases that are common targets of disease management, such as asthma and
chronic heart failure, the approaches could be standardizing, reducing the
need for outside organizations to develop and implement them.

Pharmaceutical companies' disease management efforts may be tainted by fears
surrounding their acquisition of pharmacy benefits managers.  Providers now
are leery because they say pharmaceutical makers' hidden agenda is to sell
more of their own products.

Julie Bonello, CIO at Children's Memorial Hospital in Chicago, doesn't believe
pharmaceutical companies should or will play a large role in disease
management.  "I think pharmaceutical companies could augment disease
management, but it should be driven by physicians," she says.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Working for the Common Good


Friends and colleagues of Larry Blevins delight in teasing him about his
passion for technology.  "They tell me that if I have a garage sale, they want
to know because I've always got so many gadgets," says Blevins, senior vice
president of information technology at Harris Methodist Health System, an
integrated health care delivery system based in Arlington, Texas.  "I love to
take things apart to see how they work."

That's just the nature of Blevins, a man with an insatiable curiosity-"when I
cease to learn, I'm ceasing to live"-and an intense desire to use his
knowledge to help others.

Information technology is fascinating, he says, but its value lies in its
ability to solve problems and improve the common good.  That's the bottom line
for Blevins, who emphasizes the need to give something back to his community.

Community focus

Altruistic or not, sensitivity to a community need is vital to the success of
many ventures, particularly community health information networks that enable
the on-line, real-time exchange of a variety of data, he says.

Without a common focus on an unmet community need, CHIN initiatives won't
survive the political or economic squabbles that are almost certain to erupt
among would-be participants, Blevins says.

"Look at all of the CHINs that have been started," he says.  "They've all had
wonderful intentions but then often lose focus.  Why are they doing a CHIN?
Is it because of a community need or a desire to gain competitive advantage
and increase profitability?  If it's the latter, then it's extremely difficult
to bring about anything that will really work because everyone is viewing it
as a competitive tool."

CHIN developers would have more success, Blevins says, if they first
identified a community need affecting all participants and then built a
network to meet that need.  "If you bring it from a community need, from a
social need, you have a common bond."

Blevins says that approach is working in Tarrant County, where he is heading
an effort by 40 social service agencies to build a CHIN.  A desire to increase
the immunization rate of children is one major reason behind the networking
initiative.

The electronic exchange of information via the network will enable social
workers and providers to develop methods to ensure that more children receive
immunizations.

"This is a good example of meeting a community need," Blevins says.  "Believe
me, serving the community is not a competitive or political issue if you're
serving from the heart."

Community service has long been a guiding light for Blevins, who initially
selected a career in law enforcement because he thought it represented a way
for him to repay his community for providing Little League and other
activities in which he had participated as a boy.

Fate intervened, arresting his career with the Arkansas State Police about a
year after it began.

During a trip to visit his brother in Wichita, Kan., Blevins, on a lark, took
a computer aptitude test.  Seventy-two people took the test, administered by a
local aerospace company.  Only Blevins got a job offer.

"I thought it was interesting, and I've always been curious about things,"
says Blevins, who began learning the intricacies of International Business
Machines Corp.'s models 1620 and 1130 as well as other leading mainframe
computers of the mid-1960s.

"I took advantage of an opportunity that was very unusual at the time," he
says.  "It wasn't like I thought all my life I'd want to be a computer person.
In fact, I never had a computer class in school.  But once I started reading
about it, my curiosity became piqued, and I continued down the road."

That road led two years later to a job at Sperry Univac Corp.  (now known as
Unisys Corp.), which provided a different exposure to computers.  While
Blevins had seen computers used in highly focused applications, such as
testing parts for aircraft, his new role gave him a business perspective on
computers.

"I loved solving problems and interacting with customers so much that I moved
to the world trade division, which would dispatch me anywhere they had a
particular problem, whether it was customer dissatisfaction or a machine that
wouldn't work.  It was my job to work through that and get it back on track."

Recognizing a need

Blevins worked with customers in a variety of industries.  But, in health care
in particular, he recognized a need for far more computerization than existed
at the time.

"I thought the computer could serve health care in a much broader manner than
just financials," he says.  "I could see the movement of a tremendous amount
of paper and the need to be able to share information pertinent to care."

In 1972, Blevins got his chance to bring more computerization to health care.
He joined 442-bed Sparks Regional Medical Center in Fort Smith, Ark., as vice
president of information services.

For the next 10 years, he guided the development, operation and maintenance of
the medical center's information systems.  In the evenings, he taught computer
science and management classes at College of the Ozarks, a local community
college.

"I like to interact with our young people because they have inquisitive
minds," he says.  "They're not necessarily polluted with ideas that have
already been established.  They're curious, and they keep the older generation
young with their questions."

Blevins enjoyed his job, his teaching and his circle of friends, but, in 1982,
he couldn't resist an opportunity to have an even greater impact by shaping
the automation initiatives of Harris Methodist, a much larger health care
organization with aspirations of becoming an integrated health care delivery
system.

"In visiting with Harris Methodist President Ron Smith and listening to his
vision of where he felt that health care was going and where he wanted to lead
Harris Methodist Health System, I knew that I would like to be a part of
that," he says.

"To do what we wanted to do, we needed to see significant, measurable change
in information technology areas," Smith says.  "We saw in Larry the ability to
lead us in the development of technology that would allow us to meet our
market objectives."

Automation strides

Blevins believed he could make a major contribution by building an electronic
infrastructure that would link the various providers that Smith envisioned
adding to Harris Methodist.  Such an infrastructure would support the on-line,
real-time collection, storage and exchange of administrative, financial and
clinical information necessary to achieve efficiencies, reduce costs and
improve the quality of patient care.

But that would be a big job.  Like many other health care organizations,
Harris Meth-odist had not pushed automation much beyond administrative and
financial transactions, with information exchanges typically occurring in
batches.

"We needed to develop a clinical direction, so we mapped out a master patient
index and a repository with data related to treatment or any other interaction
with the system," Blevins says.  "We didn't know we were building the basics
of what is being defined today.  We were just defining the information we
needed, how we needed to move it and how it could benefit the community and
the organization."

Today, Harris Methodist operates eight hospitals with 1,297 beds, a managed
care plan with 200,000 enrollees, a physician hospital organization and a
number of other provider sites.  All are linked electronically by a local area
network that provides on-line, real-time access not only to computer-based
patient records but also data bases built exclusively for clinical analysis
and outcomes research.

Although it was one of the first integrated health care delivery systems to
build an enterprisewide network and to begin work on computer-based patient
records, Harris Methodist "still has a long way to go," Blevins says.  "In
fact, I don't think we'll ever be done.  It's not like a house where you put a
roof on and you're done.  The end point is not definable because the
environment in today's business world and tomorrow's business world is not
definable."

Blevins, who is part of Harris Methodist's senior management team, is credited
with the development of information technology that has contributed to his
organization's growth.  "We value him highly," Smith says.  "The effectiveness
of his leadership is one of our strategic enablers."

Fellow CIOs also speak highly of Blevins.  "Larry has been a valued friend and
colleague for a number of years," says Larry Grandia, vice president of
information systems at Intermountain Health Care, an integrated health care
delivery system based in Salt Lake City.  "He has done some impressive things,
applying technology in very important ways.  There is no question that he has
made significant contributions to the industry and to the professional
organizations to which he has donated his time."

Grandia and Blevins are members of many of the same professional
organizations, including Health Information System Executive Association, a
30-member organization open only to the nation's top CIOs.

With change being a constant both in health care and technology, Blevins is
wary of designing obsolescence into an information system.

"Know that whatever you install today in 90 days won't represent the
technology of tomorrow and, therefore, probably won't represent the solution
of tomorrow," he says.

Health care organizations can help guard against obsolescence by selecting
information technologies that provide flexibility.  Blevins is a big fan of
object-oriented programming, for example, because its modular nature enables
computer programmers to change codes easily.

"We incorporated it in our interface engine design," he says.  "It saves us a
lot of time and trouble in rewriting communication structures for different
information systems."

Open systems

Flexibility also makes open systems the logical choice for health care
organizations that want to be able to use the products and services of
multiple vendors.

"Proprietary systems lock you into a particular type of company and the way it
is employing the technology," Blevins says.  "We didn't allow that to happen.
We still don't today."

Health care organizations must be careful, though, when shopping for open
systems.

"Many vendors say they are Health Level Seven-compliant, for example, and a
look at the basics may indicate that, yes, they are.  However, because of the
way in which they have interpreted HL7, their products may not be plug and
play," he says.

That does not mean, however, that Harris Methodist believes it must program
everything itself.  That's expensive and time-consuming, says Blevins, who
prefers to build long-term relationships with vendors that are willing to work
closely with Harris Methodist to meet its needs.

Among the companies with which Harris Methodist has long-term relationships
are Compaq Computer Corp., IBM Corp., Microsoft Corp.  and Ungermann-Bass Inc.

To foster long-term partnerships, Blevins recommends structuring agreements in
which the customer and vendor share both in the risks and the rewards.

For example, Harris Methodist has at least one agreement in which a software
vendor's licensing fees are based on revenues attributable to the use of the
software.  If the health care system makes more money by using the software,
the vendor earns more in licensing fees.

An incentive-based agreement such as this one gives vendors a vested interest
in Harris Methodist's future and encourages the development of long-term
relationships, Blevins says.

"I need someone that is there for the long term.  I need someone that has an
investment in my future," he says.  "That may mean changing the way we do
licensing, for instance.  Why not license per patient day or per member per
month cost?  Why not share in that deviation of business?  I'm not saying all
those ideas are right, but we should involve more of the vendors as partners
because that's really what we are."

Forming and maintaining long-term relationships with trusted vendors is vital
in weathering the changes that are sure to come in health care, says Blevins,
who jokes that CIO stands for "change information officer."

Preparing for change

"You're always designing to position yourself for change," he says.  "You
should never be designing for the problem as it's stated.  You should be
designing for the change of that problem because that, I can assure you, is
what will happen."

While change information officer is a good description of a CIO, a better
title is continuous improvement officer, says Blevins, a practitioner of the
management theory that emphasizes constant evaluation and improvement of
systems and procedures.

"A CIO must be a combination of a business and a technical person," he says.
"He or she must be a change agent as well as a business person with a
technical understanding."

And ideally a CIO applies those skills to health problems besetting a
community, which is what Blevins is doing in his work to develop a CHIN for
the area's health care and social service providers.

"Harris Methodist is a business and we must make money, but we really do have
a commitment to the community," Blevins says.  "I am part of that community.
My daughter is part of that community.  My grandchildren will be part of that
community.  And hopefully their grandchildren will be part of that community."

"Building something that helps the community, working with a group of
professionals that increases my knowledge of health care issues, those are the
kinds of things that make me want to get up in the morning and come to work,"
Blevins says.  "Where I put my time is very important, and, quite frankly, if
I didn't enjoy my job, if I didn't look forward to building, if I didn't look
forward to doing something today that gave back, I would change jobs."


Devising a practical CHIN strategy

When Larry Blevins shared his idea for a community health information network
with provider organizations in the Fort Worth, Texas area, he got a cool
reception.  Undaunted, Blevins started over, developing a new network-building
strategy and rallying support from local social service agencies instead.

Forty social service agencies, all funded in part by the United Way of
Metropolitan Tarrant County, have agreed to form what's being called a "human
service information network" to address health and social needs in the county.
Blevins remains hopeful that area health care providers eventually will join
the network.

Among the community projects that the emerging CHIN could address, Blevins
says, are tracking childhood immunization rates, measuring the outcomes of
certain cancer treatments, analyzing health care trends to develop wellness
programs and sharing computer-based patient records.

The networking project originated a year ago when Harris Methodist Health
System, abandoned plans to lead the development of a CHIN focusing on health
care financial and clinical transactions.  Harris dropped its original plans
because of its competitors' wariness about Harris' motives, concerns over
cost, widespread confusion among potential participants about what a CHIN is
and the largely unsuccessful experiences of CHIN developers in other markets,
Blevins says.

Faced with the lack of support in the health care community but convinced that
an electronic network could help meet public health needs, Blevins turned to
the United Way membership.  The strategy was a natural because Blevins serves
as chairman of the United Way's information technology committee.  "Where
better to start than the social service agencies that are funded to help our
community?"  he says.

United Way is developing the network to connect the agencies it funds and to
eventually build links to health care players, such as Harris Methodist, large
employers and not-for-profit agencies.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

The Scientific Method


For several years, librarians at the health sciences libraries of the Big 10
universities tried to gather relevant information on the Internet.  But
finding Internet-based information through Internet or World Wide Web search
engines proved disappointing to the librarians because engines search
primarily by terms only, finding plenty of essential as well as irrelevant
information during a single search.

To put an end to the time-consuming and often frustrating search process for
both themselves and their patrons, the librarians began developing Web home
pages that would cull and display or point the way to information on the
various health sciences fields.

But when the librarians realized they were duplicating efforts of their peers,
they decided to band together to create and maintain one Internet-based health
sciences information resource for everyone, including non-university health
care professionals.  The result is HealthWeb, a Web page that eventually will
present myriad educational, clinical and statistical data covering the three
dozen health sciences fields, running the gamut from general surgery and
occupational therapy to health care administration and informatics.

HealthWeb's mission is to present an easy-to-use and focused resource that
points health care Internet users to health sciences data that they otherwise
might have difficulty finding, says Julia Kelly, reference librarian at the
University of Minnesota Bio-Medical Library in Minneapolis and co-facilitator
of HealthWeb.

"The material included in HealthWeb is selected by librarians and health
sciences staff based on its significance to a particular health sciences
field," Kelly says.  "Entries in HealthWeb include descriptive annotations to
help users fully and immediately understand what information is being
presented.  Users get a one-stop shopping place for all their Internet-based
health sciences information needs."

The "one stop" is HealthWeb's reason for being, as searching the vast and
highly disorganized Internet for a specific piece of information is not easy.

"I do Internet searches for a living, and it is a mess," Kelly says.  "Search
engines are not systematic.  People mounting data on the Internet do not title
their data in effective ways.  Ultimately, searching is a hit-or-miss,
time-consuming chore.  HealthWeb alleviates the search process for users and
provides them a clear guide to the information they need."

Divide and conquer

Because the health sciences represent an enormous industry, participating
universities in HealthWeb opted to divide and conquer the task of creating the
health sciences Web page.  Each school is responsible for "areas of
excellence," health sciences fields for which individual universities are best
suited because of their resources and expertise.  The universities create the
field-specific Web pages that users can access via the HealthWeb home page.

Field-specific Web pages that now are up and running include:  a nursing page,
created and maintained by the University of Michigan; a minority health page,
by Michigan State University; and a radiology page, by Indiana University.

Sites due early this year include:  a consumer health page, by the University
of Illinois-Chicago; and an oncology page, by Indiana University.  Sites that
could be added later this year include:  a health care administration page by
the University of Michigan and a health informatics page by either the
University of Michigan or Indiana University.

Northwestern University maintains the HealthWeb home page.  Other
participating universities include:  the University of Minnesota, the
University of Iowa, the University of Wisconsin, Purdue University, Ohio State
University, Penn State University and the University of Chicago.

To access information, users enter the address for HealthWeb,
http:\\www.ghsl.nwu.edu\healthweb, into a Web browser to get to the home page.
From there, users select a field-specific page that reflects their interests.

"A nurse can select the hyperlink from the home page to the nursing page to
access information from a listing of all the Ph.D.  programs in nursing in the
nation to newsletter articles to consumer information from professional
associations.  And it is all free of charge," Kelly says.

As more field-specific pages are created over time, the usefulness of
HealthWeb will grow.  "Internet resources need to be found and evaluated for
their usefulness," Kelly says.  "HealthWeb does that so health care Internet
users don't have to."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Newsline


A bill designed to protect the privacy of medical records has created
divisiveness in the health care community.  Consumer advocacy groups, some
clinicians and others argue that the Medical Records Confidentiality Act of
1995 doesn't go far enough.  But proponents say the bill represents a
tremendous improvement over the current patchwork of state legislation on the
issue.

Critics of the bill say it contains too many exemptions to prohibitions
against transmitting patient-identifiable information.  And they contend that
the bill encourages the development of huge medical databases for the purpose
of further disseminating identifiable information, although nowhere in the
bill are these databases sanctioned.

Leading the opposition are the 40,000-member American Psychiatric Association
and two consumer advocacy groups:  The Center for the Study of Responsive Law,
formed by Ralph Nader, and the 75,000-member Public Citizen group.

The American Medical Association and the American Civil Liberties Union have
reservations about the legislation but haven't taken formal positions.

And two organizations, which were among 13 that signed a letter to the U.S.
Senate in October supporting the bill, now are having second thoughts about
that support.  Leaders of both groups-Bazelon Center for Mental Health Care
and New York Public Interest Research Group-say they signed the letter in
support of the concept and intent of the legislation, but the bill as written
is seriously flawed.

In contrast to critics who say the bill doesn't go far enough, some groups
that helped draft the bill say it goes too far in certain areas.

For instance, the Association for Electronic Health Care Transactions, an
electronic data interchange trade group, has serious reservations about some
provisions.  Language that places claims clearinghouses under strict
requirements to receive patient authorization to transmit claims and related
data electronically is unrealistic and would cause the price of claims
processing to skyrocket, says Jeanne Schulte Scott, chair of the association.

The provisions

Sponsored by Sen.  Robert Bennett (R-Utah), S.  1360 gives all Americans the
right to examine their medical records and request corrections.  The bill also
identifies persons or organizations that come into contact with identifiable
medical information as "health information trustees" and lists circumstances
under which information may be released.

Supporters of the measure include the Center for Democracy and Technology,
Association for Electronic Health Care Transactions, AIDS Action Council,
American Health Information Management Association, American Hospital
Association, and American Association of Retired Persons.

"Every group that signed the letter to the Senate believes the bill can be
strengthened," says Janlori Goldman, deputy director of the Center for
Democracy and Technology, a consumer advocacy group that studies privacy and
technology issues and was a driving force behind the legislation.  "We have
time to make sure the bill is as strong as it can be.  But if it passed today,
it would be a tremendous improvement over current practice."

But others say that legislation usually is weakened, not strengthened, as it
moves through Congress.  "We tend to believe it's not going to get tighter as
it goes through the process," says Lauren Dame, staff attorney for Public
Citizen's health research group.

Critics argue that some major health information services companies played a
part in drafting the bill to make sure it protected their interests.

They argue that such companies as Equifax, an Atlanta-based credit reporting
agency that's now involved in health care electronic data interchange, want to
develop huge databases and sell medical information to employers and insurers.

But Equifax says that charge isuntrue.  "We had zero role in putting the
legislation together," says John Ford, vice president for privacy and external
affairs at Equifax.  The company, which was among the first in the health
information services industry to develop and disseminate a set of
confidentiality principles, supports the concept of the bill but hasn't
finished a full assessment, Ford says.

Perceived weakness

One of the biggest weaknesses in the current bill, critics contend, is that it
provides too many exemptions to the stated prohibitions against transmitting
identifiable information, especially to law enforcement agencies and
researchers.

"The bill doesn't do what it purports to do," says Harold Eist, M.D.,
president-elect of the American Psychiatric Association.  "It gives away more
than it protects."

Eist and others worry that as more medical records are computerized, genetic
information will fall into the hands of employers and insurers-information
that, for instance, could show that a person has a higher-than-average risk
for breast cancer.

Goldman dismisses that argument.  "The Bennett-Leahy bill not only doesn't
sanction the development of computerized medical databases, it regulates and
limits them," she says.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

The Big Get Bigger in Latest Clearinghouse Consolidations


The electronic claims clearinghouse industry closed 1995 with a bang with the
announcement of two major takeovers.  Both of the deals involve companies with
a strong presence in pharmacy electronic data interchange acquiring EDI
expertise in other areas.

Envoy Corp., Nashville, Tenn., announced Nov.  30 a definitive agreement to
acquire National Electronic Information Corp., Secaucus, N.J., for $89 million
in cash.

Earlier in November, National Data Corp., Atlanta, agreed to acquire
Conceptual Systems Corp., Cleveland, under terms that weren't disclosed.

Although clearinghouses have been consolidating in recent years, the latest
deals may signal the start of consolidation among some of the largest players
in the health care EDI market.  The industry is consolidating because of the
economies of scale that can be achieved by transmitting huge volumes of data.

"I don't see it as an aberration but as part of a continuing cycle," says Lee
Barrett, president of Barrett Consulting Group, Middletown, Conn.

NEIC's future

Envoy expects to complete its acquisition of NEIC early this year after its
shareholders vote on the plan.  Plans call for NEIC to become a division of
Envoy, with Richard Caliri remaining as NEIC's CEO.

NEIC's owners include several of the nation's largest commercial insurance
companies.  One of the largest clearinghouses for physician, hospital and
dental claims, NEIC processes more than 7 million claims each month.

In buying NEIC, Envoy gets a national clearinghouse that serves as a central
point for most claims destined for major commercial insurance companies.
NEIC's recent acquisition of Synaptek, a physician claims clearinghouse, and
an alliance with Claims Processing Service, a dental claims clearinghouse,
gives it the capability to process claims destined for most payers.

Envoy processes more than 34 million claims per month, mostly for
prescriptions.

Earlier attempts by the company to diversify its health care transactions
business include purchasing a stake in EMC*Express, a hospital claims
clearinghouse, in 1993 and National Computer Claims Services, a dental claims
clearinghouse, in 1994.  Envoy's next step likely will be to increase its
hospital claims clearinghouse capability, starting with exercising its option
to purchase all of EMC*Express, says James Kever, co-CEO of Envoy.

Excluding pharmacies, Envoy has links to 11,000 providers, compared with the
more than 150,000 providers linked to NEIC, industry observers say.

For more than two years, NEIC has been attempting to build on-line, real-time
transaction capability by creating its Health Care Information Network,
designed to meet the needs of managed care.  NEIC's efforts in this area could
benefit from Envoy's experience in processing on-line, real-time pharmacy
transactions.

The commercial insurance companies that own NEIC determined that long-term
success in the EDI field requires significant volume-and that requires
consolidation, Caliri says.  The owners also determined that owning an EDI
company was peripheral to their core business, he adds.

Envoy reportedly received $180 million when it sold its financial transactions
processing business in May to First Data Corp.  But the downsized Envoy lost
more than $2 million during the first nine months of this year on $18.9
million in revenues.

In comparison, NEIC officials have told executives at other claims
clearinghouses that the company expects to earn $5 million to $6 million this
year on revenues of approximately $40 million.  Once heavily subsidized by its
owners, NEIC has made a profit for at least the last four years, Caliri says.

To finance the deal, Envoy has secured debt and equity financing from General
Atlantic Partners, First Union Capital Partners, First Union National Bank of
North Carolina and NationsBank.

National Data deal

Like Envoy, National Data Corp.  is bolstering its effort to diversify its
health care electronic data interchange services with its latest acquisition.

The pending purchase of Conceptual Systems Corp.  will give National Data
electronic connections to physicians and hospitals, adding to National Data's
core strength of providing electronic transactions to pharmacies.

Conceptual Systems, which processes more than 800,000 claims per month for
hospitals and physicians, will be a wholly owned division of National Data and
will continue to be headed by Nicholas Rosenstein.

The purchase is the latest in a line of acquisitions made by National Data to
diversify its health care services.  Since July 1994, National Data has bought
Lytec Systems, a physician and dental practice management vendor; Zandall
Systems Group, a pharmacy practice management software company; Learned-Mahn,
a hospital EDI software company; and Claim*Net, a physician claims
clearinghouse.

Acquiring Conceptual Systems adds expertise in processing hospital claims to
National Data's mix of services, says Craig Eilermann, director of medical
sales and services for National Data.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Idaho CHIN Wins Big in New Round of Federal Grants


A community health information network born out of one CIO's frustration with
the challenge of bringing costly technology to rural America has attracted
support in high places.

The National Telecommunications and Information Administration, a unit of the
U.S.  Department of Commerce, awarded the Southern Idaho Medical Information
Network a two-year matching grant of nearly $1.7 million, more money than any
of the 12 health care projects for which it announced grants in November.  The
grants, totaling nearly $4.7 million, are through the Telecommunications and
Information Infrastructure Assistance Program (see chart).

Federal officials like the proposed network because it demonstrated an
excellent understanding of how technology can address public health issues,
says Steve Downs, a program officer at the Commerce Department unit.

"We really expect this to be a national model of how to implement a CHIN,"
Downs says.  "We see them as pioneers, and we expect other communities,
particularly rural communities across the country, to follow them and benefit
from the lessons that are learned from Idaho."

The health problems the network plans to address include:

* Improving childhood immunization levels and inaccurate immunization records
through better recordkeeping, collection and sharing of information from
multiple sources.  * Improving care to low-income, nutritionally high-risk
women and children younger than age 5 by enabling the public health agencies,
pediatricians and physicians to have immediate access to medical histories.

The project originating when David E.  Garets, CIO of Magic Valley Regional
Medical Center, recommended that his hospital spend more than $6 million for a
new, more robust clinical information system.  Although the hospital is the
largest in southern Idaho, management decided it couldn't afford the hefty
price tag.  Undaunted, Garets started over to devise an alternative.

The CIO knew that the other, even smaller, hospitals in the region had
virtually no computerization in place.  So he came up with a plan to help the
rural provider organizations enter the automation age together.

The end result:  An $18 million community health information network
initiative that already has $12.5 million in financial support, including a
$1.7 million federal matching grant, firm financial commitments from two
hospitals and tentative commitments from three others.

In June 1994, Garets led the formation of the network, which also will serve
northern Nevada.  He chairs the network's board.

Unusual approach

Like other CHINs, the Idaho network eventually hopes to handle a broad range
of clinical and financial transactions.  But unlike other CHINs, the Idaho
project will enable many participating small hospitals and remote physicians'
offices to gain access to information systems for the first time through links
to two data centers.

Providing access to information systems to hospitals and physicians that lack
computerization was a key to rallying support for the network, Garets says.
He convinced the providers that they might not survive the advent of managed
care without clinical information systems, and that cooperation was the only
way they could afford to acquire such systems.  He also assured them that an
independent board, and not Magic Valley Medical Center, would own and control
the network and the related systems.

The network is in final contract negotiations with HBO & Co., Atlanta, which
tentatively has agreed to provide its Pathways 2000 clinical networking
software at a significant discount to the hospitals participating in the
network, Garets says.  HBOC, which declines comment until the contract is
signed, views the Idaho project as a testbed for applying its software to the
formation of CHINs, Garets says.  The network also will use HBOC's Star
hospital information system where appropriate.

Data centers

The network will build two data centers that will give hospitals access to
HBOC software over an on-line, real-time private network.  In that way,
hospitals will avoid making a heavy investment in hardware.  Some 27
physicians will gain access to HBOC's computer-based patient record software
and Scientific Data Management's practice management software through links to
the data centers.

The data centers will be located at US West headquarters in Twin Falls and at
Elko (Nev.)  General Hospital.  In addition to the HBOC systems and several
other software systems, the centers will house centralized data repositories.
But the network hopes to eventually build a "virtual repository" based on
distributed databases, Garets says.

US West will provide the telecommunication links for the network in southern
Idaho.  AT&T will provide the connections between southern Idaho and northern
Nevada.  Lockheed Martin Idaho Technologies will coordinate the network design
and management and perhaps provide integration engine technology.

"We're trying to improve medical care delivery in rural America, and in order
to do that, you have to provide solid clinical systems, and none of us here
have that," Garets says.

Beyond providing access to clinical systems, the network initially will focus
on the exchange of clinical information to support outcomes research aimed at
reducing the cost of care in all settings, Garets says.

In the first phase, to be completed by October 1998, the network hopes to
offer access to several information systems at five hospitals, two public
health agencies and the 27 physician sites.

But the network will be open to any provider who wants to participate,
including physicians, pharmacies and public health agencies.  Garets hopes the
network eventually will expand to cover all of Idaho as well as parts of other
bordering states.

Financial support

So far, 27 physicians, two public health agencies and two hospitals have
committed a minimum of $11 million in funding for the five-year networking
project.

Convinced that the cooperative effort offers the most efficient way to make
full use of information technology throughout the region, Magic Valley
Regional Medical Center has committed $8.2 million to the networking project.
Only if every provider is linked to the network can the medical center achieve
its vision for promoting health in a large rural area served by independent
providers, Garets says.

Elko General Hospital has committed $2.6 million, and three other Idaho
hospitals are negotiating their contributions.  Participating physicians have
committed an average of $10,000 each.

The network expects to generate other funds when additional providers,
including another three hospitals in the region, agree to participate, Garets
says.  It also has applied for $3.5 million in shared revenue funds disbursed
annually by the Idaho Public Utilities Commission.  -Tyler L.  Chin





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Digest


CliniComp Gets Military Hospital Pact

The Department of Defense has selected CliniComp International, San Diego, to
provide its clinical information system at military medical facilities.  The
initial contract with the company includes laboratory and hospitalwide
installations of the system at two sites.  Pending acceptance of the clinical
charting system at those sites, it's expected that the system will be
installed at 35 additional military hospitals worldwide.  The CliniComp system
already is in use or being installed at three military hospitals.  CliniComp
expected to sign the contract in late December.  The value of the contract
wasn't available.

Kaiser Alters Its IS Strategy

Kaiser Permanente, which has encouraged its 12 regional operations to develop
independent information technology initiatives, is abandoning its
decentralized approach.  The nation's largest managed care company has
directed its regions to develop a common hardware and software architecture
that ultimately will enable Kaiser to build a network linking all its
affiliated providers.  As a first step, Kaiser will combine separate
networking projects underway in Northern and Southern California.  Oakland,
Calif.-based Kaiser has 29 hospitals, 242 medical offices and 9,395 physicians
serving 6.7 million people.

Securing Digitized Images

Researchers at the University of California, San Francisco, have developed a
security system to prevent unauthorized access to X-rays and other medical
images transmitted over computer networks.  The security system is designed to
work with the university's picture archiving and communications system, used
to store and transmit digitized medical images.  A modification of the public
domain Pretty Good Privacy software, the security system protects images
transmitted between departments at the university hospital as well as those
transmitted to other sites.

ANSI To Prepare Implementation Guides

The American National Standards Institute's ASC X12N insurance subcommittee
will develop implementation guides for its standardized transaction sets.
Until now, at least six other groups have been involved in writing guides for
implementing standard health care transactions.  ANSI X12N hopes that by
centralizing the preparation of guides, the transaction sets will be
implemented uniformly by providers and payers.

Sun Introduces New Workstations

Sun Microsystems Computer Co., Mountain View, Calif., has introduced Ultra
network computing workstations that use a 64-bit Ultra SPARC RISC processor.
The desktop workstations accommodate three-dimensional graphics, imaging and
video required for advanced medical applications such as teleradiology and
surgical simulations.

Canadian CHINs Continue to Multiply

Health Network Ventures, Westchester, Ill., has signed its second community
health information network contract in Canada.  The company will work with
Bell Sygma, a subsidiary of Bell Canada, to build CHINs in Ontario.  The first
project involves providers in the St.  Catharines region.  Earlier, Health
Network Ventures entered an agreement with AGT Ltd.  to develop networks in
Alberta and the Northwest Territories.

Hewlett-Packard Enters Networking Arena

Hewlett-Packard Co., Palo Alto, Calif., is entering the enterprisewide
networking market by expanding the inpatient functionality of its clinical
software and licensing outpatient clinical software from MedicaLogic Inc.,
Beaverton, Ore.  Hewlett-Packard has added medical-surgical applications to
its HP CareVue software and will license MedicaLogic's Logician software.  It
will market a package of clinical automation services to integrated delivery
systems.

Companies Announce Third Quarter Results

Shared Medical Systems Corp., Malvern, Pa., saw its revenues increase 22% to
$169.2 million for the quarter, compared with the same period a year earlier.
Net income was nearly $10 million, up 12%.

HBO & Co., Atlanta, posted $138 million in revenue for the quarter, up 51%.
Net income was $9.3 million, up 23%.

Cerner Corp.  Kansas City, Mo., reported $41.7 million in revenues for the
quarter ended Sept.  30, up 2% from the same period a year earlier.  Net
income totaled $5.8 million, down 31%.

Health Risk Management Inc., Minneapolis, posted quarterly revenues of $13.4
million, up 15%.  Net income was $529,000 for the period, compared with a loss
of $125,000 in the same period a year earlier.

Phamis Inc., Seattle, saw its revenues increase 25% to $10.4 million for the
quarter.  Net income increased 36% to $1.1 million.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Earning the Public Trust


To integrated health care delivery systems, computer-based patient records
mean better care and lower costs.  To many consumers, however, an electronic
record signals less privacy, more risk and the arrival of Big Brother.  One
large delivery system decided a formal information security policy would be an
effective way to bridge the gap between these perceptions.

PeaceHealth, Bellevue, Wash., is implementing a security and confidentiality
policy as part of its implementation of an enterprisewide health information
network and computer-based patient records.

The system has a wide area network to link its corporate office, 40 physician
office sites, corporate data center, and five hospitals in Washington, Oregon
and Alaska.  Early this year, starting with St.  Joseph Hospital in
Bellingham, Wash., PeaceHealth will begin developing electronic records using
Lastword software from Phamis Inc., Seattle.  By early summer, records from
patients throughout the system will be stored in a central data repository and
be accessible through the WAN.

"My job is to see our clinical records system meets the needs of physicians,
nurses, patients and the community, and it can't do that unless we pay
attention to security and confidentiality," says John Haughom, M.D., chief
medical officer and the architect of PeaceHealth's security policy.

The public is concerned that computer-based patient records are more
vulnerable to breaches of privacy than paper records.  Also, there is fear
that as large integrated delivery systems implement electronic records,
sensitive, private health information will be readily available to more
people.

In addition, Haughom's research on media coverage of electronic records showed
that some providers implementing computer systems without adequate security
measures were suffering from inadvertent as well as malicious misuse of
patient data.

In-depth study

Worried that PeaceHealth was unprepared for dealing with the challenge of
keeping electronic records private, Haughom began an in-depth study of
security issues in April 1994.  By January 1995, he convinced Peace-Health's
board to budget $100,000 to develop a security policy.  He gave the board a
business plan defining a new corporate security director position and calling
for the creation of a corporate security panel with human resource, physician,
nursing and community representatives.

The group eventually developed a security policy that Haughom circulated among
PeaceHealth's five regional hospitals to gain their support.  The corporate
board approved the security policy in June 1995, beginning what Haughom
expects will be a four- to five-year implementation phase.

PeaceHealth's seven-page "Policy on Confidentiality, Privacy and Security of
Information" covers the access, administration, maintenance, destruction and
storage of information.  For each, it states PeaceHealth "shall develop
consistent policies and procedures...that will protect the rights of patients,
employees, providers and other third parties to privacy and confidentiality
and ensure appropriate and legitimate use of information."

This information, the policy states, includes data available via electronic
and paper records, faxes and even conversations.  Security breaches include
stealing another person's password or security code or giving an unauthorized
user a valid password; a "lack of discretion" with or unauthorized disclosure
of any PeaceHealth information; and unauthorized access, modification or
destruction of information or databases.

Sanctions include firing or suspending employees, revoking medical staff
privileges and losing the right to gain access to PeaceHealth information.

PeaceHealth's password system is designed to give clinicians restricted access
to defined sets of information.  "It's based on a 'need to know' philosophy,"
says Haughom.  "People's access privileges are pretty strict."

While the policy indicates PeaceHealth will take steps to restrict access to
data, it also offers system staff the same privacy protection offered to
patients.  The policy also lists separate "rights and obligations" for
patients and providers.  Key provisions of these include giving patients a
list naming every person who accesses their medical record during their stay
at PeaceHealth.  Meanwhile, providers have the right to "clear and complete
presentation of information."

Setting limits

Balancing a caregiver's needs for clear and complete data with the patient's
right to privacy is a challenge that PeaceHealth asked its providers to
address by listing what patient data they absolutely required.  The response,
Haughom says, was that most clinicians and other staff members wanted wide
access to data.

"In some cases, the job description didn't even come close to justifying what
they thought they needed," he says.  The staff members were not asking for
data out of idle curiosity, Haughom says, but were simply used to having
certain information available whether they used it or not.  With further
examination, the providers often conceded they didn't really need certain
information.

Sorting out what data is truly needed compared to what providers feel more
comfortable having falls largely to Margaret M.  Chuman, PeaceHealth's
information security director.  Chuman, a registered nurse with a master's
degree in health care administration, formerly was a CEO of a PeaceHealth
hospital, so she has the credibility and authority necessary to negotiate with
providers and staff about their information needs, Haughom says.

She also has powerful computer tools for ensuring PeaceHealth staff are
following proper access procedures.  The hospital computer system tracks every
screen accessed and keystroke entered each day, a total of more than half a
million transactions.  Needing to monitor a more manageable number, Chuman and
Haughom identified the most sensitive screens in the records system.  Each
time one of these is accessed, the system will download a record of that
transaction in a security sub-database.

Searches of that database will enable Chuman to trace everyone who viewed or
altered a particular record.  She can run spot audits to research a particular
complaint or audit an entire department's use of records, with or without
notification.

PeaceHealth is avoiding an Orwellian aura by emphasizing that these measures
protect all employees as well as patients.  For example, Chuman says
PeaceHealth physicians have incorporated security measures into their medical
bylaws.  A review committee will examine infractions by physicians and issue
sanctions.  If the physicians fail to appropriately discipline one of their
own, the delivery system will take over the review process.

Another committee that Chuman heads reviews all PeaceHealth security
infractions.  In the first few months the security policy has been in force,
sever-al employees already have been terminated for privacy violations, Chuman
says.

While computer and networking technology are triggering the public's security
and confidentiality concerns, PeaceHealth's security policy emphasizes that
people and their attitudes, not technology, are the keys to keeping patient
data private.

"Security is not a computer issue," says Marsha George, vice president for
information services and CIO at PeaceHealth.  "A security policy must start
with what we talk about, what we write down, what we fax.  Much more
confidentiality is violated in the elevator or in the cafeteria than it is by
computer."

Continuing education

To encourage thinking along these lines, PeaceHealth plans continuing
education for everyone with information access privileges.  After finishing an
initial education course, staff members were asked to sign a statement
indicating they accepted responsibility for protecting and properly using
data.  Those who fail to sign a statement are prohibited from entering or
retrieving records data.

PeaceHealth also is educating the community about its electronic records
effort and its confidentiality program through an information kit sent to
Seattle-area media, and Chuman will be available to meet with consumer groups
in the area.

Spell it out

While praising PeaceHealth for having a security policy, Adele A.  Waller, the
partner heading the health information and technology practice in the Chicago
law firm of Gardner, Carton & Douglas, suggests institutions developing
similar programs spell out exactly what information is covered and precisely
how it will be handled.  She's also leary of assigning general "rights," such
as patients' right to review their medical records, without qualifying and
limiting them.

"You might want to state that these are principles that will govern what we do
with information, rather than framing them as rights," Waller says.  "The
notion of a right usually means the right to sue."

Chuman says she's working with several task forces to outline procedures for
handling specific information.

Additional security challenges for PeaceHealth network will come as physicians
access patient data from their home computers later this year.  To ensure it
accepts only bona fide data queries, the host system may use an automatic
callback feature to verify the request came from an authorized terminal,
Haughom says.  And until Internet security measures improve, the PeaceHealth
won't offer access to it.

Although its security policy is less than a year old, Haughom says he's seen
results already, with people changing behavior and challenging their
colleagues to do the same.  "Ninety-five percent of the people in health care
want to be good at their job," he says, "and they just need to be reminded
that the Hippocratic oath says part of being good at their job is protecting
the patient's confidentiality."

Sharon Watson is a Chicago-based writer specializing in health care issues.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

"What Role Will Speech Recognition Play in Health Care?"


Talk of building computer-based patient records always comes down to a
fundamental problem-how to get information into a computer.  Data entry is the
foundation of electronic records.  Without it, health care organizations
cannot hope to build the records systems they say are needed to achieve
efficiencies and improve the quality of patient care.

Therefore, it's critical that ways be found to encourage clinicians, who may
be hesitant to give up the familiar pen and paper chart, to record data in a
computer system.

Believing, whether rightly or wrongly, that clinicians cannot or will not
type, computer hardware and software companies have developed a number of
technologies intended to win clinician acceptance and generate electronic
records of patient care.

One by one, such technologies as handwriting recognition, speech recognition,
touch screens and voice capture have come on the market, only to receive a
lukewarm response from clinicians, who have discovered that those technologies
either have limited applicability or fail to live up to their promise.  As a
result, none has won universal acceptance among clinicians.

Yet, for many health care organizations, speech recognition still sounds like
the answer to the problem of entering data in computer-based patient records.

This emerging technology, which has captured the imagination of many in the
health care industry, automatically converts human speech to digital data that
can be collected, manipulated and exchanged electronically.

Speech recognition systems enable physicians, nurses and other caregivers to
enter information in patients' charts simply by talking to a computer,
eliminating the need for dictation devices, keyboards, light pens, mouses and
other means of data entry.

Early in development

But the technology is in its infancy.  Some users and skeptics say the
software struggles with the recognition of accents, dialects and speech
patterns.  Thus, many health care organizations say, the technology won't be a
viable option for many applications for at least several more years.

But proponents say the technology is viable today, and the next generation of
the software will be even more beneficial for health care providers.

Speech recognition produces readable, professional-looking reports, but the
technology is difficult to use, says Barbara Reynolds, M.D., quality
improvement director in the emergency department at Mercy Hospital and Medical
Center in Chicago.

The speech recognition system installed in Mercy Hospital's emergency
department stumbles over many words, requiring clinicians either to repeat
words until they are understood or enter them using a keyboard, she says.  As
a result, reports that could be written by hand in one or two minutes
sometimes take 30 minutes to complete using the speech recognition system.

Impatient and frustrated, three-fourths of the physicians in Mercy Hospital's
emergency department have stopped using the system.  "I am one of the best
users here," Reynolds says, "but there are times when I am ready to throw it
across the room."

Recent progress

Mercy Hospital's experience with speech recognition does not represent the
current state of the technology, argues William Meisel, a consultant in
Encino, Calif., who's studied the technology's development for 20 years.

Much has changed in the two years since Mercy Hospital installed the VoiceEM
system made by Kurzweil Applied Intelligence Inc., Waltham, Mass., Meisel
says.  Today's speech recognition systems, including the latest version of
VoiceEM, understand far more words and often provide short-cuts, such as
macros that are able to construct an entire sentence of digital text from one
or two spoken words.

Thus, Meisel argues that today's technology is a viable option for many health
care organizations.  And some provider organizations already are firm
believers.

"I wouldn't even consider writing a chart by hand again," says Raul Rodriguez,
M.D., senior attending physician at Potomac Hospital in Woodbridge, Va., who
uses Kurzweil's VoiceMED system.

The newest speech recognition systems are much easier to use than earlier
versions, says Hossein Firooznia, M.D., who evaluated speech recognition
systems for use in the radiology department of New York University Medical
Center in New York.

The medical center selected the DragonDictate system made by Dragon Systems
Inc., Newton, Mass.  "With only a minimal familiarity with computers, I can
modify text or create macros," Firooznia says.  "There is no big problem with
my accent or if I pronounce a word differently than someone else.  It rapidly
adjusts to my particular way of speaking English words, and the system
continually improves its word recognition efficiency the more it is used."

Several companies are working on a new generation of software.  Philips
Dictation Systems, for example, soon will introduce the first
large-vocabulary, continuous speech recognition software, and at least two
other companies, Berdy Medical Systems and ACS InfoSystems, say they soon will
have next-generation products.

Still, it may prove difficult to convince health care organizations, wary of
information technology solutions that are seemingly too good to be true, that
speech recognition is getting to the point of being viable for many
applications.

Mercy Hospital, which had high hopes for the technology, will be among the
tough sells.  After spending more than $200,000 on a speech recognition system
that's little used, the institution can't afford to gamble again on the
technology, Reynolds says.

Speech recognition generated great excitement when it hit the market in the
late 1980s.  It appeared to be the ultimate approach to data entry, giving
clinicians the ability to record their findings electronically without lifting
a finger.

But some clinicians soon discovered that the technology had some shortcomings,
including a small vocabulary and a big cost.  The technology's ability to
understand fewer than 200 words limited its usefulness, and a cost of more
than $15,000 per workstation made it unaffordable for most health care
organizations.

Within a few years, however, Kurzweil and then Dragon introduced speech
recognition products with 1,000-word vocabularies.  Those products began to
find homes in hospitals' radiology and emergency departments, even though the
technology could do little more than fill in one-word blanks on an electronic
chart.

Today, speech recognition software has a vocabulary of as many as 60,000
words, giving it much greater capability.  In addition, the cost of the
technology has tumbled to several hundred dollars per workstation.  "Overall,
it's much cheaper than a transcriptionist," Meisel says.

Yet, the technology has had difficulty making inroads in health care.  Even in
radiology and emergency departments, where speech recognition is used most,
fewer than 10% of physicians use the technology, Meisel says.

Standing in the way of widespread use of speech recognition in health care are
five hurdles that have confronted the technology from the beginning:

1.  An inability to recognize normal speech patterns.  2.  An inability to
adapt to the voice of more than one person.  3.  An inadequate vocabulary.  4.
An inability to distinguish among words that sound alike.  5.  A shortage of
computing power.

The biggest shortcoming of speech recognition is its inability to comprehend
normal speech patterns, called continuous speech.  The technology requires its
users to speak in a staccato-like manner, called discrete speech, pausing at
least one-tenth of a second between each clearly spoken word.

That frustrates busy clinicians who expect speech recognition to reduce-not
increase-the amount of time it takes them to complete charts.  For clinicians
already wary of any changes in how they are accustomed to doing their work,
this provides a reason to avoid the technology, which is what happened at
Mercy Hospital.

Some vendors have responded by seeking a middle ground between discrete and
continuous speech recognition.  They have tweaked their existing systems,
enabling speech recognition software to construct an entire sentence or even a
paragraph from just a few spoken words.  That speeds the data entry process,
making it less frustrating for clinicians.  However, pauses are only
minimized, not eliminated.

Wait-and-see

Health care organizations, recognizing a major shortcoming in speech
recognition, are waiting for the development of continuous speech recognition
systems, which will enable clinicians to dictate normally instead of haltingly
as they must do now, says Joe Weber, vice president of marketing and sales for
Sudbury Systems Inc., a Sudbury, Mass.-based manufacturer of transcription
products for health care applications.

Sudbury, which is interested in incorporating speech recognition in its
transcription products, is not yet satisfied with the state of the technology
because of its inability to recognize continuous speech.

Although speech recognition has come a long way and continues to evolve, Weber
and some others who have closely monitored its development believe it still
will be several years before a practical continuous speech recognition system
is available.

Continuous speech recognition is "Star Wars" technology, says Dana Gaines,
product manager for InterVoice Inc., a Dallas-based company that designs,
manufactures and sells automated call processing and interactive information
solutions.  "It's the ultimate but not really feasible today because of the
problem of limited vocabulary or the number of words understood by the
computer."

Even if vocabulary size were not a problem, he says, the technology still
would be handicapped by its inability to recognize the voice of more than one
person.

Most of the speech recognition systems available today are speaker-dependent,
meaning they are able to recognize only one speaker's voice.  However, if the
speaker's voice becomes altered in any way, for example because of a sore
throat, the system won't recognize the voice and won't record information.
The speaker then must stop and take the time to reacclimate his or her voice
to the computer.  A system that stops functioning every time the speaker's
voice alters in any way becomes more frustrating than efficient, Gaines says.

Speaker-independent systems, which are designed to respond to any voice, would
be more user-friendly.  However, few systems available today are advanced
enough to provide that capability, he says.

Meanwhile, concern lingers over the number of words understood by speech
recognition systems.

While health care organizations say the current vocabulary size may be
adequate for radiology or emergency departments, it cannot satisfy the needs
of clinicians in all settings because each department has its own jargon.

But Meisel dismisses concern about vocabulary size.  "Most systems can now
recognize as many as 60,000 words, which is more than adequate," he argues.

The technology is still bedeviled as well by homonyms, words that sound alike
but have different meanings and spellings.  To counter this, vendors are
developing editing functions that rely on rules for grammar and sentence
structure to determine which word is syntactically correct.

Dependent on speed

Like the dictation technology from which it evolved, the performance of speech
recognition systems depends on the speed with which a computer can process
commands.  Speech recognition, while simple in concept, is complex in its
makeup and requires a computer to handle millions of instructions per second
for it to function properly.

While computers have become more powerful with each generation of
microprocessors, early machines lacked the enormous amounts of processing
power that speech recognition requires.  As a result, speech recognition
systems operated sluggishly.

"Not long ago, to make the computations needed, you had to have huge,
multimillion-dollar computers working overnight," says Mark Liberman, director
of the Linguistic Data Consortium, a 90-member speech recognition research
cooperative based at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.  Now, he
says, ordinary computers can make the calculations to process sound and pull
up close matches from memory in real time.

While great advances are being made in speech recognition, health care
organizations needn't wait for the commercial release of new products, Meisel
says.

While speech recognition does have some limitations, they are not severe
enough to warrant dismissal of the idea of using the technology in a number of
applications, he says.  "There are some minor problems integrating with word
processors, for example.  Otherwise, the technology works and with a great
deal of accuracy, too."

Speech recognition has an accuracy rate of about 90%, better than a rate of
about 75% for human transcriptionists, Meisel says.  When errors do occur,
they can be corrected via keyboard or a spell-checking function.

Much of the skepticism about the technology in health care stems from
disappointment resulting from providers' unrealistic expectations at the time
the technology was introduced, he says.

"The big hurdle is the first week or two of use," Meisel says.  "When you
first start, it seems that you always have to enter new words.  In addition,
most systems now let you put in macros, which, in some cases, can create
entire reports from just a few spoken words or phrases.  Speech recognition
presents hurdles at the beginning only because those things aren't there."

Speech recognition performs well for clinicians who are patient and willing to
learn how to use it, Meisel says.  "People say that, once they get used to it,
it's no big deal adjusting their speech patterns for the computer.  They say
the benefits, such as readable and complete reports that improve the quality
of health care, far outweigh any inconvenience."

Daniel Fought, D.O., an emergency department physician at Parkview Hospital in
Toledo, Ohio, endured a month of frustration to learn how to use a Kurzweil
speech recognition system.  Dozens of formats made it difficult, but Fought's
glad he persisted.

Charts that once took two or three minutes to complete by hand can now be
finished in about 30 seconds, and the end product is more complete, he says.

More complete charts mean health care organizations have better documentation
of patient care they delivered and, thus, are better equipped to defend
against lawsuits alleging malpractice.

Howard White, M.D., an emergency department physician at St.  Elizabeth
Hospital Medical Center in Youngs-town, Ohio, has mixed feelings about speech
recognition.  "I consider it a necessary evil," he says.

The Kurzweil system installed at St.  Elizabeth Hospital is difficult to
master and slower than writing by hand, but it produces better documentation
of patient care than does the paper-based recordkeeping system it replaced,
White says.

Like Fought, he believes better documentation of care discourages malpractice
claims.  White says no claims have been filed by any of the more than 200,000
patients treated in the emergency department since St.  Elizabeth installed
the Kurzweil system.

Despite the long learning curve, speech recognition is coming into its own,
Meisel says.

Although no studies have been conducted, he believes the overall market for
speech recognition will be measured in thousands of units in 1994, tens of
thousands of units in 1995 and hundreds of thousands of units in 1996.  "Every
year, thousands more people are using it," Meisel says.

"As the days go by, there has been more and more talk about it," says Andrew
Lederer, director of consulting and marketing for The Kennedy Group, a Redwood
City, Calif.-based consulting firm specializing in health care information
technology.  "Speech recognition is one of the technologies that could take
the use of computers to another level."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

The market leader sticks with today's technology


Kurzweil Applied Intelligence Inc., the first company to offer speech
recognition systems to the health care industry, continues to enhance the base
system it introduced in 1986.

Although some of its newest competitors are developing next-generation
products, Kurzweil intends, at least for now, to stick with what it knows
well.

While other companies pursue development of continuous speech recognition
systems capable of recognizing normal speech patterns, Kurzweil is staking its
near-term future on continued development of its VoiceMED product line.

Installed in 1,100 health care settings, VoiceMED is the most widely used
speech recognition software in the country.  The discrete speech recognition
system, which costs about $8,000 per user, is available in seven versions:
emergency medicine, emergency medicine triage, invasive cardiology,
orthopedics, pathology, primary care and radiology.

Kurzweil intends to develop additional versions of VoiceMED for other
specialties and continue to work on a new user interface scheduled for release
later this year, says Jonathan Bower, director of product management.

The Waltham, Mass.-based company has no plans to venture into continuous
speech recognition, Bower says.

"We'll stick with discrete speech," he says.  "It's proven and has a very high
accuracy rate.  We'll introduce continuous speech only when the technology is
mature, which we don't see happening for at least a couple of years.  In the
meantime, we'll keep improving."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

The next generation of software


"Providing the ability to speak naturally to computers will remove the last
obstacle."

Three newcomers to the field of speech recognition software for health care
are working on a new generation of the technology.

Philips Dictation Systems is preparing to introduce continuous speech
recognition software.  In addition, at least two other companies-Berdy Medical
Systems and ACS InfoSystems-say they are working on similar new technology.

Philips, a San Francisco-based subsidiary of Philips Electronics, is beta
testing SpeechMagic, which has a 60,000-word vocabulary.  The company expects
to introduce the software commercially within six months.

Until now, speech recognition has been based on template matching, which works
like this:  Words to be recognized by a computer are dictated and stored as an
"acoustical" image in the computer's data base.  When a particular word is
spoken, the computer searches the data base for a match.

Template matching works well as long as the number of words to be recognized
is limited and a person speaks in a consistent manner and pauses between
words.  Philips contends it has overcome those limitations by basing its
product on the recognition of phonemes, the smallest acoustical component of a
language.  Phonemes go beyond the letters of the alphabet; the letter "a," for
example, takes on different forms, as in the words "car" and "make."

Phoneme recognition is the key to success in speech recognition, says Hans Van
Der Linde, marketing manager for Philips.  To be effective, he says, a speech
recognition system must have a large vocabulary tailored to the needs of a
specific group of users; it must be able to understand the context in which
those words are used; and it must have a database in which a specific
speaker's phoneme pronunciations are stored.

SpeechMagic enables physicians and other caregivers to enter information in
computer-based patient records at a rate of 200 to 250 words per minute, says
John Payton, president of CMHC Systems Inc., a Dublin, Ohio-based company that
is developing a psychiatric vocabulary for SpeechMagic.

Grant fuels research

Like Phillips, Berdy Medical Systems believes that continuous speech
recognition is the technology of the future.  It plans to incorporate the
technology in its SmartClinic computer-based patient records software for
physician group practices.

In early October, the Rochelle Park, N.J.-based company received a $1.98
million grant from the Department of Commerce's Advanced Technology Program to
integrate its computer-based patient records software with speech recognition
software developed by researchers at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh.

With speech recognition as a front end, Berdy's computer-based patient records
software will enable clinicians to enter data simply by speaking in a natural,
conversational manner.

The system, now in prototype, will have not only a large medical vocabulary
but also the ability to understand words in context, says Rick Holtmeier,
Berdy's president and COO.  And unlike current speech recognition technology,
it does not require voice training, slow speech or pauses between words, he
says.

"Providing caregivers the ability to speak naturally to their computers will
remove the last obstacle in acceptance of the computer-based patient record,"
Holtmeier says.  "Although physicians recognize the need for and the
time-saving benefits of automation, many are unwilling to take the time to
enter patient information."

The new Berdy system will not be fully developed and commercially available
for three years.  However, Holtmeier says speech recognition for some
applications, such as physical examinations, may be available within 18
months.

ACS InfoSystems, best known for its development and installation of networking
software incorporating artificial intelligence at St.  Alphonsus Regional
Medical Center in Boise, Idaho, now is applying artificial intelligence to
speech recognition.

The result is speech recognition software that understands differences in the
way people speak, says Mark Hays, president of ACS InfoSystems, a small
software development company in Boise.

Speaker-independent

"It's speaker-independent, which means that anyone can use it without any
speech training whatsoever," he says.  "It also eliminates problems with
normal changes in voice quality that occur, for instance, when a user has a
sore throat."

The software, HInet Voice Control, also gives speech capability to a computer,
enabling it to respond orally to a clinician's request for more information
about a patient.

"It interacts with the user more like a person than a computer," Hays says.
"This allows a physician in the emergency room to focus on the patient-not the
computer screen-and simply talk with the computer while assessing the
patient."

The HInet Voice Control, which still is under development, will undergo beta
tests at an emergency room physicians' group and four hospitals early this
year.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

A Healthy Year For Electronic Claims Growth


Electronic claims processing is coming of age.  Nearly half of the more than
3.6 billion claims providers submitted during 1995 were transmitted
electronically.  Providers submitted an estimated 47% of all claims
electronically last year, compared to 41.5% in 1994.

The estimates are part of a complete look at health care electronic data
interchange and networking issues in Faulkner & Gray's Health Data Directory,
1996 Edition.

One major factor behind the increase in electronic claims is the continued
steady growth in the number of Medicare and Medicaid claims that providers
transmit electronically.  In addition, insurance companies are becoming more
adept at accepting electronic claims.

Last year, the pace of consolidation among electronic claims processing
companies picked up.  More than a dozen claims clearinghouses either bought
smaller competitors, practice management software companies or EDI gateway
software vendors to enhance their client base and product lines.

Clearinghouses that weren't buying competitors were aligning themselves with
companies that had desired technologies or services.  One company-National
Electronic Information Corp.  of Secaucus, N.J.-pulled off a triple play by
buying a company, aligning with another, then getting acquired by Envoy Corp.,
Nashville, in the year's biggest deal (see related story, page 10).

Number crunching

The 1996 directory's statistics for electronic claims mainly reflect
computer-to-computer electronic data interchange, but some organizations also
include shipping a magnetic tape or disk in calculating their electronic
claims totals.

Better ways of counting pharmacy and Medicaid claims account for large
increases in those annual claims totals compared with previous years'
directory statistics.  Last January, Scott-Levin Associates, a Newtown,
Pa.-based health care research and consulting company, began collecting daily
prescription activity from 34,000 pharmacies, more than half of the nation's
total.  In addition, the Health Care Financing Administration last year began
a comprehensive survey of Medicaid fiscal agents to support more accurate
estimates of annual claims volume.

The higher numbers this year for Medicaid and pharmacy claims, along with the
high rate of electronic submission for these claims, accounts for revised,
higher statistics for electronic submission of claims in previous years,
compared to statistics in previous editions of the directory.

In large part, provider reluctance is no longer the major reason that the
majority of claims submitted each year are still on paper.  "The problem is
not on the provider side, it's on the payer side," says Michael Eckstein,
president of EDI for Health Care, a Bryn Mawr, Pa.-based consulting company.

Most providers are at least technologically ready to use electronic data
interchange.  For instance, dental offices used to be considered a backwater
of automation.  Now, 62% of dental offices have computers and 70% of those
offices have modems or communications software that enable communication with
outside entities, according to a recent American Dental Association survey.

The percentage of claims that physicians submitted electronically grew from an
estimated 18% in 1994 to 27% last year.  Electronic dental claims increased
from 9% to 11%.  The increases reflect more computers in provider offices as
well as the increased ability of payers to accept electronic claims.

But electronic claims submission levels are not increasing in every provider
sector.  In two segments, hospitals and pharmacies, the rate of electronic
submission has hit a plateau of 80%.  "The remaining paper claims are destined
for small payers, HMOs and PPOs that aren't connected to clearinghouses," says
Nicholas Rosenstein, CEO of Conceptual Systems Corp., a Cleveland-based
processor of hospital and physician claims recently acquired by National Data
Corp., Atlanta.

While electronic claims submission has become routine for many providers,
there's still much work to be done.  For example, many smaller commercial
payers and managed care plans still cannot accept electronic claims.

And even some of the nation's largest payers are still making only slow
progress at getting electronic claims in the door.

Of 13 surveyed payers accepting more than 500,000 claims per month, only seven
received more than 20% of their claims electronically.  The seven are Aetna
Life Insurance Co., Cigna Healthcare, The MetraHealth Cos., Mutual of Omaha
Insurance Co., Provident Life Insurance Co., The Prudential Insurance Co.  of
America and United Healthcare Corp.  That compares with only one major
carrier-United Healthcare-that received more than 20% of its claims
electronically in 1994.

"Larger insurance companies are hampered by legacy systems patched together
with concrete and created by people no longer with the company," Eckstein
says.  "And the overwhelming number of managed care plans have yet to
implement any electronic encounter or referral systems."

Some payers say that they increased electronic claims submissions this year by
working more closely with providers and by establishing links with more
clearinghouses.

For instance, Aetna identified providers who had been submitting claims
electronically to the insurance company, only to revert to submitting paper
claims.  The carrier created teams to meet with providers through seminars or
office visits.  "We find out if they've had problems with electronic
submission and correct them," says Patricia Gray, Aetna's EDI administrator.

Furthermore, Aetna finally started doing what many other major carriers have
been doing for a couple of years-link to clearinghouses and other networks in
addition to NEIC.  Aetna established connections with EDI USA, U.S.  HDI and
the Texas Health Information Network, operated by Blue Cross and Blue Shield
of Texas.

Clearinghouse volume

In 1995, the nation's 25 largest claims clearinghouses handled an estimated
335.3 million claims per month, an increase of 23.4% over 1994 monthly volume.

Electronic Data Systems, Plano, Texas, remains the nation's largest processor
with monthly volumes in excess of 70 million claims, up 17% from the previous
year.  EDS transmits 80% of these claims to payers electronically.  But just
as in 1994, runner-up National Data Corp.  grew faster than EDS last year,
increasing its total claims volume by 66% to 59 million claims per month, all
of them electronic.

"Most of our growth has come from within our existing customer base," says
Bruce Roberson, vice president of health care information network services for
National Data.  "But we've also gotten aggressive in taking business away from
our competitors."

Other clearinghouses reporting large claims volume increases include Unisys
Corp., whose claims volume grew 89%; Equifax Healthcare EDI Services, with 65%
growth; National Electronic Information Corp., 56% growth; and PCS Health
Systems, 53%.

Stung by lost Medicaid fiscal agent contracts-especially in Virginia-First
Health Services saw its monthly claims volume drop 66% in 1995.  Likewise, a
lost Medicaid contract in Florida resulted in a 61% volume reduction for
Consultec Inc.

The clearinghouse consolidation of 1995 was the result, in part, of earlier
work by companies to reposition themselves in the health care EDI industry.
"It was the year that people began implementing strategies developed in 1994,"
says Richard Caliri, CEO of NEIC.

No longer do companies just look inward to develop new automation services for
the health care industry.  The new mantra is:  If you don't have it, buy it.
"It's a lot easier to buy relationships rather than build them," says Joseph
Bigley, president of Real:Time Investment, a consulting company in Alpharetta,
Ga.

Bigley should know.  His clearinghouse, Cooperative Healthcare Networks, was
bought by Equifax Inc.  in 1994 as the information services company's first
entrance into the health care EDI field.

Another reason for consolidation was the continuing decrease in the prices
that clearinghouses charge to transmit electronic claims.

A recent Faulkner & Gray survey of clearinghouses shows that the average price
per claim plummeted from 43 cents in 1994 to 34 cents in 1995.  "As the price
drops, the industry has to consolidate to get volumes through the switches,"
Bigley says.

Prices decline

Some clearinghouses are dropping prices to remain competitive in tight
markets.  "To stay in business, I had to lower my prices," says Beatrice
Dvorak, CEO of Medical Data Insurance Processing, Sioux Falls, S.D.

But other processors are cutting prices in an effort to raise transaction
volume quickly, thus making a clearinghouse a viable candidate for
acquisition.  "Volume is everything in the marketplace," says Frank
Giannantonio, president of Frank Giannantonio & Associates, a Piscataway,
N.J.-based clearinghouse.  "Some clearinghouses are saying, 'Let me get my
numbers up so someone will buy me.'"

The buying frenzy started early in the year, with National Data Corp.  buying
Learned-Mahn, a Boise, Idaho-based supplier of transactions processing
software.  Then in May, National Data bought Claim*Net, the claims
clearinghouse of Indianapolis-based Physicians Practice Management.

With that buy, National Data began implementing its strategy of integrating
the software and clearinghouse services of its new companies with its existing
pharmacy and dental claims processing services to provide one-stop shopping of
information services for integrated delivery systems and community health
information networks.

That strategy was further cemented in November when National Data announced it
would buy Conceptual Systems Corp.  With the acquisition, National Data will
gain hospital claims clearinghouse capability (see story, page 10).

"What we are looking for is established connectivity in markets beyond our
core pharmacy business," says Richard Cohan, senior vice president of health
care at National Data.

Driven by the increased information needs of integrated delivery systems as
they go after managed care contracts, National Data was by no means alone in
buying its way to increased functionality.

MedE America, formed by the acquisition of three clearinghouses in 1994, added
two more in 1995-General Computer Corp.  and Latpon Health Systems.  Now armed
with electronic data interchange software for claims processing and systems
integration for hospitals, pharmacies and physicians, MedE America is
aggressively marketing its expanded services to existing clients.

Seeking to become a leading provider of disease management services,
pharmaceutical giant Eli Lilly and Co.  followed up on its 1994 acquisition of
pharmacy processing powerhouse PCS Health Systems with the purchase of
Integrated Medical Systems, a Golden, Colo.-based supplier of networking
services for the exchange of clinical and financial information.

Unisys Corp., a leading Medicaid fiscal agent, launched a diversification
strategy when it purchased Claims Express, EDI software from Comprehensive
Technologies.  The acquisition gave Unisys a valuable commodity it didn't
have:  software to send claims to private insurance companies.

A snail's pace

As the year drew to a close, the health care industry began to investigate why
providers and payers have made so little progress in implementing standard
formats for electronic transactions.

Although the American National Standards Institute's ASC X12N subcommittee
introduced its first standard transaction sets four years ago, the formats are
not widely used.

For example, only 2% of the Medicare claims that providers submit
electronically are in the X12 837 format.  And Blue Cross and Blue Shield of
Florida reports that 5.5% of 3.6 million electronic claims submitted
electronically in October were in the X12 837 format.

Some say that although there is nothing technically wrong with the X12 837
transaction set, it evolved from previously developed retail EDI transaction
sets and didn't take into account the complexity of health care transactions.

"From a logical sequencing perspective, the 837 works well," says Catherine
Peper, director of health care information management for Blue Cross and Blue
Shield of Florida.  "However, mechanically when you try to use it, it becomes
a nightmare."

But ANSI X12N members are skeptical that there's a significant problem with
the 837 format.

"People are saying it's too complex, but nobody's coming to us with specific
information that would lead us to believe the 837 is deficient in any way,"
says Bruce Horn, manager of electronic commerce for The Associated Group, an
Indianapolis-based payer, and co-chair of the X12N health care task group.
"To the extent that we can, we are going to address those issues.  If
something needs fixing, then we will fix it."  n

Joseph Goedert is editor of Health Data Network News, a Faulkner & Gray
newsletter.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Facing the Outpatient Coding Challenge


As more health care is delivered in outpatient rather than inpatient settings,
outpatient costs are skyrocketing.  This has prompted several payers,
including the federal government, to test a new method of paying providers for
the use of outpatient facilities.

As this complex new payment mechanism, known as ambulatory patient groups, or
APGs, is implemented, providers and payers are turning to coding software
developers for help in billing and paying for outpatient services.

The Health Care Financing Administration commissioned the development of APGs
as the potential basis of a federal prospective payment system for outpatient
care, similar in design to diagnosis-related groups, or DRGs, a treatment
classification system that's the basis of Medicare's inpatient payment system.

Under APGs, Medicare would reimburse hospitals and other outpatient facility
owners a fixed rate determined in advance for facility expenses, such as
outpatient surgery center use.  These payments would be based on resource use
as determined by the APGs' grouping mechanism.  Today, most payers reimburse
providers for outpatient facility costs based on charges or a percentage of
charges.

Because APGs group together outpatient services and procedures for
reimbursement of facility expenses, they generally result in lower payments
than if payers reimbursed providers based on facility charges for every
individual service or procedure.  As a result, APGs, like DRGs before them,
will force providers to carefully examine care delivery to ensure they are
delivering only those services that are clinically necessary.

HCFA is testing APGs in the Iowa Medicaid program, hoping to eventually
implement the payment system to cover all Medicare outpatient services.  HCFA
will allow individual states to decide if they want to use APGs for Medicaid
outpatient services.

Moving forward

The government has yet to finish testing the outpatient system or assign
national reimbursement levels for the 290 APGs.  But a handful of private
insurance companies have decided not to wait for HCFA to act and are moving
forward to implement APGs for outpatient facility payments to control costs.

Using consultants and their own reimbursement experience to devise
reimbursement rates for the outpatient groups, these payers are automating the
APGs grouping process in an effort to curb rising outpatient care costs and
encourage greater efficiency in outpatient care delivery.

"Providers are shifting services from inpatient settings to outpatient
settings, and outpatient costs are going nuts," says Ben Zelman, director of
utilization management at Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Ohio, which is
implementing APGs.  "To remain competitive, we need to know expected resource
utilization and have a clinical understanding of outpatient care, which
represents about half of health care costs."

Last July, the Ohio plan began using APGs to reimburse outpatient facilities
in a few regions of the state.  The plan wants to expand use of APGs to other
areas this year.  The Blues plan used consulting firms to help create weights
and rates, which determine levels of reimbursement for groups of services,
based on its past outpatient reimbursements and negotiations with Ohio
providers.

To facilitate the grouping of medical codes under APGs to determine
reimbursement, the Blues plan has added to its claims adjudication information
system the APG Grouper, Version 1.0, an automated code grouper from 3M Health
Information Systems, Murray, Utah.

"A provider sends us an electronic claim, which is sent through our claims
adjudication system and the grouper," Zelman says.  "The process of APG
grouping is automated and an integrated part of our health information
system."

Management tool

As payers use APGs to set payment rates and providers refine care delivery to
keep costs in check, providers and payers will learn to better predict
outpatient payments and expenditures, says Nancy Hirschl, director of
ambulatory coding and reimbursement enhancement services at Case Mix Analysis
Inc.  The North Grafton, Mass.-based consulting firm assists hospitals with
coding and reimbursement issues.

"APGs shift risk to providers; they are a management tool to monitor physician
practice patterns and hospital costs and expenses," Hirschl says.  "Payers are
finding in APGs an easily manageable tool to reimburse hospitals for
outpatient care.  And because payers know how successful DRGs have been in
containing inpatient costs, they are eager to embrace a similar system to
contain outpatient costs."

APGs are necessary because of the shift in health care from inpatient to
outpatient services, says Josh Pollatsek, vice president of finance at SOLON
Consulting Group Ltd.  The Silver Spring, Md.-based consulting firm
specializes in the design and implementation of prospective payment systems.

"APGs show payers and providers where they may or may not be having problems,
where they are losing money or where they can be making more money," Pollatsek
says.  "When relying on APGs for reimbursement, providers can filter out
unnecessary services, based on APG standards, to increase their efficiency in
outpatient care."

Groupers

To make more efficient use of the complex grouping methodology, payers and
providers are acquiring automated groupers, software that automatically
classifies medical codes under appropriate APGs.

"APGs require a tremendous flow of data into coding staff members' computers.
And with outpatient care, coders are dealing with enormous volume compared to
inpatient cases," says Steve Harris, president of IRP Systems Inc., a
Wilmington, Mass.-based company that specializes in coding and reimbursement
software for hospitals and payers.  "To successfully use APGs, providers and
payers need to have efficient, integrated information systems.  Otherwise,
coders will not be able to go through patient charts and find all necessary
codes for optimal reimbursement."

In 1988, HCFA commissioned 3M Health Information Systems to develop an
outpatient classification system in response to the increase in outpatient
care and the lack of a comprehensive outpatient cost containment system.  The
result was APGs, which use a combination of International Classification of
Diseases, 9th Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM) and Current
Procedural Terminology, Version 4 (CPT-4) codes to group outpatient facility
costs for reimbursement.

APGs are a patient classification system designed to explain the amount and
type of resources used in an outpatient visit, explains Donn G.  Duncan, M.D.,
APG project clinical consultant for HCFA and 3M Health Information Systems,
co-developers of APGs.

"Patient visits that fall under one of the 290 APGs have similar clinical
characteristics and similar resource use and cost," Duncan says.  "Development
of APGs focused on the full range of outpatient settings-including same-day
surgery units, emergency rooms and clinics-and the full range of patients, not
just the Medicare population.  APGs also were designed to include only
facility costs, not professional costs, which are handled separately by CPT-4
codes."

Data elements used to define APGs included information on the UB-92 and the
Medicare claim forms, which include ICD-9-CM diagnosis and CPT-4 procedure
codes, he adds.

One major difference between APGs and DRGs is that APGs depend on both
ICD-9-CM and CPT-4 codes to group outpatient services, while DRGs use only
ICD-9-CM codes for inpatient services.  Further, where coding staff classify
an inpatient admission by only one DRG, they can classify one outpatient visit
by several APGs.

"Coders seek the reason for admission found in a medical record to arrive at a
DRG number," Duncan says.  "To figure out which APGs are relevant, coders look
at visit necessity by three categories-a significant procedure or therapy, a
medical visit, or an ancillary test or procedure."

A testbed

As HCFA's testbed for implementing APGs, the Iowa Medicaid program is the
crystal ball for many who want to view the future of APG automation.  In July
1994, when the test began, many Iowa hospitals were uncertain how to handle
the automation of APGs.

With HCFA's APG effort in full bloom in Iowa-and private efforts sprouting in
California, Maine, Nebraska, Ohio, Utah and other states-many health care
organizations now are looking to a limited selection of specialized coding
software to improve their handling of APGs.

Coding software can help coders better understand the APG system, says Harris
of IRP Systems, which distributed its APG Calculator system at no cost to all
Iowa hospitals before the start of the APG Medicaid test.  Coding staff use
the IRP system to automatically determine APGs for claims.

Staff at Mercy Hospital in Council Bluff, Iowa, use IRP's APG Calculator to
determine APGs for Medicaid claims, a task they are mandated to perform under
the HCFA test.  With a Medicaid patient population of nearly 25% and a need to
hasten the APG learning curve, automation has been an important element of APG
implementation for staff at Mercy Hospital.

"All we have to do is enter the principal ICD-9-CM code or the various CPT-4
codes, along with a patient's gender and age, and the grouper examines the
data and shows the various APGs for which the hospital will be reimbursed,"
says Jim Harwood, Mercy's supervisor of medical records.

Although it took some time to understand the new classification system, Mercy
Hospital staff members have realized both financial and clinical advantages.

"Through the APGs fixed-reimbursement system, the hospital is better able to
focus on outpatient costs as well as develop clinical protocols," Harwood
says.

APGs lump resources used during an outpatient service or procedure into a
group.  Thus, providers can use APGs as one indicator of which services and
procedures should be included in outpatient clinical treatment protocols.

Mercy Hospital is in very early stages of developing clinical protocols, which
recommend diagnostic and treatment approaches for treating patients with
certain medical problems.  But APGs already have helped staff see where such
protocols could improve care and the bottom line.

"Everyone that comes into our emergency room does not need a chest X-ray or
laboratory work," Mercy's Harwood says.  "APGs make our providers think more
in terms of necessity.  APGs make caregivers and administrators more aware of
costs.  APGs make people acutely aware of the fact that health care has
changed."

Private-sector test

Just as HCFA is testing APGs in Iowa's Medicaid program, Blue Cross and Blue
Shield of Utah is testing APGs as a strategic way to control payments.

"We wanted to move to a prospective payment system where, through negotiations
with providers, we could control the levels of reimbursement for outpatient
care," says Mark Watson, director of hospital reimbursement at the Utah Blues
plan.  "We found that the APG system was the only comprehensive prospective
payment system with an established grouper for the outpatient health care
environment."

The Utah Blues plan has been working on APG implementation for about two
years.  The payer plans to begin testing APGs in April at two hospitals.

Staff at the Utah Blues plan know that automation will be a key to successful
use of APGs.  The payer is recalibrating its internal claims information
systems so that it can handle the new grouping methodology.

"We have not traditionally collected all the CPT-4 codes and other data
necessary for APGs; we have been using revenue and ICD-9-CM codes for
outpatient care," Watson says.  "We are enhancing the backbone of our claims
processing system to accept the CPT-4 codes to facilitate the grouping of
claims data for APGs."

For the actual grouping, the Blues plan will use the automated grouper from 3M
Health Information Systems.  The plan has hired a consulting firm to help
create the payment weights and rates needed for reimbursement.

More work is needed at the federal level before APGs can become a universally
mandated classification system for Medicare.  While the grouping methodology
is in its second version, HCFA still must devise formalized payment weights
and rates.

"The weights and rates used in the Iowa Medicaid program are based on older
data; we have to develop Medicare-based weights and rates on the new data from
our tests," says Mark Wynn, a member of the special analysis staff for the
associate administrator for policy and team leader for development of
prospective payment systems for outpatient services at HCFA.

"And to finalize

the policymaking, APGs will have to go through further evaluation to gauge
their impact on various types of providers," Wynn adds.  "Many payers are
waiting for Medicare to implement APGs; that is the main reason why APGs are
not yet widely accepted."

However, some observers believe that the private market will lead the way on
APGs, whether HCFA completes work on the system or not.

"Like us, a lot of health care organizations around the country are starting
to work with APGs," says Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Ohio's Zelman.  "Right
now the private market is leading the government because the assumption is
that APGs will provide a competitive edge in managing reimbursement and
quality in a health care delivery system."

Payers and providers will have to deal with spiraling outpatient care costs
one way or another, Zelman says, and automated APGs represent the best
outpatient cost containment resource available.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Putting the Pieces Together


the objectives underlying disease management appear to be essential components
of the new health care delivery business strategy in the next few years.
Managed care is increasing its stranglehold as a reimbursement approach,
forcing providers and payers to develop ways to limit their financial risk in
providing individuals' health care.  That's creating stronger incentives for
preventing illnesses from occurring, intervening early and appropriately, and
handling chronic illnesses in the least expensive and most clinically
effective way.

HMOs have long claimed that those objectives were central to their philosophy.
But until now, most HMOs have been able to succeed financially by merely
managing health care costs, not actual care delivery.  Now, as margins tighten
and pressure from purchasers grows, providers and payers are finding they have
no choice but to seek ways to avoid costly health care interventions and to
improve individuals' health.

Fortunately, providers' and payers' urgency to start disease management
programs is coming at a time when information technology tools are available
to provide the information and the organization needed to develop and
effectively implement such strategies.

Information a key

While there's much debate about exactly what this discipline should be called
and how it should be used in health care, there's little argument that as risk
becomes a centerpiece in efforts to limit health care spending, disease
management will flourish, and information tools will be absolutely essential
in dealing with risk-based reimbursement strategies.

"The whole industry of managed health care is evolving to a level of higher
quality, and that means managing outcomes, which is another term for disease
management," says John C.  Marlow, M.D., vice president of health care
programs for Capp Care, a Newport Beach, Calif.-based managed care company
that operates preferred provider organizations.  "Parallel to the development
of disease management, information technology has evolved, and we're seeing
the beginning of enabling or empowering technologies that help providers make
decisions to navigate through the health care system.  That will have a big
impact on disease management."

Those still-developing tools, including outcomes assessment technology,
computer-based patient records, central data repositories and health
information networks, will enable disease management to have more of an effect
on health care by building a strong foundation of data on which to base
clinical guidelines.  But, like those enabling technologies, disease
management is embryonic in its development, and skeptics now are wondering if
it's a marketing invention that will fade as quickly as it's burst on the
scene.

Key issues in successful disease management programs include picking diseases
that can be managed effectively, doing high-quality research, navigating the
politics of getting physicians and other providers to use computers for data
collection, and standardizing clinical data from disparate sources so it can
be compared and analyzed.

Finding a niche

Disease management is an extension of several trends in directing health care
delivery-utilization manage-ment, case management, outcomes assessment,
patient education and clinical protocols and pathways.  Proponents say disease
management seeks to harmonize those disciplines to arrive at the best of
managed care, using evidence-based ap-proaches that offer the best care at
least cost.

In disease management programs, researchers develop a comprehensive plan for
handling patients who have a chronic specific illness or condition.  Providers
use best practices and patients use preventive measures.  These interventions
can occur in home, ambulatory or acute care settings.  The goal is to deliver
the most effective care in the least expensive setting.

Information technology will facilitate the gathering of evidence for disease
management research.  And computers' ability to analyze data and provide
direction at the point of care will provide critical impetus to disease
management.

Lee Newcomer, M.D., chief medical officer of United HealthCare Corp., an
Edina, Minn.-based managed care company, defines disease management as a set
of interventions, determined prospectively, targeted at a large group of
patients with particular diseases, with the intent of altering the course of
the disease, preventing exacerbations and improving the patients' quality of
life.

While most disease management programs are seeking those objectives, there is
a wide range of approaches for achieving those ends, says Michael Miele,
president of Capitated Disease Management Services, a Montclair, N.J.-based
company that provides disease management services.  "It can be anything, as
little as an education program or as aggressive as planting case managers on
site in somebody's home."

Some say the disease management buzzword doesn't really explain the work that
needs to be done.  That's why they are terming their efforts care management,
health management or outcomes management.

In addition, the status of disease management as a buzzword is making many
view it as a hot business opportunity.  New entrants in the market range from
startup companies seeking contracts to organize and direct care for a specific
group of patients for providers or managed care organizations, to giant
pharmaceutical companies hoping to leverage their research experience and
enormous databases while they find a new and more important niche in health
care delivery.

Many payers and providers, such as hospitals and integrated delivery systems,
are beginning to develop disease management programs on their own.  That's
because they're under more pressure to reduce costs.  Also, buyers of health
care services are becoming more sophisticated, demanding that those bidding to
provide health care coverage have clinical protocols or disease management
initiatives in place.

Capp Care's Marlow sees disease management as another step in the evolution of
managing health care costs.  Starting with efforts to manage costs in the late
1970s, the health care system has moved to managing utilization through such
1980s efforts as precertification requirements and utilization review and most
recently to managing components of the process, such as behavioral health and
drug formularies, to deliver cost-effective care.

Disease management, Marlow says, is the next step in health care management.
It differs from previous efforts because it seeks to manage a patient's
treatment across a continuum of care, not just in a hospital setting.

In addition, disease management differs from case management because it's not
just implemented when a person enters an intensive inpatient setting in an
effort to limit costs and lengths of stay.  Instead, it's intended to be a
wide-ranging plan that keeps people out of the hospital and manages chronic
conditions so that these individuals enjoy the best health possible and thus
consume the most appropriate and effective health care resources.  It's
believed that this will provide the best payoff in long-term cost savings.

Risk as the impetus

The emergence of risk-shifting in providing health care, through such devices
as capitated managed care contracts, has shifted incentives.  If providers or
payers are paid a fixed amount per month per plan enrollee, regardless of
their medical needs, the use of unnecessary services and resources comes out
of their pockets.  Conversely, the better an enrollee's health is, the more
profit can be made, and the more satisfied the enrollee is.

It's no surprise, then, that those at most risk for covering health care costs
are most keenly interested in disease management.

As James B.  Couch, M.D., sees it, the push for evidence-based disease
management is coming right from the top, from large companies that see health
care costs as limiting their ability to compete worldwide.  It's also coming
from government programs, which want to get the most effectiveness for their
health care dollar, says Couch, director in charge of disease management
consulting for Coopers and Lybrand, a New York-based consulting firm.

"Global competition has driven companies to look at what they get for their
health benefit dollar.  They are going beyond managed care to finding the most
cost-effective way to identify and treat diseases within specific populations
with the intent of achieving measurable improvement in health status," he
says.  "Major purchasers are finally assessing health care suppliers like they
do any other supplier.  For many, health care is their most expensive
supplier.  When they manage the value and quality and cost-effectiveness of
health care, the net effect is a happier and more satisfied workforce and a
better bottom line."

An example of large companies' interest in disease management is the Managed
Health Care Association, a group of companies organized to promote and improve
managed care.

One of its initiatives is the Outcomes Management System Consortium, which
seeks to apply patient-centered outcomes assessment methods to monitor and
improve the quality of health care services, says Michael R.  Huber, executive
director of the Health Outcomes Institute, a Bloomington, Minn.-based
not-for-profit organization that's coordinating research efforts for the
consortium.

"The consortium's work reflects the growing demand for marketplace
accountability of health services," Huber says.  The focus is on the results
of care, which can help consumers compare health plans.  The institute's first
study, involving severe asthma patients, sought to study how plans managed the
chronic disease and relate treatment to patients' outcomes.  "We're looking to
develop models for application of this data, either for providing comparisons
across plans or feedback to providers," he says.

Payers that are assuming risk for health care also are beginning to phase in
disease management programs.  For example, one of the largest managed care
organizations, United HealthCare, is developing disease management programs
for asthma, diabetes, lower back pain and chronic heart failure, says Karen
Keown, its senior director of medical management projects.  United HealthCare,
which recently acquired New York-based MetraHealth and covers 27 million
through managed care programs, will begin gradually implementing the programs
in March, she says.

The diseases that United HealthCare is targeting in its new program are common
candidates for disease management.  These diseases get a lot of attention
because they are known to be sources of high utilization, says Jaan Sidorov,
M.D., director of the continuous health improvement program for Geisinger
Health Plan, a Danville, Pa.-based HMO.

Studying diseases also can indicate whether a coordinated plan of management
can help reduce costs and increase patient satisfaction.  That's a crucial
question to ask, United HealthCare's Newcomer says.  He recalls that a task
force for his company spent many weeks studying low birthweight and high-risk
pregnancies as a potential condition for disease management, but wound up
deciding that no amount of preventive interventions would significantly reduce
the risk that women would have these pregnancies.

Disease management also involves scientific research, and experts say an
effective program must compare the results of interventions-both for cost and
outcomes-against a control group so that the effectiveness of those efforts
can be analyzed.

Automation's promise

That's why information technology will play a pivotal role in disease
management.  Computerization capabilities fit hand-in-glove with the need to
capture and bring together clinical and financial information to conduct
complex research.

"Better information is indispensable," says Couch of Coopers and Lybrand.
"You need to identify the ultimate customer of the health care system and
their wants and expectations, then design and implement a health care system
that is intended to meet their needs.  You need to be able to track the actual
clinical results of the health care delivery process, and track and trend
those results with financial results so you can constantly look at the process
and continue to improve."

Doing the necessary research for evidence-based disease management will be
impossible without the use of computers.  It's extremely difficult for
researchers to cull paper-based systems and monitor the outcomes of variations
in treatment.  In fact, current automation trends will have to continue if
researchers are to have a chance of discovering the most clinically effective
and least expensive treatment regimens for particular diseases.

"The automation of medical records and the automated collection of health data
is going to be critical for any of this to work," Couch says.  "In our present
state of affairs in medical records, it's almost hopeless to really be able to
manage disease.  We need to capture

real-time information from large populations of patients concerning pre- and
post-intervention health status to be able to demonstrate that systematic
disease management interventions have resulted in improvements in the health
status of populations."

The benefits of automation will go beyond improved data collection.  Disease
management experts say it's crucial to get guiding information back to
practitioners so that they have it available at the point of care, when
they're treating patients.  That involves automating treatment guidelines and
assisting physicians with decision support systems.

For example, Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound has operated a program
called Clinical Roadmap.  It's paper-based for the physicians, although data
is compiled on a mainframe computer, says Robin Johnson, manager of the
program for the Seattle-based HMO.  But this month, Group Health will pilot
the program on its clinical workstations in physicians' offices for its
diabetic population.

Computer assistance

"It will be a decision support system that will give providers information
that helps them deliver the most appropriate care to their patients," she
says.  For example, a physician will be able to see how many diabetics he has
treated and, of those, how many have had eye or feet examinations to meet the
HMO's clinical guidelines.  Such examinations can prevent more expensive
treatment if a patient's condition deteriorates before it's detected by
clinicians.

Physicians' use of information technology will be important, both in
implementing practice suggestions as well as gathering data to refine disease
management approaches, says Dan Segedin, vice president of health systems
management for PCS Health Systems.  The Scottsdale, Ariz.-based pharmacy
benefits manager recently was acquired by Eli Lilly & Co., an
Indianapolis-based pharmaceutical company, and is leading the parent company's
disease management effort.

"The linkage to physicians is critical.  They remain the primary decisionmaker
in health care, and on average, they're influencing how $1 million per
physician is being spent downstream," Segedin says.  "We need to have some
connection to physicians to get data from them to measure outcomes and to get
data back to them, which they now get in a piecemeal fashion, or clinical
guidelines over the network."

It's not enough for such information systems to collect financial information,
says Paul Tang, M.D., medical director of information systems at Northwestern
Memorial Hospital in Chicago.  "It's almost a no-brainer that we need
information systems, but if we don't look at clinical practice through our
systems and just look at costs, then we're missing a big opportunity," he
says.  "If the overemphasis on financial issues comes at the risk of ignoring
the quality issues, then we risk not gathering the right data."

Network building

The other challenge for applying information technology to disease management
initiatives is to build health information networks to make information
readily available at multiple sites, including physicians' offices and other
ambulatory care settings, Tang says.  Clinical guidelines and preventive
measures can most easily be implemented at outpatient settings to pre-empt
expensive inpatient treatment of serious conditions.

Northwestern, which is building a $580 million facility expected to be ready
in 1999, is designing a new enterprisewide information network that will
include links to about 600 physician offices in the building, as well as
ancillary diagnostic and testing services, in an attempt to give physicians
needed clinical and financial information drawn from one data repository.
"We're not addressing what physicians need to make these decisions, so we need
to target physicians in ambulatory care settings," Tang says.  "We have to
reorganize the data and design applications that help physicians use and view
data the way they need to."

Involving ambulatory care physicians is also part of the information systems
strategy of Children's Memorial Hospital in Chicago, which is seeking to
automate its disease management program.  Automating best practice information
and patient documentation is important because Children's handles about
200,000 outpatient visits annually throughout the metropolitan Chicago area.
The hospital plans to begin testing a computer-based patient records system in
one of its primary care clinics this spring.

Disease management programs will become a way of life for most hospitals,
predicts Julie Bonello, Children's CIO, and physicians will need to use
information technology if they are to survive under managed care.  "I don't
know if there will be a big complaint from them about practicing cookie cutter
medicine, because this will affect their pocketbook," Bonello says.  "They'll
have to know how to aggressively manage their patients.  They'll need a lot of
information to do that and a lot of tools."

In addition to using tools such as electronic records to capture information
and data repositories to collect it, disease management will benefit from new
hardware technologies that bring information and data collection nearer to the
point of care.

New tools

For example, University of Texas M.D.  Anderson Cancer Center in Houston is
using its clinical repository, built over the last 50 years of specialized
care, to continually refine its critical pathways.  The cancer center is
giving its 28 case managers portable computers to aid in implementing its care
management program, says Charles Emery, the center's associate vice president
and CIO.

A similar approach is being developed by Capp Care, which is developing a
pen-based wireless computer that both captures clinical data and gives
physicians decision support at the bedside.  Capp Care, which has PPO
contracts with more than 104,000 physicians and 4,300 hospitals, hopes to
complete work on the system by mid-year and to market it commercially.

Marlow says such systems will offset costs with more efficiency, reductions in
costs and elimination of mistakes, which can reduce malpractice exposure.  The
payback period will shorten because technology costs are falling.

But he cites a more sobering reason why providers need to move to automation
to implement strategies such as disease management.  "Within three to five
years, providers that haven't taken strides to implement this type of
technology will be at a significant disadvantage, and they may be out of
business," he contends.  "If this helps reduce costs by two-thirds to
three-quarters, those using more archaic forms won't be able to compete."

Still, some organizations aren't sure that the concepts underlying disease
management will work and that money will be saved.  Some note that other
health care initiatives and technologies have been hyped as potential money
savers but only resulted in increased utilization.

Skepticism exists

One person who's hedging her bets is United HealthCare's Keown, who oversees
disease management.  She says the HMO company is "going into disease
management incrementally."  United will test modules for asthma, diabetes, low
back pain and chronic heart failure starting in March.

"We clearly don't know what pieces of the program work, and we don't want to
waste customers' money if we can't clearly show a value for the intervention,"
she says.  She cites some efforts at direct case management as not being
consistently successful in reducing health care expenditures.

But Capp Care's Marlow sees disease management as part of a logical
progression in health care that eventually will result in the development of
payment methodologies that move beyond capitation.  Where capitation sets a
financial incentive to limit care in order to maximize profits, Marlow
foresees a system that will give providers incentives to provide optimal care,
promoting the use of disease management.

Couch of Coopers and Lybrand believes providers will have to do more than
voice support for information technology and disease management programs.
"I'm still seeing primarily lip service to making these investments among
medical leaders," he says.  "They have to recognize that these types of
investments, if they are not made, will basically leave the management of
health care to those that have access to this information and data.

"If physicians are going to continue to have influence over clinical
decisionmaking, they will have to lead in making investments into electronic
medical records and into integrated systems that allow this research," he
continues.  "There's a tremendous amount of distrust that this kind of
information will be used against them.  If they don't have the courage to put
themselves out there and lead the medical information revolution, it will be
inflicted on them by those that have the technology and the information."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Information technology essential to HMO's disease management strategy


Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound is approaching disease management as
an extension of its concept of population-based care, says Robin Johnson,
manager of the Seattle-based HMO's Clinical Roadmap program.  And it plans to
use information technology to help physicians better monitor patients'
conditions and give them guidance in providing preventive and non-acute care.

Providers can define populations in many different ways, she says, such as
seniors or women of child-bearing age.  The Clinical Roadmap program is Group
Health's effort to define a population by its clinical needs, and then to
improve its services in certain key areas:

* Planning for care across the continuum rather than emphasizing sickness or
acute care needs.  * Looking at what the patient wants and needs vs.  meeting
the organization's needs.  * Looking at health care delivery instead of just
looking at business performance.  * Paying attention to patients' quality of
life.

The process of putting together a system of care for a clinical population has
helped Group Health predict and manage care by measuring important outcomes
and then using the information to see what it should be doing differently,
Johnson says.

"It's like a decision tree underlying the individual case," she adds.  "For a
diabetic, for example, you can not only see when the last eye exam was, but
there's a linkage between that and the underlying guideline.  The information
will be highlighted in some way to help the clinician know that the patient is
out of compliance."

Primary care physicians are the coordinating point for the system, she says,
and Group Health plans to use its growing network of workstations in
physicians' offices in two ways.  First, physicians will be able to use
patient registries to determine which of their patients have specific
conditions.  Secondly, by linking those patients to guidelines of care,
physicians can see suggestions for what treatment is appropriate.

The Clinical Roadmap program started in late 1992 to target diabetics and
those needing heart care, pregnancy care and tobacco cessation.  Since then,
it's been expanded to include depression, breast care, immunizations, HIV/AIDS
and asthma.

Besides functioning as a decision support system for physicians, the computer
network "will be a very important tool in aiding provider and patient
decisionmaking," Johnson says.  "It will help us evaluate outcomes and give us
better ways to learn what works from the care we're delivering.

"The power of the information system is that it can really make planning a
proactive component so the physician can focus on the care rather than
figuring out who needs to provide the care."

Anecdotal evidence suggests that Group Health patients who are involved in the
program feel more empowered by the approach and are more satisfied because
physicians are taking a proactive role in their health, not just treating them
when they get sick, Johnson says.

Group Health's disease management automation effort is part of a broader, $100
million, five-year initiative to build an enterprisewide network to connect
all care delivery sites.  It's using its own legacy results reporting
software, Sun Microsystems servers and networked personal computers, most of
which are made by Compaq Computer Corp.  (see story, July/August 1994 issue).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-2</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B039-136</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh30.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015240 text/html 48293
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:50:43 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:44 GMT
Content-length: 48106
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh30.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
HEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 20, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Funding Problems Delay Iowa CHMIS Date</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(862 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>Why WEDI And ANSI Are Working Together To Boost Standardization</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(832 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>How Telemedicine Is Improving Emergency Care In North Carolina</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(966 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Maryland's Certification Program Remains On Track</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(252 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>With MedAccess, Employees Get More Plan Information The Cyberspace Way</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(650 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Using The Internet To Find Community Physicians</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(255 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>To Thrive In Managed Care, Oregon Docs Take The Health Data Network&nbsp;Initiative</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1134 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>The Pharmacy Fund Looks For Rapid Expansion Of Its Rapid RxEmit Program</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(596 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>Why VHA Is Dropping Its Supply-Side EDI Software</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(407 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>The ANSI Health Care Standards</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(144 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>WHIN Expands Its Wisconsin Network Reach</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(179 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>The Federal Privacy Bill Will Get A Close Look At WEDI's Annual Conference</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(171 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>New Database On The Net Gives Health Care Plan Performance Measures</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(114 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>PCS Veteran Moley Moves To Lead A Sister Company:  Integrated Medical</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(153 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 20, 1996

Funding Problems Delay Iowa CHMIS Date


With implementation costs higher than expected, a July deadline for starting
Iowa's state-sanctioned community health management information system likely
will be delayed at least one year.

The Iowa CHMIS program-including a centralized state data repository and
certification of claims clearinghouses-could be headed back to the drawing
board after four vendor bids for building and operating the data repository
came in at least $1.5 million over projections.

On Dec.  15, the Iowa CHMIS governing board voted to recommend to state
legislators that the mandate to start the program this July be postponed for
one year.  And administrative rules released for public comment in December to
implement a certification program for transaction processing networks are on
hold.

The repository and other activities of the program were to be funded by a
transaction fee surcharge of about 3 cents on electronically transmitted
claims and other transactions.  But because the project costs are higher than
anticipated, the surcharge would approach 18 cents plus membership fees,
violating a tenet of the program that it provide overall savings.

Four bids on the data repository ranged from $6 million to $7 million over
five years, which were $1.5 million to $2 million more than anticipated.

"When we started this process, we always recognized the volatility of the
cost/benefit process," says Walter Tomenga, Iowa CHMIS chair and vice
president of the Farm Bureau Insurance Companies.  "We knew we wouldn't be
able to understand the total cost ramifications until we put a system together
and put it out for bid.  We've not backed away from our commitment; we're now
looking at different models."

A 15-member task force began weekly meetings on Jan.  4 hoping to draft a new
CHMIS program by March, but some question how much can be saved.  "The bottom
line is the stakeholders are not willing to pay for one centralized
repository," says Susan Voss, projects director for the Iowa Division of
Insurance, which has regulatory jurisdiction over the program.  "It's good
that the board decided to take another look rather than rush into
implementation only to find out it's not working."

Local Links First

Outside observers concur, saying local health information networks need to be
well established before statewide efforts can succeed.  "A statewide
initiative is premature at this point," says Pamela Hanlon, president of
Community Medical Network Society, Atlanta, an association for those
interested in networking issues.  "We are not seeing successful state networks
at this time."

Since lawmakers enacted legislation in 1994 to create the centralized data
repository and require that all providers and payers be linked to certified
clearinghouses by this July, the electronic data interchange environment has
changed in Iowa.

As a result of the looming state government mandate and national growth of EDI
implementation, providers and payers are well on the road to using a range of
electronic transactions.  As a result, many of the goals of CHMIS already are
being accomplished.  "Just the threat of all this has made a lot of groups
move," Voss says.

For instance, CHMIS organizers anticipated that such transactions as
eligibility verification, preauthorization of treatment and electronic funds
transfers eventually would be significant income-generators for the program.
But vendors already are widely marketing these and other EDI services in the
state.

"A lot of the original concepts embedded in CHMIS-we can look at the private
sector and see that they're doing that now," Tomenga says.

In addition, larger payers and provider organizations already collect and
analyze all types of data and don't see a business need to increase data
collection or share it with the state, Voss adds.

"One of the frustrations that people have is when the government says, 'Give
us all of your data and then we'll decide later what to do with it,'" says
Richard Rubin, executive director of the Foundation for Health Care Quality, a
Seattle-based national CHMIS resource center.  "The original CHMIS model has
not proven to be viable."

Another byproduct of the CHMIS program as the original July 1996 deadline
neared is new interest in a national clearinghouse accreditation program that
Iowa adopted.

"We've had a number of companies apply in part because of Iowa," says Lee
Barrett, executive director of the Electronic Health Network Accreditation
Commission.  Those companies include Athena of North America, Louisville, Ky.;
MDIP Inc., Sioux Falls, S.D.; and The ISYS Group, Des Moines, Iowa.

Iowa was the first state to adopt the commission's standards, with Maryland
expecting to follow suit this year.

Barrett hopes the trend will continue, regardless of the setback in Iowa.  "It
certainly added credence to what we're trying to do to promote certification
across the nation," he says.

For now, nearly everything is on the table as Iowa CHMIS supporters craft a
new program.  "We have two stakes in the ground that are not movable:  the
collection of data and standardized transactions," Tomenga says.

Despite the funding setback, Iowa's CHMIS isn't dead, Hanlon says.  "They're
going to pull something off that will be good for their constituency and that
they can afford," she says.  "It just will look different."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 20, 1996

Why WEDI And ANSI Are Working Together To Boost Standardization


The American National Standards Institute's ASC X12N insurance subcommittee
and the Workgroup for Electronic Data Interchange are joining forces to
develop educational programs to increase the use of standardized electronic
health care claims and related transactions.

Following an open forum in December at the X12N interim meeting to discuss
problems with implementing the ANSI 837 claims transaction set, the two
organizations are discussing ways to coordinate development of more
educational programs.

WEDI and X12N organized the forum in Kansas City, Mo., to determine whether
low acceptance of the X12 837 standard format for claims is due to technical
flaws in the standard or other factors (see HDNN, Nov.  20, 1995).

While the standard is maligned by many in the industry as being too complex,
it is technically sound, providers and payers at the forum agreed.

Attendees pointed to a lack of educational efforts as a major reason ASC X12
standards are not widely used in health care.

"A lot of people don't know where to go for information," says Bruce Horn,
manager of electronic commerce for The Associated Group, an Indianapolis-based
payer, and co-chair of the X12N health care task group.  "We don't have the
infrastructure to help these people."

Some say the meeting provided a "wake-up call" to WEDI.

"It is a golden opportunity for WEDI to make something happen, and hopefully
they got that message," says Gary Beatty, electronic commerce manager for
Employers Health Insurance Co., Green Bay, Wis.

WEDI Responds

Message received, replies Gene Carruth, vice president of Blue Cross and Blue
Shield of Arizona and WEDI treasurer.  "We can be a conduit to help get
educational materials out to grassroots organizations," he adds.

But WEDI likely will not hold educational forums, says Gina Grage,
reimbursement coordinator for Mayo Medical Center and co-chair of WEDI's
educational technical advisory group.

Rather, WEDI will help local entities, such as medical associations or EDI
resource centers, put on seminars by developing educational materials and
creating a speakers bureau.

For instance, the WEDI advisory group is putting the finishing touches on a
slide presentation on the basic issues of electronic commerce in the health
care industry.

WEDI's commitment to assisting local educational efforts is good news for some
attendees of the special X12N forum, who worried that the two organizations
would settle for having special educational seminars at future X12N or WEDI
meetings that providers and payers would have to travel hundreds of miles to
attend.

"Whoever does the education will have to go out to the masses," says Paul
Montgomery, EDI translation specialist at Blue Cross and Blue Shield of
Kansas.  "The masses will not go out to EDI."

Still, 185 people attended the special X12N/WEDI meeting in December on only
30 days notice, a sign that there clearly is interest in the health care
community to standardize transactions, Horn says.

Uniform Implementation

Those attending the meeting told X12N and WEDI leaders that increased use of
the ANSI 837 is hampered by the lack of a uniform implementation guide.

For instance, at least six industry groups, including WEDI, have written
implementation guides.

But this problem should be resolved during 1996, as X12N is beginning to write
standardized, low-cost implementation guides for the 837 and other transaction
sets.

Some pioneers who have implemented the ANSI 837 caution that there are no
shortcuts to the procedure.

Because mainframe-based translation software can cost as much as $200,000,
many organizations are trying to implement the standard by writing translation
software themselves-and doing it wrong.

Following implementation guidelines properly and using commercially available
translation software can ease the implementation task, Beatty says.

He advises organizations to start slowly with personal computer-based
translation software and enhance their systems as they gain knowledge about
translation and data mapping issues.  "Don't build your own-that will slow
implementation," he says.

Today's PCs are powerful enough to handle transmitting many claims-related
transactions in large volumes.

For instance, Employers Health Insurance Co.  recently sent eligibility
rosters of 1.8 million people to a major pharmaceutical company from one PC
using a $3,500 off-the-shelf translator.  The transfer took about 10 hours.
The expected 25,000 daily eligibility transactions will take about 10 minutes.

Organizations considering buying a translator need to do some homework
beforehand to gain a better understanding of translation technology and what's
needed to fulfill business needs, says Daniel Kazzaz, president of Paper Free
Systems Inc., a translation software vendor in Fairfax, Va.

Once a vendor is selected, the buyer should get the software on a trial basis,
along with sample maps for transferring one claim format into another, he
adds.

Kazzaz applauds enhanced educational programs to implement standardized
transactions but warns that many people want quick answers.  "People mean
different things by education," he says.  "What they really mean is they want
someone to tell them, 'These products work and these don't.'"





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 20, 1996

How Telemedicine Is Improving Emergency Care In North Carolina


A handful of hospitals in North Carolina are testing telemedicine
consultations between emergency physicians at rural hospitals and academic
medical centers with a long-term goal of expanding the program statewide.

In planning for more than a year, the pilot program began on October 1 as
physicians at 49-bed Chatham Hospital in Siler City began consulting with
counterparts at the University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel
Hill.  That was followed later that month when Bowman Gray Medical Center,
Winston-Salem, linked with Wilkes Regional Medical Center, North Wilkesboro.

In November, teleconsultations began between the Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, and the Southeastern Regional Medical Center, Lumberton.  East
Carolina University School of Medicine, Greenville, and Pungo District
Hospital, Belhaven, began telemedicine consultations in December.  Project
organizers also hope to create links between the U.S.  Naval Hospital,
Jacksonville, and the East Carolina School of Medicine.

"We want to test the telemedicine equipment in an emergency room setting to
see if it can be used effectively to diagnose and treat diseases from a
distance, and whether it will be a viable resource to rural hospitals," says
Gayle Fitzgerald, project manager for the North Carolina Telemedicine Network
and a policy analyst with the Office of State Planning, the state agency
overseeing the project.

Camera Shy

Participants already have learned some lessons.  Chatham Hospital spent 45
days familiarizing its staff with the equipment and helping them over their
fear of being filmed.

"Emergency room people aren't shy individuals but when you try to get them on
camera they get that way quick," Chatham CEO Ted Chapin says.

Workstations-one telediagnostics and another teleradiology-are housed at both
UNC and Chatham.  The backbone of the network is the North Carolina
Information Highway, a fiber-optic network developed by the state and
telephone companies.  The network uses high-speed asynchronous transfer mode
switching technology that simultaneously routes huge amounts of voice, data
and video communications.

The telemedicine program-and the fiber-optic backbone-are part of a larger
effort in North Carolina to develop a comprehensive health information
networking infrastructure statewide.

The effort began in 1994 when Gov.  James Hunt created the North Carolina
Health Care Information and Communications Alliance-comprising information
systems companies, state universities, government agencies, hospitals and
physicians-to map out the state's health information networking strategy (see
Automated Medical Payments News, Sept.  20, 1994).  Among other projects, the
alliance is developing a statewide master patient index, which will undergo
initial testing this spring.

The telemedicine project has cost about $2.6 million so far, including a
$550,000 grant the network received in 1994 from the National
Telecommunications and Information Administration, an agency of the U.S.
Department of Commerce.

Funding Concerns

The project is scheduled to end in April but North Carolina will ask NTIA for
a six-month extension of time-but no additional funding-to collect more data
to analyze the benefits of the program.  Participants experienced delays of up
to six months in implementing the program because it took longer than
anticipated to identify and acquire the necessary equipment, Fitzgerald says.

While the project now focuses on emergency department applications at a
limited number of sites, participants hope to expand the network and include
scheduled consultations, but funding is a major concern.

Because of the emergency nature of the telemedicine consultations during the
test, the network operates on dedicated telecommunication lines that are open
24 hours a day.

"The expense of operating the fiber optics network is fairly great because
there aren't that many sites connected to it, but that cost should drop
dramatically as more sites are connected," says William Mattern, senior
associate dean for academic affairs at the University of North Carolina School
of Medicine at Chapel Hill.

The monthly line charges-at least $4,000 per participant-is shared by the
state and the hospitals.  In April, state funding expires and hospitals will
bear the full cost, Fitzgerald says.

Physicians using the network are doing so pro bono because very few insurance
companies or health plans pay for telemedicine consultations.

But with the Health Care Financing Administration paying for some telemedicine
services in a limited pilot program, Fitzgerald hopes payers eventually will
provide reimbursement if the federal program proves telemedicine is
cost-effective.

Meanwhile, the state is negotiating with regional telephone companies for
reduced charges for the telemedicine program.  If the negotiations are
unsuccessful, the scope of the program will be reduced, Fitzgerald says.

Participating providers praise the telemedicine program.  "It puts us on the
cutting edge for a small rural hospital, and physicians like the security of
having consultative expertise at their beck and call," Chapin says.

"The fact that physicians can talk to each other, look at images and hear
sounds with the patient participating offers huge advantages in terms of
providing care," Mattern adds.

Issues that participants hope to address during the pilot programs include the
cost-effectiveness of telemedicine, liability concerns and the willingness of
physicians to use the teleconsulting service on a regular basis after the
pilots are over.

By using telemedicine, smaller hospitals can treat and admit more patients,
rather than transferring patients to other hospitals.  "We're trying to save
patients money, and the payback for me would be an increase in the hospital
census," Chapin says.

The University of North Carolina School of Medicine takes a long-term view of
the program's potential benefits.

"The real payback will be when managed care becomes the predominant method of
care in the state and medical care is capitated," Mattern says.  "In the long
run it will be less expensive to take care of patients without having them
travel to medical centers, and telemedicine looks like it can be an extremely
valuable tool in allowing patients to remain at local sites."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 20, 1996

Maryland's Certification Program Remains On Track


While Iowa's effort to mandate state certification of clearinghouses is on
hold, a less ambitious certification effort is rolling along in Maryland.

Under rules being promulgated now, clearinghouses can seek state
certification, which includes meeting certain performance standards and
committing to being an open network that accepts all claims, beginning July 1.
Clearinghouses will gain state certification by being accredited by the
Electronic Health Network Accreditation Commission, an industry-sponsored
national program.

Maryland decided against mandating state certification because the state's
attorney general said a mandate could violate due process laws by depriving
businesses of the right to operate in the state without the benefit of
redress.

But while the program is voluntary, there's an extra incentive that kicks in a
year later.  By July 1997, all payers operating in the state must designate at
least one certified clearinghouse from which they will accept claims.

"We don't see any other way for there to be guarantees of open networks
without payers having at least one open door," says Benjamin Steffen, deputy
director of the Maryland Health Care Access and Cost Commission, the agency
responsible for the certification program.  Market pressures likely will force
most clearinghouses to eventually seek state certification, he adds.

Maryland decided to adopt the Electronic Health Network Accreditation
Commission's program after its confidentiality provisions were strengthened in
December to address the state's concerns.  Now, accredited clearinghouses have
to spell out in contracts how end users will use data transmitted through
their networks.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 20, 1996

With MedAccess, Employees Get More Plan Information The Cyberspace Way


Open enrollment, an annual ritual for employees and employers, is about to
leap into cyberspace.

This month, MedAccess Corp., a privately-owned, start-up company based in
Lexington, Mass., is introducing a new service enabling employees to access
information about their health insurance plans on the Internet.

The service, Health Fair Online, targets corporations employing at least 500
people, says Jaime Taaffe, founder and CEO of MedAccess.

An employer would pay MedAccess a fee to provide detailed, current information
on its health plan options to its employees on the MedAccess World Wide Web
page.  The company already has assembled a massive database of information on
virtually every managed care plan in the country, Taaffe says.

In October, Health Fair Online was tested at GTE Laboratories, Waltham, Mass.
Over a three-week open enrollment period during which the company offered the
choice of seven different health plans, about half of its 500 employees
accessed plan information on-line via MedAccess.

Available Information

The information included marketing materials for the seven managed care plans,
audio messages from the plans' senior executives, the background and
availability of physicians in those plans, the contracts between GTE and the
plans and information from the Health Plan Employer Data Information Set, a
standardized set of quality and performance measurements used to compare
managed care plans.

By calling up the Web site and then entering a social security number and a
pin number, employees could find out what their contribution and that of GTE
were to the health plan in the past year and compare those costs to the plans
being offered for the coming year.  Employees also could run scenarios
pertaining to their personal and family health care circumstances to learn
what plan may suit them best and its cost.

Based on the pilot program and a survey of GTE employees, MedAccess concluded
that employees are willing to go on-line for health plan information, Taaffe
says.

"The overwhelming majority said the information influenced their decision and
people found it very convenient because we were able to provide more
information and it was easy to navigate," he adds.

Responding to requests from GTE employees, MedAccess will add more information
on health-related areas such as life and disability insurance.

The interactive service provides more information in a more efficient manner
than other options, such as giving employees brochures, Taaffe says.  This
results in better informed employees and helps them choose the best plan for
their needs rather than selecting a plan simply because it has the lowest
cost, he adds.

GTE Corp., the parent company of GTE Laboratories, is looking for programs to
give its employees assistance in choosing the best quality plans because
"quality is cheaper," says Dwight McNeill, health care information manager for
GTE Corp.

Health Fair Online is feasible and less expensive than the traditional ways
corporations have sought to inform employees about their health plan choices,
he adds.  "I imagine the cost would be 25% of the cost of mailing and printing
paper."

While GTE Laboratories was pleased with the performance of MedAccess, its
parent company hasn't decided if it will retain the service, McNeill says.
GTE Laboratories agreed to test the service because its corporate office is
near MedAccess', and it was familiar with the firm and its personnel.

GTE Corp.  employs about 100,000 people in the United States.  Before the
company can decide whether to further utilize MedAccess, it must sell the
concept to the various divisions, McNeill says.  While he is impressed with
MedAccess, McNeill says it could use more video, graphics and color.

Taaffe declines to say whether MedAccess has signed any customers for its roll
out.  The cost of the service will depend on the company's size and the scope
of its health care benefits.  The company has a demonstration Web site at
http://www.medaccess.com.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 20, 1996

Using The Internet To Find Community Physicians


A new Internet service rolling out in March will enable members of managed
care plans to use personal computers to find affiliated physicians in their
community.

GeoAccess Inc., Overland Park, Kan., developed the service, called Referral
Online, which is free of charge for health plan members.  Insurance companies
and other payers will pick up the cost, which varies due to membership and
other factors but averages about $12,000 a year.

GeoAccess, formed in 1989, specializes in software and consulting services
that help its 300 payer clients measure health care access issues.

For instance, managed care plans can use the software to compare the employee
addresses of prospective employer clients with addresses of the plan's
regionally contracted providers, showing the degree of access to care that
employees would have under the plan.  GeoAccess also markets software to
create provider directories.

In essence, Referral Online takes these existing services and reformats them
for health plan membership use on the Internet.

To use Referral Online, a plan member dials up a Web site-either for the
health plan or at GeoAccess-and enters his or her street address.  After the
member selects a physician specialty from a subsequent menu, a listing of area
contracted physicians with address, telephone number and distance from the
member's home is displayed.

Health plans can make additional information available, such as office hours
and bilingual services.  In addition, Referral Online can search for
individual physicians by name.

A Web site demonstration is available at http://www.geoaccess.com.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 20, 1996

To Thrive In Managed Care, Oregon Docs Take The Health Data Network
Initiative


While several state medical associations have endorsed electronic claims
clearinghouses and obtained discounted rates as an incentive for members to
use electronic data interchange, few, if any, have gone so far as to develop
an electronic network.

Thus, the Oregon Medical Association is blazing a trail as it introduces a
statewide health information network, which could evolve to look much like a
community health information network.

Tested in the Portland area during the latter half of 1995, the Oregon Medical
Electronic Network is a "custom health care network" tailored to the needs of
its users, and those needs will determine how the network will evolve, says
Robert Dernedde, the medical association's executive director.

The medical association developed the network to help member physicians
successfully compete in the state's growing managed care business.

"It dawned on us that there was only one way we could help the medical
community survive this demand and that was to automate the administrative
process," Dernedde says.

Available Transactions

The network now enables physicians to verify insurance eligibility with
participating payers, refer patients to other physicians and communicate with
other users via electronic mail.

Other services scheduled for testing in 1996 include submitting claims to
participating payers, submitting certain prescriptions to pharmacies,
submitting laboratory orders and receiving results and submitting workers'
compensation injury reports.

The network doesn't include a centralized data repository, but expects to
eventually assist physicians in creating computer-based patient records.  How
that will be accomplished has yet to be determined, Dernedde says.

But before the network reaches that stage, it will have to address such thorny
issues as confidentiality and ownership of the information, he adds.

This month, the network began connecting members of the Salem-based Mid-Valley
Independent Physicians Association, whose 368 members practice at about 160
sites in two eastern counties, to the network.

Already connected are 146 physicians at 22 sites in the Portland area who were
hand-picked to participate in the pilot because they had a variety of
different information systems.

Participating Payers

The eight payers that participated in the pilot are:  HMO of Oregon, the
managed care plan of Blue Cross of Oregon; Sisters of Providence Good Health
Plan; ODS Health Plan; Physicians Association of Clackamas County; Pacificare
Inc.; Pacific Source; QualMed Inc.; and the Oregon Medical Assistance Program,
the state Medicaid program.

The state's two major workers compensation carriers-State Accident Insurance
Fund and Liberty Northwest Insurance Corp.-have committed to use the network
and Dernedde expects to hook them up shortly.

Mid-Valley has committed $1.2 million over the next 15 months to hook up
affiliated providers, with 20 sites expected to be on-line by February.

The network also is negotiating with organizations representing about 850
physicians in the Eugene, Springfield and Medford areas.

Physician-Driven

Physicians took the lead in developing the network to avoid political and
competitive problems that have plagued community health information networks
elsewhere.

"If payers or health systems take the lead, then other payers and health
systems won't participate," Dernedde says.  "The physicians are the ones who
ultimately have to provide the encounter data and they need to be able to
access multiple health plans, hospitals, pharmacies and other providers."

Precisely because of the need for connectivity to other providers, the medical
association's network is not limited to its member physicians.  "We're set up
in a non-proprietary way so that all participants who have a legitimate need
to use the highway can come to the table," Dernedde adds.  The network hopes
that as physicians in certain communities join the network, local hospitals,
pharmacies and other providers will join as well.

For now, the network is concentrating on signing up physicians through
independent practice associations or similar groups.  It anticipates serving
most of the 7,000 physicians in the state within five years through deals with
the state's 30 IPAs.

The state medical association chose Peregrin Medical Review, Beaverton, Ore.,
in February 1994 to install and run a frame relay-based network to switch
transactions.

Unlike other vendors, Peregrin understood the network's specific needs,
Dernedde says.  "The others all had their preconceived notions and they wanted
us to fit the round hole when we were square," he adds.

The network uses systems integration software developed by Informedics Inc., a
Lake Oswego, Ore.-based physician practice management software company.  The
software, HealthLink, easily integrates with many practice management systems,
including Informedics' ClinicManager product.

Lessons Learned

Now that the network is operational, the biggest obstacle- and lesson learned
from the pilot-is overcoming the fear of technology among physicians and their
staffs.  "You really have to work with the people in each installation so that
they can get comfortable with the system and will use it regularly," Dernedde
says.

The association hopes the network will enable physicians to communicate with
each other more efficiently and enable them to conduct outcomes research
geographically, by specialty, "or by any other configuration the medical
community might want to put together," Dernedde adds.

For instance, Mid-Valley hopes that electronic connectivity will enhance its
existing data collection and analysis programs.  "What we're really interested
in is having access to our raw data to do outcomes-based studies," says Jan
Buffa, Mid-Valley's CEO.

Mid-Valley operates its own data repository, downloading information from
certain health care payers on a quarterly basis.  But the Oregon network will
give it access to greater data on a more timely basis and enhance its data
collection capabilities, she adds.

Mid-Valley, the IPA in Salem, expects its investment in the network to pay for
itself within two years through reductions in administrative expenses and
increased staff productivity, says Michael Rohwer, a member of the
organization's board of directors and a general internist with the Doctors
Clinic, in Salem.  The Oregon Clinic, a multi-specialty facility in Portland
that participated in the pilot, already relies heavily on the network for
checking the insurance eligibility of patients, says Regina Tipton, the
practice's computer education coordinator.

"I don't know what the cost savings are, but if you take one individual who's
making $8 an hour who calls up the insurance company and waits 45 minutes to
get the answer, versus using the network and getting the information within
two minutes; we absolutely will get a lot more done," she adds.

The medical association expects to eventually profit from the network, but
Dernedde declines to say when profitability is expected or what the
association's investment has been.

Members of the medical association pay an average of $3,100 to $3,500 to join
the network, plus a monthly software licensing fee of $50.

The association, which has 5,263 members, including 4,300 practicing
physicians, charges non-members an additional $50 monthly surcharge.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 20, 1996

The Pharmacy Fund Looks For Rapid Expansion Of Its Rapid RxEmit Program


Having signed more than 300 pharmacies in 30 states to its Rapid RxEmit
receivables financing program in the past year, The Pharmacy Fund is preparing
to double the number of participating pharmacies.

Since December 1994, The Pharmacy Fund, a New York-based receivables financing
company, has paid more than 1.1 million claims the next business day through
the short-term receivables financing program.

To fund the receivables financing effort, The Pharmacy Fund is using about $25
million in investments from company officials and companies such as Mutual of
Omaha and Centre Financial Services Holdings Ltd.  But the fund has been
attempting since September to draw $80 million on a $500 million line of
credit arranged by Smith Barney to expand the program to 335 other pharmacies
that have committed to joining.

This month the fund expects to close on the $80 million in new financing,
ending months of frustrating legal maneuverings.

"We thought we could do this relatively simply," says Pharmacy Fund President
Jeffrey Greene.  "The legal bill is twice what was expected.  We have hundreds
of pharmacies signed up and we can't give them a start date until the lawyers
are finished."

How It Works

Rapid RxEmit uses electronic data interchange to process claims and evaluate
the credit risk of prescription payers.  Pharmacies using Rapid RxEmit submit
claims through National Data Corp., Atlanta, to the respective payers.  The
payers adjudicate the claims and transmit remittance advice back to the
pharmacies through National Data.  But payers also transmit copies of
adjudicated claims to the Pharmacy Fund.

The fund then uses evaluation software to check for duplicate or denied
claims, or claims from unapproved payers.  Only one-half of one percent of
claims are from payers that have payment histories so poor that the fund won't
buy the claims, Greene says.

The Pharmacy Fund pays approved claims the next business day, primarily
through direct deposit to pharmacy bank accounts.  The fund charges a fee
equal to 2% of each claim financed, and then assumes responsibility for
getting payment from payers.

The program dramatically improves cash flow for pharmacies, which often wait
30 to 90 days for payment and find the 2% fee money well spent.  "When you're
waiting more than 30 days for payment, you're really financing the
prescription program of these health plans," says Lou Giannotti, director of
pharmacies for Mayfair Super Markets, Elizabeth, N.J.  "The fund remedies the
task of chasing the receivables."

About 80% of claims for Mayfair's 12 pharmacies are paid the next business
day.  Most of the remaining claims are for the New Jersey Medicaid program,
which may join Rapid RxEmit later this year.

The Pharmacy Fund's evaluation software includes credit and payment histories
of 2,800 prescription payers, ranging from major corporations such as General
Motors Co.  to two volunteer fire departments.

To assess the credit risk of payers, the fund pulls reports from
investment-grading companies such as Moody's Investor Service, Standard &
Poor's Corp.  and Fitch Investor Service Inc.

Other reports come from Dun & Bradstreet Inc.  and state insurance divisions.
But the best source of information, Greene says, is The Pharmacy Fund's direct
experience with getting paid by the insurers.

One of the biggest challenges of Rapid RxEmit has been convincing payers to
pay The Pharmacy Fund rather than pharmacies.  While most payers agree, the
process is cumbersome.  "Every pharmacy we turn on, we have to notify 20 to 25
payers to change their files and that's all paper-driven," says Fred Tarter,
chairman of the fund.  





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 20, 1996

Why VHA Is Dropping Its Supply-Side EDI Software


A major hospital purchasing coalition is abandoning its proprietary software
for hospitals to submit supply orders electronically because its limited
functionality doesn't address customer needs.  Instead, VHA Inc., Irving,
Texas, is recommending that its member hospitals use the Quik Link materials
management software from Abbott Park, Ill.-based Abbott Laboratories, or the
Echo software from Choice Medical Inc., Louisville, Ky.

Quik Link, which has 900 customers, accommodates purchase orders,
acknowledgments and an electronic catalogue.  Echo offers its 300 customers
those same services, as well as electronic invoicing.  Both software products
support standardized transactions developed by the American National Standards
Institute ASC X12 subcommittee.

VHA is abandoning its own software because its functions are limited to
purchase orders and acknowledgments, and it doesn't accommodate customers'
requirements for easier connections to multiple vendors, says Gregory
Lindstrom, manager of VHA Net Services.  "We won't have to continue to utilize
VHA resources to build and design software, and provide customer and technical
support," he adds.

VHA expects to stop supporting the software by next January.

Abbott, a major manufacturer and distributor of pharmaceutical products and
other health care products, will supply Quik Link free to VHA hospitals.

Choice Medical is offering a 5% discount off the $495 price of the Echo
software.  The company also will offer discounts on annual support fees and
additional modules.

For Abbott, which merely provides software as a service to customers, the VHA
agreement will have little impact.  "We want to encourage our customers to use
EDI technology to keep costs out of the supply chain," says Alan Greenthal,
Abbott's senior systems analyst.

But the agreement will have a big impact on Choice Medical, says Rachel
Foerster, principal and founder of Rachel Foerster and Associates, a Beach
Park, Ill.-based EDI consulting firm.

Choice Medical markets Echo to smaller hospitals, but has more advanced
software, called RSVP, for the complete materials management needs of larger
hospitals.  Thus, the VHA deal gives the company a way to enter the larger
hospital market.

"It has a very positive impact for Choice Medical because they have some very
easy-to-use and affordable systems," Foerster says.  "Quik Link is limited in
functionality compared to Choice's Echo and it's not a full materials
management inventory system like Choice's RSVP."

"The VHA endorsement is almost as good as the Good Housekeeping seal of
approval," says George Puckett, vice president of Choice Medical.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 20, 1996

The ANSI Health Care Standards


148:  Transaction for reporting workers' compensation first reports of injury.
Approved in August 1993.

270/271:  Transactions for inquiry and response of insurance eligibility
information.  Approved in February 1993.

275:  Transaction for patient information, such as claims attachments.
Approved in June 1995.

276/277:  Transactions for inquiry and response of a status of a submitted
claim.  Approved in October 1993.

278:  Transaction for health care service review functions, such as
certification and referral information.  Approved in October 1994.

834:  Transaction for submitting and updating health plan enrollment
information.  Approved in February 1992.

835:  Transaction for remittance advice.  Approved in October 1991.

837:  Transaction for claims submission.  Approved in October 1992.

IHCEBI/IHCEBR:  Real-time, interactive standards for insurance eligibility
inquiry and response.  The first health care transaction written in the
international EDIFACT syntax.  Approved in October 1994.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 20, 1996

WHIN Expands Its Wisconsin Network Reach


A large Wisconsin independent practice association is committing up to
$500,000 to link its 300 primary care physicians to the Wisconsin Health
Information Network.

The 750-member Community Physicians Network in Sauk City will pay for all
software and training, and a "substantial subsidy" of hardware costs, to
assist 100 clinics in joining the Wisconsin network, says Gary Busack,
director of planning and development with Unity Health Plans.  Busack was
interim executive director of Community Physicians Network when the agreement
was finalized in December.

"The network is a means of Community Physicians Network being able to provide
more data to their members on how they are doing with their managed care
commitments," Busack says.  "This is what primary care needs if it is to be
successful in the future."

The clinics are in 30 southern Wisconsin counties, substantially expanding the
geographical reach of the network, which has concentrated on the Milwaukee and
Madison metropolitan regions.

The Wisconsin Health Information Network is owned by Ameritech Inc.  and
Aurora Health Care, a Milwaukee-based hospital system.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 20, 1996

The Federal Privacy Bill Will Get A Close Look At WEDI's Annual Conference


The Workgroup for Electronic Data Interchange has added a special forum on
federal medical records confidentiality legislation to the agenda of its Jan.
29-31 conference in Orlando, Fla.  The forum, from 9 a.m.  to noon on Jan.  29
focuses on the Medical Records Confidentiality Act, introduced by Sen.  Robert
Bennett (R-Utah) last fall.

The event is more an informational seminar than a debate on the bill's merits.
"It's a workshop for people who want to understand what the bill does and what
it doesn't do," says WEDI Executive Director Barbara Souder.

Panel members include Paul Yost, legislative director for Sen.  Bennett;
Kathleen Frawley, Washington director of the American Health Information
Management Association; Marjorie Carey, assistant general counsel of the
American Hospital Association; Jeanne Shulte Scott, chair of the Association
for Electronic Health Care Transactions; and Joel Gimpel, associate general
counsel of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association.  The forum cost is
$250, but it is free for WEDI conference registrants.  For more information,
call 617-374-9170.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 20, 1996

New Database On The Net Gives Health Care Plan Performance Measures


Employers and other purchasers of managed care, as well as consumers, have new
information at their fingertips to help assess the performance of individual
health care plans.

Last month, the National Committee for Quality Assurance rolled out a World
Wide Web site that includes a list of health plans that have obtained NCQA
accreditation and HEDIS report cards that show how the services of a managed
care plan compare to other plans.  Nearly half of the nation's HMOs have been
reviewed as part of NCQA's accreditation program.

The web site also includes NCQA conference information and various
organization publications.

The Internet address for the web site is http://www.ncqa.org.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
HEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 20, 1996

PCS Veteran Moley Moves To Lead A Sister Company:  Integrated Medical


Integrated Medical Systems, the Golden, Colo.-based health information network
vendor owned by Eli Lilly & Co., has new leadership.

Kevin Moley, senior vice president of PCS Health Systems, is the new president
and CEO of Integrated Medical.  Moley succeeds Kevin Green, who resigned on
Jan.  10 to accept a similar position at an undisclosed company.

Moley was a driving force in PCS' investment in Integrated Medical Systems in
1994.  Eli Lilly bought both companies last year.

Moley, who served as Deputy Secretary of the U.S.  Department of Health and
Human Services in the Bush Administration, was interim CEO of Integrated
Medical Systems during much of 1994.

The company operates 45 health information networks linking hospitals to
affiliated physicians.  The leadership change won't result in philosophical
changes, Moley says.

But he expects to use new capital from Eli Lilly to expand the company's
client base and services.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-3</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B039-157</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh10.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015259 text/html 30709
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:51:01 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:47 GMT
Content-length: 30522
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh10.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
HEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>GRANTS ALERT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>TECHNOLOGIES FOR NEUROSCIENCE (NSF)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(316 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>BIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION (NSF)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(229 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>BRIEF AIDS INTERVENTIONS (NIMH)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(177 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH ON EPIDEMIOLOGY OF DRUG ABUSE (NIDA)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(163 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>DRUG AND ALCOHOL USE AND ABUSE IN RURAL AMERICA&nbsp;(NIDA/NIAAA/USDA)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(351 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>MINORITY RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE SUPPORT (NIMH)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(231 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>TRANSITION FROM CARDIAC HYPERTROPHY TO OVERT HEART FAILURE&nbsp;(NHLBI)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(215 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>BEHAVIORAL PAIN RESEARCH (NIH)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(162 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>STATE COURTS GRANTS (SJI)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(185 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>NATIONAL BOATING SAFETY (DOT)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(269 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>SMALL COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT:  NEW YORK STATE (HUD)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(221 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>GRANTS CALENDAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(88 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS BRIEFING</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>TOOLS OF THE TRADE:  THE FEDERAL REGISTER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(667 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>AGRICULTURE SETS RULES FOR GRANT PROGRAMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(287 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

TECHNOLOGIES FOR NEUROSCIENCE (NSF)

Scope:  The National Science Foundation is inviting
proposals to plan and initiate collaborative projects to
integrate enabling electronic and information technologies
into neuroscience research as part of the federal "Decade of
the Brain" initiative.

Deadline:  March 15.

Funds:  Up to $100,000 per project for one or two years.
NSF expects to make eight to 12 awards.

Eligibility:  Domestic academic institutions and nonprofit
organizations with academically-oriented engineering and
science research programs.

Proposals must include teams of two or more investigators,
including at least one neuroscientist and one investigator
from a relevant discipline, such as applied mathematics,
computer science, intelligent control/neuroengineering,
interfaces, mathematical and statistical modeling, network
engineering, physics, scientific visualization, sensor
design, signal processing, simulation and systems
integration/interoperability.

Areas:  The initiative aims to bring together new teams of
investigators able to use common languages and scientific
concepts to attack problems with impact on more than one
discipline.  Projects include collaborations to address
problems in designing, developing and implementing
electronic and information resources for functional studies
of the nervous system; and collaborations that apply
paradigms from engineering, computer science or artificial
neural network theory to assess the functionality of
neuroscience models and circuits.

Projects may include new computational and statistical
approaches to functional visualization; explorations of
learning capabilities of biological neurons and neural
networks; development of novel database structures and
search strategies; and design of software tools that provide
neuroscientists access to multimodal information.

NSF expects these research programs to lead to novel
solutions for problems of neuroscience information storage,
visualization, integration and communication or empirically
based reverse engineering of the brain with emphasis on
generic learning capabilities.  NSF encourages research on
any organism that provides a good model system for
neuroscience.

Contact:  Carol Colby, Division of Integrative Biology and
Neuroscience, Biological Sciences Directorate, National
Science Foundation, 4201 Wilson Blvd., Arlington, VA 22230,
(703)306-1416.  Refer to NSF announcement 96-20.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION (NSF)

Scope:  The National Science Foundation funds research
projects aimed at understanding the structure and function
of biological macromolecules and the biochemical
characterization and regulation of cell metabolism and
related processes.

Deadline:  Jan. 10 and July 10.

Funds:  Fiscal 1996 appropriations are pending in Congress.
Typical awards are for three years and average about
$80,000.

Eligibility:  Higher education institutions and other
research institutions.

Areas:  Metabolic biochemistry projects should research the
characterization and regulation of biochemical pathways and
related processes by which microbes and plant and animal
cells transport, assimilate and derive energy from
substrata.

Molecular biochemistry projects should include protein,
nucleic acid, carbohydrate and lipid structure and
interactions; the mechanism and regulation of enzyme and RNA
catalysis; protein synthesis; bioenergetics and
photosynthesis; supramolecular structures; and biomolecular
materials.  Molecular biophysics projects should research
the structure, dynamics and interactions of biological
macromolecules by utilizing physical techniques in the
three-dimensional structure of macromolecules; assembly and
architecture of supramolecular structures; energy
transduction; structure and function of photosynthetic
reaction centers and mechanisms of electron transfer in
biological systems.

Contact:  For metabolic biochemistry, Robert Uffen, National
Science Foundation, 4201 Wilson Blvd., Arlington, VA 22230,
(703)306-1443; e-mail, ruffen@nsf.gov.  For molecular
biochemistry, Brenda Flam, same address, same phone; e-mail,
bflam@nsf.gov.  For molecular biophysics, H. Stewart
Hendrickson, same address, same phone; e-mail,
hhendric@nsf.gov; or Kamal Shukla, same address, (703)306-
1444; e-mail, kshukla@nsf.gov.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BRIEF AIDS INTERVENTIONS (NIMH)

Scope:  The National Institute of Mental Health will fund
research on brief prevention interventions for use by health
clinics and community organizations to prevent the spread of
HIV.

Deadline:  May 1, Sept. 1 and Jan. 1.

Funds:  There is no specific setaside.

Eligibility:  Foreign and domestic public and private for-
profit and nonprofit institutions.

Areas:  NIMH seeks theoretically grounded research
applications focusing on developing models of brief HIV
prevention programs.  The agency leaves it to investigators
to define "brief interventions" to encourage developing and
testing a range of short-term interventions that can be used
in traditional health and alternative non-healthcare
settings.  Special issues investigators must address include
connecting with hard-to-reach populations that may not seek
HIV prevention programs to change high-risk behavior; and
developing methods and techniques to motivate people to
assess their risk for HIV and seek help in changing
behaviors.

Contact:  Willo Pequegnat, Office on AIDS, National
Institute of Mental Health, 5600 Fishers Lane, Room 10-75,
Rockville, MD 20857, (301)443-6100; fax, (301)443-9719; e-
mail, wpequegn@aomh2.ssw.dhhs.gov.  Refer to PA 95-070.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH ON EPIDEMIOLOGY OF DRUG ABUSE (NIDA)

Scope:  The National Institute on Drug Abuse is encouraging
applications for international research on similarities and
variations in drug abuse behaviors, factors influencing the
initiation, progression and cessation of drug abuse and
social and health consequences of drug abuse, including HIV.

Deadline:  Feb. 1, June 1 and Oct. 1.

Funds:  There is no specific setaside.

Eligibility:  Foreign and domestic public and private for-
profit and nonprofit institutions.

Areas:  This program initiative expands and advances the
study of the interrelationship of the agent, host and
environment to include environments across and within
different countries.  NIDA is looking for projects that will
increase understanding of the role of social, cultural,
political and economic factors on drug abuse behaviors by
examining those factors in different national and regional
environments.

Contact:  Moira O'Brien, Division of Epidemiology and
Prevention Research, National Institute on Drug Abuse, 5600
Fishers Lane, Room 9A-53, Rockville, MD 20857, (301)443-
6637; e-mail, mobrien@aoada2.ssw.dhhs.gov.  Refer to PA 95-
072.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

DRUG AND ALCOHOL USE AND ABUSE IN RURAL AMERICA
(NIDA/NIAAA/USDA)

Scope:  The National Institute on Drug Abuse, the National
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism and the
Agriculture Department are inviting applications to foster
research on drug and alcohol use and abuse behaviors in
rural America.

Deadline:  Feb. 1, June 1 and Oct. 1.

Funds:  There is no specific setaside.

Eligibility:  Public and private for-profit and nonprofit
institutions.

Areas:  Research should focus on drug and alcohol use and
abuse behaviors in rural America, its consequences and the
delivery of appropriate prevention and treatment services.

Areas include epidemiologic descriptions of patterns of drug
and alcohol abuse, characteristics of those who fit patterns
and of associated social, economic and environmental
factors; documentation of the health, social, legal and
economic consequences of drug and alcohol abuse;
identification of processes associated with initiating drug
and alcohol use and progression to abuse and dependence;
specification of varying use and abuse patterns by cultural,
ethnic, gender, age and occupational subgroups.

Areas also include development and testing of innovative
community-based prevention and treatment strategies;
development and testing of single-channel prevention
strategies, such as media-based and worksite approaches;
evaluation of existing prevention/intervention/treatment
programs for rural populations; assessments of the impact of
interventions and outreach strategies; research on methods
for disseminating innovative clinical practices and
management techniques; research on consumer choice; research
on integrating drug and alcohol abuse prevention approaches
with interventions for other problems, including violence
and HIV; studies on reaching preschool and elementary
students; research on the operation and impact of financing
mechanisms relating to substance abuse; ways to organize
services in rural areas; and management of care in health
systems in rural areas.

Contact:  Peter Hartsock, Division of Epidemiology and
Prevention Research, National Institute on Drug Abuse, 5600
Fishers Lane, Room 9A-53, Rockville, MD 20857, (301)443-
6720; fax, (301)443-2636; e-mail, ph45z@nih.gov.  Gayle
Boyd, Division of Clinical and Prevention Research, National
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, 6000 Executive
Blvd., Suite 505, Bethesda, MD 20892-7003, (301)443-8766;
fax, (301)443-8774; e-mail, gboyd@willco.niaaa.nih.gov.
Elizabeth Robertson, Agriculture Department, Agriculture
Research Service, Unit No. 83, Riverdale, MD 20737,
(301)734-8596; e-mail, erobertson@assrr.ars45da.gov.  Refer
to PA 95-060.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

MINORITY RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE SUPPORT (NIMH)

Scope:  The National Institute of Mental Health is inviting
applications under a new infrastructure program to increase
the capacity of minority institutions and their faculty to
conduct rigorous mental health-relevant research.

Deadline:  Feb. 1, June 1 and Oct. 1.

Funds:  Grants typically range from $100,000 to $500,000 and
average $300,000 a year.  First-time applicants may request
support for three years, which may be renewable for five
years.

Eligibility:  Primarily but not exclusively minority
institutions.  Institutions must serve a student body
comprising 55 percent or more minority students; or have
served a student body with a 30 percent minority population
for at least three years.

Areas:  Grants are to develop and/or expand existing
capacities for conducting behavioral and neuroscience
research in all fields related to mental health.  NIMH will
provide institutional research development support to
strengthen the institutional infrastructure and enhance the
capability of individual faculty members to undertake mental
health-related research; and individual investigator
research support for developing research scientists to
conduct small grant research activities that can lead to
successful applications for funding under regular research
grant mechanisms.  Applications must include developmental
core activities and at least two fundable individual
research projects.

Contact:  Rodney Cocking, Office for Special Populations,
National Institute of Mental Health, Parklawn Bldg., Room
17C-14, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857, (301)443-
3641; fax, (301)443-8552; e-mail, rc4@cu.nih.gov.  Refer to
PAR 95-058.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

TRANSITION FROM CARDIAC HYPERTROPHY TO OVERT HEART FAILURE
(NHLBI)

Scope:  The National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute
encourages applications for basic research on the molecular
and cellular mechanisms that lead to cardiac deterioration
and heart failure.

Deadline:  Feb. 1, June 1 and Oct 1.

Funds:  There is no specific setaside.

Eligibility:  Foreign and domestic public and private for-
profit and nonprofit institutions.

Areas:  Examples of research interests include studies that
clarify the mechanisms underlying growth response of the
overloaded heart; identify the origins of peptide growth
factors and their role in ventricular wall remodeling in the
adult; explain the mechanisms that enable angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitors to lower peripheral vascular
resistance in heart failure patients and appear to reverse
hypertrophy of damaged myocardium; clarify the ways beta-
blockers have beneficial effects on myocardial remodeling;
investigate the pathophysiological consequences of immune
cytokines in heart failure; examine the interactions between
cytokine action, neuroendocrine activation, and growth
abnormalities in the failing heart; develop and use
genetically altered animals to explore the molecular and
physiological factors and processes responsible for heart
failure; and devise and test new therapies.

Contact:  Isabella Liang, Division of Heart and Vascular
Diseases, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, Two
Rockledge Center, Suite 9044, 6701 Rockledge Dr., Bethesda,
MD 20892-7940, (301)435-0520, ext. 2; fax, (301)480-1335; e-
mail, isabella_liang@nih.gov.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
HEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BEHAVIORAL PAIN RESEARCH (NIH)

Scope:  The National Institute of Nursing Research and 10
other National Institutes of Health funding components
encourage applications for basic and clinical studies on
pain from a variety of perspectives.

Deadline:  Feb. 1., June 1 and Oct. 1.

Funds:  There is no specific setaside.

Eligibility:  Foreign and domestic public and private for-
profit and nonprofit institutions.

Areas:  The focus is on research at all levels, including
the gene, molecule, cell and organ, with the goal of
developing biobehavioral interventions to manage or prevent
pain.  Research topics include individual differences in
pain response that may be due to factors such as genetic
differences, endocrine activity, neural activity, immune
function, psychological state, disability, age, gender and
cultural background.  Research is also needed in areas such
as the neuroanatomical pathways and neurophysiological
mechanisms in pain.

Contact:  Mary Lucas Leveck, National Institute of Nursing
Research, Natcher Bldg., Room 3AN-12, Bethesda, MD 20892-
6300, (301)594-5963; e-mail, mleveck@ep.ninr.nih.gov.  Refer
to PA 95-056.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
HEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

STATE COURTS GRANTS (SJI)

Scope:  The State Justice Institute is inviting proposals
for state court-related improvement projects under final
fiscal 1996 grant program guidelines.  (Dec. 14 Federal
Register)

Deadline:  Feb. 14 for full proposals.  SJI is not seeking
concept papers this year.

Funds:  SJI estimates it will have $6 million to $9 million,
but its fiscal 1996 appropriation still is pending in
Congress.  SJI awards several types of grants, including
research and demonstration grants of up to $200,000 each.

Eligibility:  State and local courts, nonprofit
organizations and higher education institutions.

Areas:  Interests include projects to collect and analyze
information on the admissibility and quality of expert
testimony on the experiences of battered women; develop
training to help battered women and their advocates to use
expert testimony on battered women's experiences; research
state judicial decisions relating to child custody
litigation; develop training to improve handling of child
custody cases; and develop training dealing with criminal
and civil aspects of interstate and international parental
child abduction.

Contact:  David Tevelin or Richard Van Duizend, State
Justice Institute, 1650 King St., Suite 600, Alexandria, VA
22314, (703)684-6100.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
HEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

NATIONAL BOATING SAFETY (DOT)

Scope:  The Coast Guard is seeking applications to promote
boating safety at the national level.  (Dec. 28 Federal
Register)

Deadline:  March 18.

Funds:  $1.5 million for multiple awards.  Fiscal 1995
awards ranged from $15,000 to $304,000.

Eligibility:  National nongovernment nonprofit public
service organiztions devoted to promoting national boating
safety.

Areas:  Areas of particular interest include development and
implementation of a national annual safe boating campaign
that targets boater market segments and specific
recreational boating safety topics; development and
implementation of a national recreational boating safety
outreach and awareness conference for volunteers, state and
local boating safety program organization leaders and
industry specialists to be held in the spring of 1997
concurrent with a major recreational boating saftey aquatic
symposium; dissemination of a market multi-use waterway
guide to aid development of comprehensive boating management
plans; implementation of a second phase of a recreational
boating safety measures of effectiveness project; design and
development of a recreational boating accident healthcare
cost model; planning of public workshops addressing
development of boat construction and safety standards and
reporting of defects by manufacturers and others.

Other areas are development of instructional materials and
training courses for boating accident investigators;
analysis and compilation of research on operating
efficiency, maneuverability characteristics and protection
factors of propellers, propeller guards and pump jets;
implementation of a program to encourage public involvement
in developing voluntary boating standards; and initiation of
state/federal/boating organization cooperative partnership
efforts to foster boating safety.

Contact:  Betty Alley, Office of Navigation Safety and
Waterway Services, U.S. Coast Guard (G-NAB-5/Room 1202),
2100 Second St. SW, Washington, DC 20593-0001, (202)267-
0954.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
HEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SMALL COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT:  NEW YORK STATE (HUD)

Scope:  The Housing and Urban Development Department is
inviting proposals for small community development projects
that focus on creating or expanding jobs, meet housing needs
or addressing local public facilities requirments, including
health needs.
(Dec. 28 Federal Register)

Deadline:  March 13.

Funds:  $50 million for comprehensive multi-year projects
for up to $5 million and three years; and $600,000 for
single-purpose grants.  Previous recipients of two- or
three-year commitments at lower levels may submit new multi-
year applications and "trade-up" to the higher three-year
amount.

Eligibility:  Units of general local government in New York
state, excluding metropolitan cities, urban counties, units
of government participating in urban counties or
metropolitan cities and certain American Indian tribes.

Areas:  Funded activities must meet a national objective,
for example, meeting imminent threats to community health
and safety.  Comprehensive grants should fund projects that
address a substantial portion of the identified community
development needs within a defined area or areas; involve
two or more related and coordinated activities; and have a
beneficial impact within a reasonable time period.  Single-
purpose grants are designed to address and resolve a
specific community development need.

Contact:  Stephen Rhodeside, State and Small Cities Div.,
Office of Community Planning and Development, Housing and
Urban Development Department, Room 7184, 451 Seventh St. SW,
Washington, DC 20410, (202)708-1322.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
HEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

GRANTS CALENDAR

MONTH/GRANT PROGRAM/AGENCY          IN HGCW         CONTACT
FEBRUARY 1
Olfactory Neurogenesis (NIDCD/NIA)          09/25/95
(301)402-3464
Prescription Drug Use, Abuse and Diversion (NIDA/NIMH)
08/28/95     (301)443-0107
Research in Reproduction (NICHD)          11/20/95
(301)496-6515
Research Infrastructure in Minority Institutions (NCRR/ORMH)
10/23/95     (301)435-0760
Research on Atherosclerosis (NHLBI)          08/28/95
(301)435-0550
Research on U.S. Immigration (NICHD)          12/04/95
(301)496-1174
Research on Violence and Trauma (NIMH)          10/16/95
(301)443-3728
School-Based Prevention Research (NIDA)          08/28/95
(301)443-1514
FEBRUARY 6
Healthcare Financing Research (HCFA)          11/20/95
(410)786-6643
Enhanced Research Instrumentation (DoE)          12/11/95
FEBRUARY 8
Markers of Uterine Receptivity for Blastocyst Implantation
(NICHD)          09/25/95     (301)496-6515




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
HEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

TOOLS OF THE TRADE:  THE FEDERAL REGISTER

The Federal Register -- the federal government's 60-year-old
regulatory affairs reporter -- remains a key grantseeking
tool, even in the electronic age.

The Register last month announced free access to its own
searchable electronic version.

And despite increased use of the Internet by agencies to
advertise funding opportunities directly, the Register is
the forum of choice for certain health-related funders.

In addition to running grant notices, the Register also
updates readers daily on critical rules, regulations and
actions that shape grant competitions.

By following official developments, grantseekers can stay on
top of changes that could affect their eligibility under a
grant program or effect new procedures and requirements.

In its electronic form, readers can have a custom-tailored
Register.  Instead of slogging through pages of extraneous
text, readers can go straight to notices from agencies of
interest.


"It's what they've always asked for," says Richard
Claypoole, director of the Federal Register.

And the electronic version has caught on, he says.  Even
before the Register went public,  subscribers logged 558,369
document retrievals from 103,722 searches from November to
December.

In whatever form, grantseekers can use the Federal Register
to:

*  Mine grant nuggets:  The Health Resources and Services
Administration, Centers for Disease Control and Energy
Department regularly use the Federal Register to announce
grant competitions.

Browsers will find health-related Education Department
notices and health and life science notices from the
Agriculture Department and the Environmental Protection
Agency.

*  Check on winners:  A few agencies, such as the Housing
and Urban Development Department, use the Federal Register
to announce recent awards.  Announcements are occasional,
but they can provide insights about program constituents and
reveal subgrant and subcontracting possibilities.

*  Respond to proposed program rules and funding priorities:
Laws creating grant programs often require agencies to
publish regulations before getting down to grantmaking.
Grantseekers can influence program direction by commenting
on the proposals appearing in the Federal Register.

*  Keep up with grant-related policies:  The Register
provides the full text on government-wide policies affecting
grants and contracts, such as Office of Management and
Budget circulars related to university research costs.

*In fact, revisions to OMB Circular A-21, which deals with
university costs, could hit the Register late this month.

*  Learn about meetings:  Agencies publish announcements for
meetings, ranging from preapplication workshops and advisory
group sessions to policy-setting forums, including meetings
on grantseekers' home turf.  Notices specify when and where
meetings will be held and which parts will be open to the
public.

But the Federal Register also has its drawbacks -- for hard
copy and electronic users.  Agencies used to soliciting
grant applications via the Register sometimes bypass the
publication these days, finding it faster and easier to go
with electronic announcements.

For example, EPA's 1996 grant competition, announced on the
Internet last month, has yet to make it into the Register.
Unless their announcements have regulatory impact, says
Claypoole, agencies are not required to publish application
notices in the Register.

And whether users are hard copy or on-screen readers, they
routinely must slog through pages of often confusing
legalese.  To make things easier, the Federal Register
office regularly holds workshops on how to use the system.
The 1996 schedule includes workshops in and out of
Washington.

Other efforts to make life easier include a new column on
regulations taking effect that day a daily reminder of
impending closing dates for comments on proposed rules. --
Pam Moore

Contact:  The paper Federal Register is $375 a year from the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office, Washington, DC, (202)783-3238.

Logging Into The Federal Register

GPO Access, an online service of the Government Printing
Office, provides searchable versions of the Federal Register
through the Internet.  Tap into this resource for free via:

*  Telnet to swais.access.gpo.gov., login as guest;

*  The World Wide Web at
http://www.access.gpo.gov/su_dics/aces/aaces001; or

*  The World Wide Web at
http://thorplus.lib.purdue.edu/gpo/.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
HEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

AGRICULTURE SETS RULES FOR GRANT PROGRAMS

The Agriculture Department last month caught up on year-end
housekeeping, issuing final rules for its $100 million
National Competitive Research Grants program, which includes
health-related grants categories.

The rules add nothing new but finally codify for
grantseekers evolving administrative procedures that govern
grant competitions.  Affected programs include:

*  National Competitive Research Initiative Grants Program.
In a Dec. 8 Federal Register notice, USDA issued final rules
specifically defining the types of research funded under the
program and explaining award mechanisms.


The rules are effective immediately and should be consulted
for the fiscal 1996 competition, currently underway.

*  Higher Education Challenge Grants.  A Dec. 19 Federal
Register notice proposed rules for the program, which closed
its outlining matching grants requirements and underscoring
program focus on strengthening institutional capacities for
teaching food and agricultural sciences.

Grants -- $4 million in fiscal 1996 -- to four-year colleges
and universities fund projects to enhance curriculum,
faculty, scientific instrumentation, instruction and student
recruitment.  Proposed rules define eligibility, establish
the requirement for a match without setting the amount and
describe eligible activities.  Comments on proposed rules
are due Jan. 18.

*  1890 Capacity Building Grants.  A Dec. 20 Federal
Register notice proposed rules for soliciting, submitting
and evaluating applications for teaching project grants and
research grants to 16 historically black 1890 land-grant
institutions and Tuskegee University.  Comments on proposed
rules are due Jan. 19.

Contact:  To comment on proposed rules, Jeffrey Gilmore,
Office of Higher Education Programs, Cooperative State
Research, Education and Extension Service, Agriculture
Department, Ag Box 2251, Washington, DC 20250-2251,
(202)720-1973; fax, (202)720-2030; e-mail,
jgilmore@reeusda.gov.

For the National Competitive Research Initiative, Sally
Rockey, same address, Ag Box 2240, Washington, DC 20250-
2240, (202)401-1761.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-4</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B039-183</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh51.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015345 text/html 116133
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:51:21 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:40 GMT
Content-length: 115945
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh51.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>DEMAND FOR SKIN RESURFACING KEYS TODAY'S&nbsp;SURGICAL LASER SALES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2104 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>BAXTER'S SPIN-OFF GAMBIT: A 1993 IDEA WHOSE TIME&nbsp;HAS COME</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1129 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>LEAVES FALL, FUR FLIES AT BAXTER IN NOVEMBER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(198 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>MOST VENDORS BULLISH, UNDAUNTED BY LATEST GPO&nbsp;MEGA-MERGER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(562 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>=============</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>APPLIED VASCULAR GAINS FDA NOD FOR CORONARY&nbsp;STENT TRIALS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(166 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>BAXTER ACQUIRES PSICOR, A PERFUSIONIST PROVIDER,&nbsp;FOR $80 MILLION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(115 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>SMITH & NEPHEW RICHARDS TO OFFER DATABASE&nbsp;PROGRAM TO ORTHOPODS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(111 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>PICKER, AT&T CAPITAL AGREE TO EQUIPMENT&nbsp;FINANCING PACT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(133 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>COMDISCO SURVEY: IMAGING SALES SUFFER AGAIN IN&nbsp;1995</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(311 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>SMITH & NEPHEW TAKES BLUE PENCIL TO&nbsp;BEWILDERING BUSINESS UNIT NAME LINEUP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(187 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>ETHICON ENDO ACQUIRES ULTRASONIC INSTRUMENT&nbsp;MANUFACTURER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(160 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>IMPROVED DISEASE MANAGEMENT THE GOAL OF&nbsp;DORNIER/ACOUSTIC IMAGING COMBO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(140 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>STERIS-AMSCO MERGER BRINGS TOGETHER&nbsp;CENTRALIZED AND DECENTRALIZED PROCESSORS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(223 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>Standard Textile signed a new, five-year, sole-source agreement</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(103 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>Isolyser Co., Norcross, Ga., reached agreement with two group</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(165 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>Midmark Corp., Versailles, Ohio, was chosen to supply medical</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(73 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>Enterprise Systems, Inc. (ESI), Wheeling, Ill., signed an agreement</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(117 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>McKesson Drug Co.'s San Francisco-based home health care</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(56 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>Becton Dickinson Vascular Access, Sandy, Utah, and VHA Inc.,</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(137 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>Bard Urological, Covington, Ga., signed a five-year contract</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(94 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>Bracco Diagnostics, Princeton, N.J., signed a renewal of its</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(38 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><A HREF = "#22"><LI>BOEHRINGER MANNHEIM DIAGNOSTICS' FAST ASSAY&nbsp;DIAGNOSES HEART ATTACKS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(530 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><A HREF = "#23"><LI>IMPLANTABLE PUMP MARKS STRATO/INFUSAID'S RE-&nbsp;ENTRY INTO PAIN MANAGEMENT MARKET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(438 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><A HREF = "#24"><LI>I-FLOW PROMOTES SIMPLE, LOW COST BAND-IT SYRINGE&nbsp;DELIVERY SYSTEM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(439 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><A HREF = "#25"><LI>OUTCOMES STUDIES BECOMING A "MUST" FOR&nbsp;SUCCESSFUL DEVICE SALES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(425 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><A HREF = "#26"><LI>EXCITEMENT AND FLASH SEEMED MISSING FROM 1995&nbsp;RSNA SHOW</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(989 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>Conmed Corp., Utica, N.Y., will acquire New Dimensions in</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(128 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>Mallinckrodt Medical, Inc., St. Louis, opened nuclear medicine</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(45 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>United States Surgical Corp., Norwalk, Conn., reported that a</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(122 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>Innovative Technologies Group, Cheshire, England, and</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(63 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>Picker International, Cleveland, relocated its Nuclear Medicine</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(45 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>Invacare Corp., Elyria, Ohio, was named by Financial World</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(61 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>EDAP Technomed International, a French manufacturer, learned that</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(74 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#34"><LI>SangStat Medical Corp., Menlo Park, Calif., has filed a 510(k) with</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(73 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#35"><LI>UroMed Corp., Needham, Mass., signed a five-year multi-national</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(111 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#36"><LI>The American Occupational Therapy Assn. (AOTA) in November</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(32 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#37"><LI> Vollrath Group, Inc., Memphis, Tenn., says it is nearing</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(90 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#38"><LI>Oliver Products Co., Grand Rapids, Mich., a supplier of roll stock</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(92 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#39"><LI>Dade International, Deerfield, Ill., and Intracel Corp., Cambridge,</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(75 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#40"><LI>Bracco Diagnostics Inc. has relocated its corporate headquarters to</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(28 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#41"><LI>3M, St. Paul, Minn., connected the first commercial 3M Dry View</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(98 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#42"><LI>Healthcare Materials Services (HMS), a pharmacy and materials</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(65 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#43"><LI>Cantel Industries, Inc., Clifton, N.J., will acquire MediVators,</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(51 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#44"><LI>Heraeus Surgical, Inc., Milpitas, Calif., and Minneapolis-based</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(49 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#45"><LI>United States Surgical Corp., Norwalk, Conn., introduced a</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(87 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#46"><LI>Image Diagnostic Systems, Inc., Sunrise, Fla., took an unusual tact</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(42 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#47"><LI>WORTH READING . . .</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(216 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#48"><A HREF = "#48"><LI>OUTCOMES ANALYSIS CAN WIN OVER TOUGH&nbsp;AUDIENCES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(957 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#49"><A HREF = "#49"><LI>OWENS, HENRY SCHEIN MARKETING TANDEM CREATES&nbsp;"VIRTUAL ORGANIZATION"</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(464 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#50"><A HREF = "#50"><LI>BAXTER'S NEW SUPPLY CHAIN PLAN WORRIES SOME&nbsp;VENDORS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(250 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#51"><LI>KENTUCKY DISTRIBUTORS TO MERGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(210 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#52"><LI>SHOW BIZ . . .</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(257 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#53"><LI>TRADING PLACES . . .</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(410 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#54"><A HREF = "#54"><A HREF = "#54"><LI>PRODUCER PRICE INDEX INCHES 0.1% HIGHER IN&nbsp;NOVEMBER; MEDICAL CARE COMMODITIES INCREASE BY&nbsp;0.3%</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(195 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#55"><A HREF = "#55"><LI>PURCHASING MANAGERS: MANUFACTURING SLOWS&nbsp;FOR FOURTH STRAIGHT MONTH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(305 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#56"><LI>Wright Medical Technology, Inc.: Richard D. Nikolaev was elected</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(156 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#57"><LI>Baxter International: William B. Graham retired as senior chairman</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(152 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#58"><LI>Medline Industries, Inc.: Susan Hall was named president of the</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(139 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#59"><LI>HIDA: Cara C. Bachenheimer, director of government relations for</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(40 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#60"><LI>Behring Diagnostics: Rudi Steinmann was appointed head of</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(45 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#61"><LI>Rusch International: Frank Sodha was promoted to president of this</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(42 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#62"><LI>B&G Equipment Co.: John Jefferson Dykstra was named director</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(50 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#63"><LI>Varian Associates, Inc.: David A. Berkowitz was named national</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(71 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#64"><LI>Imagyn Medical, Inc.: Chris Bova joined this Laguna Niguel,</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(42 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#65"><LI>Owens & Minor, Inc.: Larry Sapp was promoted to Denver division</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(28 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

DEMAND FOR SKIN RESURFACING KEYS TODAY'S
SURGICAL LASER SALES

By Curt Werner
For those companies canny enough to capitalize on the trend, falling
reimbursements and the search for private pay patients have proven
to be the salvation for manufacturers in the surgical laser segment.
Baby Boomers closing in on their fifties have spawned the latest
rage--laser skin resurfacing--and turned it into a mini-bonanza for
smart, technologically adept vendors. What's more, physicians in
several specialties can perform the procedures, including
dermatologists, plastic surgeons, facial plastic surgeons and
ophthalmologists, which broadens the universe of purchasers for the
machines and moves them from the hospital to the physician's
office.

But for vendors that have fallen behind in turning their products into
multi-use tools, the past few years have been a trying time.

Like presidential polls, the surgical laser market is subject to fast-
changing national mood swings. Just two years ago, lasers that
were used to correct severe snoring problems were the hot tickets.
But that market has faded.

The key to success in sales of today's sophisticated, expensive
lasers is finding a range of uses for them. Said one capital
equipment contracting executive for a major group purchasing
organization, "When you spend about $100,000 for a laser, you
want to make sure it doesn't end up sitting around gathering dust in
a corner somewhere."

Credit manufacturers and the medical community for finding scores
of applications for lasers. Medical miracles like excising cancerous
tissue and cells, coronary angioplasty, and a variety of laparoscopic
surgeries are part of the laser equation. But so is removing
somewhat more benign unwanted things like warts and wrinkles. In
fact, it is precisely that "aesthetics market" that drives the surgical
laser segment today.

And what powers that aesthetics market is the public itself.
Providers and surgical laser manufacturers have literally teamed up
in several cases to promote laser skin resurfacing. They have
capitalized on the yen for reversing the aging process by spreading
the word about the possibilities of surgical lasers through countless
newspaper and consumer magazine articles, network news shows
and even infomercials.

Financially speaking, probably the best part of this scenario for
physicians and vendors alike is the fact that men and women who go
to their doctors for laser skin resurfacing are that most precious of
commodities these managed care days: private pay patients. Few
insurers will pay for elective skin resurfacing procedures. "Doctors
are looking for private pay patients, and aesthetics fits right in," says
Karen Amburgey, vice president of marketing for Sharplan Lasers,
Inc., a manufacturer that is based in Allendale, N.J., listed on the
American Stock Exchange, but owned by an Israeli corporation,
Laser Industries, Ltd., Tel Aviv.

For Sharplan and its competitors, like Coherent, Inc., Palo Alto,
Calif., Heraeus Surgical, Milpitas, Calif., and the dozens of upstart
companies with revenues below the half million dollar mark, the
stakes are big and the rewards may be great. According to a June
1995 report published by Frost & Sullivan, Mountain View, Calif.,
the worldwide surgical laser market topped $203 million in 1994.
Factoring in a growth rate of 12.8% in 1995 and 14.1% to 15.4%
through 1998, the market will swell to $429 million globally by the
year 2000. The U.S. dominates in laser revenues, holding more
than 55% of the market, the report said.

Laser's "Swiss Army Knife"

Surgical solid-state lasers and surgical gas lasers will continue to
garner the largest share of the dollars by far. Some relatively new
laser technology is beginning to have an impact on the market,
particularly on the solid-state side. Leading that technology race are
holmium:yttrium aluminum garnet (or Ho:YAG) and
neodymium:YAG (Nd:YAG) lasers. Ruby lasers and potassium
titanyl phosphate (KTP) devices are also in the solid-state market.

The Ho:YAG laser is rising in importance in the orthopedics market.
This type, known as the "Swiss Army Knife" of lasers, has been in
use for about six years, mostly in arthroscopy and diskectomy
(though high-powered Ho:YAG devices have been on the scene for
less than three years). Reflecting the trend for multi-use
applications, Ho:YAG lasers, which cost between $40,000 and
$150,000 depending on power capabilities, are being utilized in
general surgery, urology, neurosurgery, lithotripsy, angioplasty and
dentistry. Because of their ability to be used in blood and saline
environments, Ho:YAGs are also being wheeled into the surgical
suite for gynecological procedures.

A March 1995 report from ECRI, Plymouth Meeting, Pa., the
respected technological assessment company, cautioned hospital
laser purchasers about the high price tag, but added, "The ability of
a laser to be used in several specialties may help justify its
acquisition." ECRI recommended that hospitals that plan to acquire
only one laser bring in the CO2 laser (for its precise cutting ability
and low cost) or the Ho:YAG/Nd:YAG combination laser, which
can be used for many types of procedures. Combination lasers, like
those produced by Coherent, Inc., sell for approximately $150,000.
At the same time, ECRI said that the Ho:YAG laser is "poised for
rapid and widespread use."

Here's how a few of the players in the laser market are handling the
sales, marketing and the major trends in the industry today:

Sharplan's Strength In Snoring And Aesthetics

Although the laparoscopy market has been a "mainstay market" for
Sharplan since the mid-1970s, more recently the snoring and
aesthetics markets have been the keys to its success. Through the
first nine months of 1995, the company had $36.5 million in sales,
up 26% from the same period in 1994. Sales of more than $50
million (up 36%) are expected for 1995. According to Sharplan's
Amburgey, her company splits the aesthetics market evenly with
Coherent (45% each), with the remainder going to smaller, low-end
companies.

The Silk Touch(TM) laser line is Sharplan's biggest seller. Like
other vendors' product lines, several versions are available.
Products range from a compact 40-watt model to a high-powered
100-watt device, varying in price from $70,000 to $130,000. The
Silk Touch is not intended to be limited to hospital use, and its
pricing is aimed at the broader physician's office market. In its
presentation to physicians, Sharplan touts its laser as the "Gold
Standard" for aesthetic CO2 laser surgery.

According to Amburgey, selling to the office market is relatively
simple since the number of decision-makers is limited and physician
autonomy is strong. But even office-based physicians want
flexibility. For example, an ear, nose and throat doctor in a group
practice setting may also work with physicians who perform skin
resurfacing with the same machine. But in the hospital market, she
told HIT, managed care has made providers very price sensitive.
And while Sharplan markets its product to hospitals, hospitals are
marketing the product to physicians. "Hospitals use lasers to entice
physicians to perform their procedures in the hospital rather than in
their offices in order to bring revenue into the hospital," Amburgey
said.

Sharplan uses medical journal advertising only as a supplement to
build name recognition, as it is doing in the ophthalmic market.
Instead, it places heavy emphasis on courses. This is where the
company can educate doctors about the benefits of the various
procedures, allow them to mingle with their peers, then make their
buying decisions. Most physicians come to the courses already
decided, Amburgey said. Courses sponsored by Sharplan and
others are everywhere, just as they were with the snoring
phenomenon.

Sharplan makes sure that the public is exposed to hot, new laser
procedures such as work on leg veins, hair removal and
photorefractive keratectomy (the subject of next month's Health
Industry Today Market Memo). This is where the company believes
the payoff is. To stimulate public interest, and to help its physician
customers sell their services, Sharplan provides a slick package of
marketing aids that includes videos, brochures, slides and counter
cards complete with striking "before and after" shots. Amburgey
and her staff have been successful in keeping laser skin resurfacing
in the public eye with articles placed in publications like Self
(August 1995), Allure (June 1995) and Vogue (September 1995).

The strategy seems to be working. "Skin resurfacing is peaking now
but should go on for another six to 12 months before winding
down," Amburgey said. She estimates that about 150,000 patients
have already been treated with Sharplan lasers, which are used by
about 750 physicians in the U.S.

Heraeus Surgical

LaserSonics(R) is Heraeus' laser division, and it has been in
operation for more than 20 years. Privately held Heraeus, which
was founded in 1851 and is headquartered in Germany, also has an
integrated operating room division that offers products such as
surgical lighting systems, surgical tables and video systems. An
arrangement with Minneapolis-based CVAC Corp. gives it access to
a smoke evacuation system as well, and all of the above can be sold
with LaserSonics' products. The laser lines include a series of CO2
and Nd:YAG lasers, along with accessories such as hand pieces and
micro-manipulators.

LaserSonics' CO2 lasers, introduced in late 1994, are used by
gynecologists, ENT physicians, and more recently, in dermatology
and plastic surgery away from the hospital setting. The company's
Nd:YAG lasers are used by urologists, gastroenterologists, thoracic
surgeons and ENT docs.

The Paragon(TM) CO2 laser was released in January 1995 and
launched in April 1995, and since then, sales have "exceeded
expectations," a company spokesperson said. The Paragon line is
popular for laser skin resurfacing and is used in both private practice
and hospital settings.

In January 1995, Heraeus introduced the Hercules 5100 ("the
smallest, 100 watt Nd:YAG laser ever developed" and the "first
Nd:YAG laser to combine high power in a convenient and portable
design"). The device is on a 15"x20" base that allows it to fit into
large and small surgical suites, plus it has standard power
requirements to sidestep special electrical connections. It's also "five
times faster than any other Nd:YAG laser on the market," the
company says, which allows surgeons to work faster and still
provide effective coagulation and minimal tissue trauma during
surgery.

Heraeus has a 35-member direct sales force, with some devoted to
laser sales, some to the O.R. equipment, plus a few distributors to
cover sales in outlying areas. They also have "clinical instructors"
on the payroll--nurses that handle inservice and add credibility to
laser sales. Heraeus also has a 20-member field service department
that supports both O.R. and laser sales, something of an oddity
among laser vendors.

For Heraeus, the titles of purchasing decision makers have not
changed much over the past few years. It's still a group decision due
to the high cost involved, and the group includes purchasing staff,
O.R. supervisors/managers, biomedical and administration. "The
docs still drive the decision by their product preferences," said
Doreen Smillie, marketing communications manager for Heraeus.
"We start with the physicians, and they will drive it for you, but you
need buy-in from the others."

As it does for its competitors, multi-use sells. Says Smillie, "It's
easier to get an approval when two or three departments can use one
machine. That's where our strength is, along with merging our O.R.
and laser equipment."

Increasing the number of national accounts tops the Heraeus agenda
for 1996. "As a company goal, we're trying to add more national
accounts in 1996," said Smillie. Heraeus has an agreement with St.
Louis-based AmeriNet. Craig Lingel, the recently promoted vice
president of sales, handles national accounts.

Heraeus has positioned its laser prices below market leader
Coherent. "We're $20,000 to $30,000 cheaper than Coherent,"
Smillie said. The company's 1996 prices: 50-watt $65,000; 70-watt
$73,000; 100-watt $89,000. Heraeus' 70- and 100-watt models are
used predominantly in hospitals. The 50-watt models are intended
for private practice settings.

To promote its laser products, Heraeus presents many workshops in
specialty settings such as gynecology, urology and ENT.
Workshops are presented along with CME credits in an unbiased
institution.

Heraeus also relies heavily on trade shows. Among them are the
Assn. of Operating Room Nurses, American Academy of
Dermatology, American Society for Laser Medicine and Surgery,
American College of Gynecology, American Academy of
Gynecological Laparoscopy and the American Urology Assn.
Heraeus abandoned the American College of Surgeons in 1993.
"We didn't get a lot out of it," Smillie told HIT.

Heraeus doesn't place many journal ads "because decision makers
vary and it's hard to find publications that hit both of our product
lines." The only ad that did appear in 1995 was found in Surgical
Products magazine, and there are no plans for more or less than that
in 1996. Direct mail efforts are made in conjunction with trade
shows.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

BAXTER'S SPIN-OFF GAMBIT: A 1993 IDEA WHOSE TIME
HAS COME

By Curt Werner
Jim Tobin and Tony White shared an enjoyable laugh a few days
after their Thanksgiving dinners when Baxter International
announced plans to spin off its hospital supply business. The two
former top-level Baxter executives, chief architects of exactly the
same spin-off plan that the company stubbornly repudiated two
years ago, left Deerfield in December 1993 in the wake of a power
struggle with chairman and CEO Vernon R. Loucks over the plan.
Now, Tobin told Health Industry Today in an exclusive interview
that he feels "vindicated" over the outcome. "I can't find anything
that is different than what we did two years ago," he said. "It was a
good plan then, and they wasted two years in not implementing it."
Tobin and White's distribution spin-off plan has been on the shelf
since November 1993.

During those two years, Baxter has floundered a bit, and its market
share in the medical-surgical distribution business has been flat, a
particularly disheartening development for Baxter shareholders,
since the company's main competitor, Owens & Minor, Inc.,
Richmond, Va., has fought off some doldrums of its own and
jumped its share to more than 21% in 1994 from about 8% in 1990.

Today, Tobin serves as president and chief operating officer of
Biogen Inc., a Cambridge, Mass.-based biotech concern, while
White is an executive with Perkins-Elmer Corp., Norwalk, Conn.
And unlike his former employer, Tobin's company is doing just
fine. Biogen just received approval from an FDA advisory
committee for Avonex, a naturally occurring beta interferon drug
that is used to slow the progression of multiple sclerosis. Biogen
stock shot up about $11 in one mid-December week to about $64.
Baxter's stock price languished in the low $20 range for months,
before perking up of late to the low $40s as analysts hailed the
ultimate implementation of Tobin's bold strategy.

Many say that Baxter's gambit has returned the company to its 1985
American Hospital Supply pre-merger look. That was the year the
two big corporations merged in a $3.8 billion blockbuster deal.
Baxter had 1994 sales of approximately $9.32 billion. The spin-off
would split the company into two companies with sales of about $5
billion each.

"Milking HS Into Mediocrity"

Now that the spin-off has been set into motion and the genie is out
of the bottle, Tobin believes that the new Baxter Hospital Supply
(HS), by whatever name it chooses, must look at getting bigger.
"HS business, when the debt is split, is around book value. It
makes sense [for an investment firm] to buy it from Baxter, install
cost-oriented management, double the profits and take it public for
big bucks." He feels that investors could "use it, fix it and make it
the core of building a powerful medical supply company.

"Hospital Supply is a good, strong business even though margins
were thin two years ago and they're thin now (Editor's note:
Published estimates are that Baxter's hospital supplies and
management side has a 5% to 6% profit margin, while the Baxter
International technology side comes in at between 14% and 15%.).
But the business is worse off than it was two years ago. The board
looked at the performance over the past two years and decided to
head back to Plan A.

"The structures [of Baxter's manufacturing and distribution
divisions] are vastly different and need to be run differently. As long
as the numbers are aggregated, you'll always under-invest in one
side or another. And running a business for cash is like going out of
business slowly. They've been milking the HS business into
mediocrity."

Unlocking Baxter Distribution Books

Everyone has a theory about Baxter's big move, and the somewhat
unexpected consensus from the vendor community seems to be that
Baxter's plan is good for the industry as a whole. Tom Sherry, vice
president of sales and marketing for Owens & Minor, was
practically elated over the news. "It's great for Owens, and it's great
for distribution. Now we will have an industry comparison. We'll
be able to show the cost of a sale, and we'll be able to show that
we're the low-cost provider." Sherry predicts Baxter will intensify
its marketing efforts on behalf of its stockless/just-in-time ValueLink
Division and its Procedure Based Delivery System (advanced
custom packs).

Ted Almon, who heads another Baxter distribution competitor,
Providence, R.I.-based Claflin Co., called the new Baxter "a
souped-up American Hospital Supply" that could become a better
competitor in the distribution market. He envisions a stronger
relationship between Baxter and branded manufacturers in the wake
of the spin-off. However, Almon cautioned that not all the pieces
will necessarily fall neatly into place for the new Baxter. "If growing
pains and start-up problems and a lack of strategic direction surface,
the result could prove to be an advantage for Baxter's competition."

Stronger words came from Pete DeBusk, president of DeRoyal
Industries, Inc., Powell, Tenn., who is convinced that shareholder
pressure drove Baxter's decision. "It takes the old Baxter and its
blood substitute and greatly appreciates the value of its stock," he
told HIT. "Vernon Loucks is running the show, and he wants to
enhance the company's stock value, realign the company and make
the industry happy. He can't lose.

"It's the first wise thing he [Loucks] has done in a long while."

DeBusk believes that Baxter must "realign the distribution business
and run it mean and lean because it won't have the manufacturing
side to carry it. Distribution has to stand on its own and fight.
Baxter will take on a whole new look and realize it must look at the
margins it must have in order to make it in today's market. It's gone
from a consumer side to a supplier side economy because the
services required of customers today are expensive and distributors
are finding out they've under-priced their product tremendously."

As soon as news of Baxter's split hit the national media, the rumor
mill began to churn out a few interesting possibilities. One was that
a number of suitors were in line for Baxter's distribution arm.
Names of heavyweight drug wholesalers surfaced, such as San
Francisco-based McKesson Corp. and Orange, Calif.-based Bergen
Brunswig Corp. The Houston-based food giant, Sysco Corp., was
another name in the mill, though Baxter's reportedly long
relationship with Sysco's arch-rival, Kraft Foods, could preclude
such a transaction.

Post-spin-off rumors have also persisted that Baxter International
was in talks aimed at acquiring the National Medical Care Inc.
kidney-dialysis business operated by W.R. Grace & Co., an
acquisition that would carry a steep price tag estimated at about $4.5
billion. Three weeks after those rumors arose, however, little has
occurred, and observers have privately questioned Baxter's desire to
enter the provider field.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

LEAVES FALL, FUR FLIES AT BAXTER IN NOVEMBER

As usual, it was another extremely hectic month of November at
Baxter International. The saga opens in November 1985 when
Baxter merged with American Hospital Supply. Then, the timeline
skips to November 1992, when Baxter announced plans for its ill-
fated $376 million acquisition of the medical-surgical distributor
Stuart Medical, Inc., Greensburg, Pa., a controversial deal that was
aborted just a few short months later in February 1993. Also in
November 1992, Baxter spun off its Northbrook, Ill.-based
Caremark International Inc. unit, which it purchased for $586
million in 1987.

There's more. It was November 1993 when Baxter and San Diego-
based American Healthcare Systems announced the signing of a
five-year, $4 billion corporate agreement, then the largest of its kind
in the industry. In November 1994, the industry was again
surprised when Baxter was named the fourth authorized distribution
agent of Irving, Texas-based VHA Inc.

In the most recent November, of course, Baxter said it would spin
off its hospital supply operations.

Next November? Who knows? Mail (5350 So. Roslyn, Suite 400,
Englewood, CO 80111), phone (303-290-8500) or fax (303-290-
9025) reader predictions to Health Industry Today. We'll print the
best ideas next month.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

MOST VENDORS BULLISH, UNDAUNTED BY LATEST GPO
MEGA-MERGER

Medical-surgical supply vendors in general reacted positively to the
stunning news of the latest giant merger between group purchasing
organizations. In late November, Charlotte, N.C.-based SunHealth
Alliance announced plans to join with two other newly merged
buying groups--Premier Health Alliance, Westchester, Ill., and
American Healthcare Systems, San Diego--in a move that
confounded widespread rumors that had SunHealth headed toward
an alliance with Irving, Texas-based VHA Inc. At press time, the
deal was awaiting ratification by SunHealth's 152 shareholders.

The big merger creates a huge, highly compliant, far-flung health
care network that includes more than 240 owner systems that own
or operate 650 hospitals and other assorted facilities, in addition to
another 1,000 affiliate members in all 50 states representing
approximately 315,000 licensed beds. Estimates are that total annual
purchasing volume for the new network could top the $10 billion
mark. SunHealth alone chipped in about $2 billion to that total.
However, lurking in the shadows is a degree of uncertainty spurred
by rumors of member defections from the new group due to
disapproval of the merger terms or the addition of competing
hospitals to the new network.

Pete DeBusk, president of DeRoyal Industries, Inc., Powell, Tenn.,
is convinced that the formation of the super-group will help his
company. DeRoyal had contracts with SunHealth and Premier, but
not with AmHS, so the new network will increase DeBusk's
opportunities significantly. However, he is just as convinced that the
big network's buying power won't be able to reduce prices as much
as some think it can. "Prices are on the bottom," he told HIT. "We
can't operate at the margins we have now." In fact, DeBusk predicts
"tremendous" price increases for 1996. "It's bad. Rises in raw
materials prices have never been passed on, and manufacturers have
been devastated.

"The industry must sit up and take notice that there will be further
price increases, especially for distribution, and it's to our benefit to
support distributors. We shouldn't take a hostile approach to the
needs of the distribution business," he said.

Another happy customer is Jon Mills, president of Medline
Industries, Inc., Mundelein, Ill., whose company signed a two-
year, $4 million-a-year contract with SunHealth last summer. Like
DeBusk, Mills praised the new combination. He believes the move
to Premier/AmHS will give his company an opportunity to increase
its sales. Mills, also like DeBusk, feels that the new network won't
drive prices further downward. "Any GPO has great power
already," he said. "Anybody would be honored to have their
business, but most prices are as low as they can be right now."

Not everything is rosy, however. The formation of the supergroup
does leave some unanswered questions. Several observers feel that
vendors are going to have to sharpen their pencils even further than
before, and some are edgy over possible demands of the new group.
A few may even walk away from their contracts, frustrated over
sharp administrative fees, reporting requirements, contract
implementation demands and approaches to the supply contracts
themselves. Other vendors may be perplexed over their future and
wary of possible leadership clashes within the new group.

There's general agreement, however, that the rise of the new group
(by whatever name it chooses) is a daring stroke. Said Kim Bearce
of NCI, Rancho Santa Margarita, Calif., "Nothing since
Columbia/HCA is as brave and as bold." Few could argue.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

APPLIED VASCULAR GAINS FDA NOD FOR CORONARY
STENT TRIALS

Applied Vascular Engineering, Inc., Santa Rosa, Calif., will begin
clinical trials for its coronary stent delivery system following the
FDA's investigational device exemption (IDE) approval for its Micro
Stent(TM). The result is believed to be the first clinical trial to utilize
the Palmaz-Schatz stent from Johnson & Johnson Interventional
Systems, Warren, N.J., as the concurrent control. For now, the
J&J product is the only coronary stent approved for the reduction of
restenosis in the U.S.

Currently sold outside the U.S., the Micro Stent system is also
designed to prevent restenosis, the reclosing of arteries opened by
an angioplasty procedure.

The clinical trial is called SMART (Study of Micro Stent's Ability to
limit Restenosis Trial). SMART is believed to be the first device-
approval study to incorporate the use of ticlopidine, which is
emerging as the primary anticoagulation medication for stent
patients. The trial, which began in November, will involve up to 20
U.S. medical centers with patient enrollment expected to last
approximately six months.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

BAXTER ACQUIRES PSICOR, A PERFUSIONIST PROVIDER,
FOR $80 MILLION

Just days before the announcement of its controversial split, Baxter
Healthcare Corp., McGaw Park, Ill., disclosed that it had acquired
San Diego-based Psicor, a provider of cardiovascular perfusion
services to hospitals that perform open heart surgery. The
acquisition cost Baxter approximately $80 million.

The purchase is designed to bolster Baxter's ability to offer
customers a set of products and services on a capitated basis. Psicor
is said to have about 400 hospitals as its customers and reported
1994 sales of about $82 million. The deal follows Baxter's purchase
earlier this year of Seta, Inc., another company that offers
perfusionists--clinicians who operate heart-lung bypass machines
used during open heart procedures--to hospitals on a contract basis.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

SMITH & NEPHEW RICHARDS TO OFFER DATABASE
PROGRAM TO ORTHOPODS

Smith & Nephew Richards, Memphis, Tenn., has signed a five-year
agreement with Summit Medical Systems, Inc., Minneapolis, that
will provide database software products to orthopedic specialists.
Under terms of the deal, Smith & Nephew Richards will market
Summit Medical-developed proprietary orthopedic clinical outcomes
database products in the U.S. Programs related to hip, knee and
shoulder procedures will be offered, along with a health status and
patient satisfaction program. Smith & Nephew Richards makes the
programs available to physicians as a value-added service.

Summit Medical will also maintain a national database of orthopedic
outcomes information for Smith & Nephew Richards that will
enable specialists to compare their results against national
benchmarks.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

PICKER, AT&T CAPITAL AGREE TO EQUIPMENT
FINANCING PACT

Picker International, Cleveland, and AT&T Capital Corp.,
Morristown, N.J., have become equal equity partners in a joint
venture that will provide customer financing to hospitals, clinics and
other users of Picker's medical imaging systems and related
equipment. The 10-year agreement is expected to result in financing
arrangements of as much as $400 million during the first five years
alone.

Picker Financial Group has amassed net leased assets of $85 million
in the three years since it was founded. That rapid growth led the
Group to seek a partner with international capabilities.

The partnership will likely result in a wider array of true-lease and
conditional-sale financial products, as well as more customer
services during the lease term. The annual worldwide leasing market
for imaging equipment has been estimated at approximately $3
billion.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

COMDISCO SURVEY: IMAGING SALES SUFFER AGAIN IN
1995

With all modalities reporting increases in average age, the year 1995
marked a second straight sub-par year for diagnostic imaging
equipment sales, according to the fifth annual study of acquisition
trends by Comdisco, Inc., Rosemont, Ill. The survey polled more
than 3,600 hospitals. The bad news was worst for the magnetic
resonance imaging sector, where the average age of installed MRIs
rose to 5.5 years in 1995 from 3.1 years as recently as 1992. A full
70% of all MRIs are now more than three years old, compared with
just 35% in 1992.

The study found that the oldest and most pervasive technology in the
market remains radiography/fluoroscopy (R&F). The average age of
equipment in that sector has now hit 10.1 years, up from 7.9 years
in 1992. About two-thirds of current R&F systems are more than
seven years old, and one in five are more than 15 years old. The
systems are installed in 95% of all U.S. hospitals.

On the CT side, 75% of scanners are now more than three years old,
up from 64% in 1994. Almost one-third (31%) of hospitals
surveyed have cardiac catheterization labs installed, significantly
more than the 20% that had cath labs in 1993. Eighty-four percent of
nuclear medicine devices in surveyed hospitals are now more than
three years old.

Comdisco Medical Equipment Group president Kenneth A.
Halverson blames "market-driven reform" for the bad news. Part of
that reform is centered on integrated delivery networks, the
emergence of which has created redundancies in many modalities.
He added, however, that "the tide may be turning," since his
company, which provides equipment leasing and other services,
entered 1996 with a record backlog of orders. Comdisco had
another record year in reconditioned diagnostic imaging equipment
in 1995, with shipments totaling $28 million, up 17% from 1994,
when shipments jumped 68% from the previous year.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

SMITH & NEPHEW TAKES BLUE PENCIL TO
BEWILDERING BUSINESS UNIT NAME LINEUP

As part of a broader strategy calling for names of the group's
businesses to reflect the medical disciplines they serve, a
reorganization--including a name change--has been instituted by
Memphis, Tenn.-based Smith & Nephew Richards. Under the
changes, which took effect Jan. 1, the company is now known as
Smith & Nephew Orthopaedics. The new unit will be headed by the
company's current president, Larry Papasan.

There's more. Smith & Nephew Richards' medical specialties
division based in Bartlett, Tenn., will become Smith & Nephew
ENT (ear, nose and throat). James Duncan, president of the medical
specialties division, will stay on as president of Smith & Nephew
ENT.

The orthopedic accessories and continuous passive motion
rehabilitation exercise equipment product lines, currently part of the
medical specialties division, are being reassigned to Smith &
Nephew Orthopaedics and Smith & Nephew Rehabilitation
respectively. Early in 1995, the old Smith & Nephew Dyonics
became Smith & Nephew Endoscopy while Smith & Nephew
Roylan became Smith & Nephew Rehabilitation. Smith & Nephew
Richards will remain a principal brand name for both Smith &
Nephew Orthopaedics and Smith & Nephew ENT products.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

ETHICON ENDO ACQUIRES ULTRASONIC INSTRUMENT
MANUFACTURER

Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Inc., Cincinnati, is the only company to
offer a full line of both videoscopic (minimally invasive surgery)
and ultrasonic surgical instruments, following its acquisition of
UltraCision, Inc., Smithfield, R.I. UltraCision is a pioneer in the
area of ultrasonic technology and the developer and manufacturer of
the Harmonic Scalpel(TM), a device that uses ultrasound power to
make surgical incisions with minimal tissue damage. The
acquisition, for undisclosed terms, will boost Ethicon Endo's
product offerings in the area of videoscopic surgery.

The Harmonic Scalpel is used by surgeons in both videoscopic and
open surgical procedures including gall bladder removal,
appendectomy, repair of hiatal hernia, hysterectomy and bladder
neck suspension. The scalpel is connected to a generator that
converts electrical energy to mechanical energy, causing its blade to
vibrate at more than 55,000 hertz to cut tissue and seal blood vessels
simultaneously. Future applications for the device include cardiac
and vascular surgery, plastic and reconstructive surgery,
dermatology and arthroscopic surgery.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

IMPROVED DISEASE MANAGEMENT THE GOAL OF
DORNIER/ACOUSTIC IMAGING COMBO

The combination of two manufacturers has created a new single-
source provider of dedicated ultrasound imaging and interventional
therapy delivery systems. The new company, known as Dornier
Medical Systems, Inc. (DMSI), was formed in November through a
combination of Acoustic Imaging Technologies Corp., Phoenix, and
Atlanta-based Dornier Medical Systems, Inc. Acoustic Imaging has
had an eight-year relationship with Dornier Medical.

The development is expected to permit the new company to
accelerate new product development, in particular what the company
calls "a new direction in disease management by integrating
diagnostic imaging and minimally invasive therapy."

DMSI will continue to offer Acoustic Imaging's diagnostic
ultrasound imaging systems to the specialty, general radiology,
mammography and obstetrical markets. The company has led
advances in urologic imaging and interventional therapy systems and
continues to provide lithotripters, lasers and urological tables to
those markets.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

STERIS-AMSCO MERGER BRINGS TOGETHER
CENTRALIZED AND DECENTRALIZED PROCESSORS

The $660 million merger of Steris Corp., Mentor, Ohio, with
Pittsburgh-based AMSCO International will capitalize on
complementary sales, operational, manufacturing, product
development and expense control abilities to reach a shifting
customer base. Despite this, the merger surprised many, even
though AMSCO had been involved in merger discussions with an
undisclosed company only a few days prior to the Dec. 18
announcement. Steris is involved in decentralized sterile processing
and surgical support systems, while AMSCO handles centralized
sterile processing and similar support systems.

The deal will merge the North American sales and service
organizations of the two concerns to provide increased account
penetration and new product introduction capabilities. A direct sales
and service force of more than 1,000 field representatives will
emerge following completion of the merger. The new company will
use those capabilities to reach all major acute care provider markets:
hospital, ambulatory and alternate site. It will also place a renewed
emphasis on national accounts, group purchasing, governmental and
other large-volume capital equipment sales, supplies and services
contract business.

According to Steris, the move was spurred by consolidation in
ownership of hospitals and alternate site providers, which is leading
to more use of centralized purchasing.

Bill Sanford will stay on as top executive of the combined Steris
Corp. Two AMSCO executives will join an expanded Steris board
of directors.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Standard Textile signed a new, five-year, sole-source agreement

Standard Textile signed a new, five-year, sole-source agreement
with Irving, Texas-based VHA Inc. for textiles and apparel. The
Cincinnati-based manufacturer has had contracts with VHA since
1986 but had shared the apparel portion of the agreement with
Angelica Uniform, St. Louis. It is anticipated that Standard Textile
will gain between $50 million and $70 million in annual sales
through the VHA pact, which has provisions that call for direct
discounts for each product segment and discounts based on
utilization levels and adoption of Standard Textile's linen
management program. According to figures released by VHA, 79%
of the group's institutions purchase Standard Textile products.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Isolyser Co., Norcross, Ga., reached agreement with two group

Isolyser Co., Norcross, Ga., reached agreement with two group
purchasing organizations for its line of OREX(R) Degradables.
Seattle-based Sisters of Providence and the University
HealthSystem Consortium (UHC), Oak Brook, Ill., signed
contracts in December. UHC has initially committed six of its
teaching hospitals to OREX evaluations. Two Sisters of Providence
sites are St. Joseph's Hospital, Burbank, Calif., and St. Peter's
Hospital, Olympia, Wash. Isolyser reports that so far 107 hospitals
in the U.S. have signed agreements to purchase OREX
Degradables. The company also says it will step up plans to offer
the products in the European market, a move spurred by what it calls
"substantial interest" on the part of several European countries,
where medical waste incineration and landfilling have become major
problems. Distribution discussions are under way, and initial
product orders have been received, Isolyser says. Finally, Isolyser
reports that its woven goods plant in Abbeville, S.C., became
operational on Dec. 4 and is producing OREX woven towels for
operating room and industrial applications.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Midmark Corp., Versailles, Ohio, was chosen to supply medical

Midmark Corp., Versailles, Ohio, was chosen to supply medical
exam equipment to Operation Blessing Flying Hospital, as part of a
partnership between Midmark and Operation Blessing that began in
December 1994. The hospital provides medical and surgical services
and disaster relief to people in developing countries in an L1011-50
jet. Midmark supplied several surgical tables, standard exam and
pediatric exam tables; 13 stretchers; physician seating; biohazardous
waste receptacles and an Ultraclave automatic sterilizer.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Enterprise Systems, Inc. (ESI), Wheeling, Ill., signed an agreement

Enterprise Systems, Inc. (ESI), Wheeling, Ill., signed an agreement
with the West Jersey Health System, a 740-bed multihospital
integrated delivery system based in Camden, N.J., that includes
four main components of ESI's integrated software. The $1.4
million deal covers materials management, surgical services,
financial management and resource management systems.

Picker International, Cleveland, will have two existing technologies,
the ViewPoint(TM) computer-assisted surgery system and the
Outlook(TM) MRI system, integrated into clinical trials of a
computer-assisted minimally invasive surgery (CAMIS) system.
The CAMIS system is the focus of a two-year, $9.35 million grant
awarded to the Ohio Aerospace Institute by the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration. The ViewPoint system was developed
jointly by Picker and The Cleveland Clinic.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

McKesson Drug Co.'s San Francisco-based home health care

McKesson Drug Co.'s San Francisco-based home health care
division has signed an exclusive, renewable distribution agreement
with Momentum Medical Corp., Salt Lake City, for Momentum's
lines of home health care products. The contract includes the
SuperCane(TM) assistive device. Momentum products like the
SuperCane were on display at the McKesson booth at November's
MedTrade show in Atlanta.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Becton Dickinson Vascular Access, Sandy, Utah, and VHA Inc.,

Becton Dickinson Vascular Access, Sandy, Utah, and VHA Inc.,
Irving, Texas, have reached agreement on a new purchasing contract
that will upgrade VHA's I.V. infusion management program. The
three-year agreement, which covers I.V. start kits, catheters and
safety products, is valued at $39.1 million in 1995, with I.V.
catheters accounting for approximately $26 million of that sales
volume. Under terms of a "guaranteed savings" provision in the
agreement, Becton Dickinson offers users a net savings by
converting to Vialon Insyte Catheters, which are said to reduce
catheter usage by nearly 5%, and moving away from Teflon
catheters. B-D will help hospitals defray conversion costs by paying
3% of annual sales to an institution when it converts to I.V.
catheters through Becton Dickinson. B-D will also manufacture its
I.V. start kits for VHA's private label VHA PLUS(R) program.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Bard Urological, Covington, Ga., signed a five-year contract

Bard Urological, Covington, Ga., signed a five-year contract
extension with VHA Inc., Irving, Texas, that covers urological
specialty items in addition to the acute care products that have been
covered under Bard-VHA contracts since 1988. The agreement,
which took effect Jan. 1, is said to have the potential of $48 million
in annual sales for Bard, a figure that does not include possible sales
to AmHS/Premier facilities. The specialty items covered in the new
agreement are stents, baskets, balloons, urethrals, filiforms and
urolase. VHA says that 81% of its facilities use Bard Urological
products.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Bracco Diagnostics, Princeton, N.J., signed a renewal of its

Bracco Diagnostics, Princeton, N.J., signed a renewal of its
contrast media agreement with the New Jersey Hospital Assn. that
will be in effect through Aug. 31, 2000. The contract covers
purchases of both ionic and non-ionic contrast agents.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

BOEHRINGER MANNHEIM DIAGNOSTICS' FAST ASSAY
DIAGNOSES HEART ATTACKS

Sales of a new rapid bedside assay that helps physicians diagnose
heart attacks are under way, and its manufacturer, Boehringer
Mannheim Diagnostics, expects that its speed and ease of use will
translate into big sales for what it feels is a ground-breaking
product. Indianapolis-based Boehringer received 510(k) clearance
(after a six-month wait) to market the Cardiac T(TM) Rapid Assay in
late November.

The assay is based on the company's proprietary market cardiac
troponin T, which is found inside cardiac muscle and is released into
the blood only when cells are damaged.

The Cardiac T is a self-contained, disposable unit approximately
four inches long, less than an inch wide and a quarter-inch thick.
Drops of blood are placed in a well on the device and are quickly
drawn into a sandwich assay impregnated with two distinct types of
monoclonal antibodies, which link to cardiac troponin T in the
sample resulting in a visible color change. Results are obtained at the
bedside without the use of a central lab.

According to Lynda Koester, marketing manager for Boehringer
Mannheim Diagnostics, sales efforts are focusing on emergency
medicine physicians, cardiologists and laboratory personnel. The
product was rolled out to the cardiology market at the recent annual
meeting of the American Heart Assn. in Anaheim, Calif., starting
with a press conference and symposium. The company also
presented the Cardiac T in October for a pre-market look at the
American College of Emergency Physicians meeting, where better
than 700 leads were garnered from the approximately 2,300
registrants. At that meeting, Boehringer Mannheim sent dosed rapid
assays to attendees inviting them to stop by the booth. On the lab
side, Boehringer will display the new product at the American Assn.
for Clinical Chemistry, the Clinical Laboratory Management Assn.
and a number of local and regional sessions. The company utilizes a
speakers bureau for the presentations.

The company has also arranged journal placements in two major
emergency medicine journals, Annals of Emergency Medicine and
Emergency Medicine News, as well as Circulation and the Journal
of Cardiology. Later this year, ads will run in the Journal of
American Cardiology.

Probably the biggest obstacle to Cardiac T sales is overcoming
clinicians' traditional use of other markers and resistance to the new
technology in what is estimated to be an $82 million market in 1996.
To help do that, Boehringer Mannheim Diagnostics concentrates on
clinician education led by an evaluation program for its customers.
More than 130 publications and peer review studies are currently
available. Training in the use of Cardiac T is handled by a
combination of videotape tutorials, sales rep time spent with
customers and a policy and procedures manual.

Boehringer Mannheim Diagnostics utilizes a sales force made up of
10 specialists and over 100 sales representatives for lab sales
exclusively, in addition to approximately 250 reps on the pharmacy
side. The Cardiac T carries a list price of $30 per test, though group
purchasing organization contracts will discount that price. The
company is engaged in discussions with Oakland, Calif.-based
Kaiser Permanente, and several hospitals in the Nashville, Tenn.-
based Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp. chain are currently
participating in evaluations of the new product.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

IMPLANTABLE PUMP MARKS STRATO/INFUSAID'S RE-
ENTRY INTO PAIN MANAGEMENT MARKET

After a five-year hiatus, Strato/Infusaid Inc., re-entered the pain
management market in the fall when the FDA cleared its Infusaid
Model 400 Single Catheter Constant Flow Implantable Pump. The
Norwood, Mass.-based subsidiary of Pfizer Inc., New York, will
go head-to-head with Medtronic, Inc., the Minneapolis-based giant
that until now has had the pain management pump market all to
itself.

Strato/Infusaid was active in the pain management market in the
1980s, before leaving that market in 1990 while awaiting
development and approval of its new device.

To overcome loyalty to the Medtronic product lines, Strato/Infusaid
is playing the cost card. The Model 400 is priced at $4,995, a figure
the company says is less expensive than current alternatives, both
initially and over time. The company says that the total cost over six
months is $18,654, which "compares favorably" with that of
implantable programmable pumps ($21,129), implanted catheters
($31,144) and externalized systems ($38,190). After four years, as
patient survival lengthens, treatment costs for the Model 400 are
$34,828, roughly two-thirds the cost of treatment with implantable
programmable pumps ($49,621), one-fifth the cost of implanted
catheter treatments ($158,572) and one-eighth the cost of treatment
with externalized systems ($273,852).

These figures have not been lost on Strato/Infusaid's target market,
which it defines as 80% anesthesiologists active in pain management
and 20% neurosurgeons. The company met with "extreme success"
last fall during a six-stop national show tour, during which the
response from physicians was positive for the less-expensive new
product, a departure from the scene only 10 years ago when cost
was virtually a non-issue. Another plus for the Model 400 is the fact
that it needs no batteries. With its "inexhaustible" power supply, the
device requires neither programming nor recharging, another
attribute of interest to end-users.

Along with the aggressive show schedule, Strato/Infusaid launched
a direct mail campaign to anesthesiologists and neurosurgeons,
including the 2,800 members of the American Pain Society. Journal
ads are running in Neurosurgery and in Anesthesia and Analgesia.

To sell the Model 400, Strato/Infusaid uses its 32-member direct
sales force plus eight nurses who perform critical inservice
functions. Surgeons, oncologists and community physicians require
training on the device, as do clinicians responsible for refilling
medication (Infumorph, a preservative-free morphine), such as
home health care nurses.

Anne Roussell, Strato/Infusaid's product manager for implantable
pumps, has two objectives for the first 12 months following release.
The first is to re-establish the company's name recognition, while
the second is to capture 20% of the market. She says that the U.S.
pump market for pain management is $30 million and growing at
about 15% a year.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

I-FLOW PROMOTES SIMPLE, LOW COST BAND-IT SYRINGE
DELIVERY SYSTEM

I-Flow Corp. is hoping that cost-conscious hospitals will take to a
low-cost, low-tech syringe delivery system that makes use of a
common rubber band to help reduce customers' supply costs when
delivering I.V. medications. The small Irvine, Calif.-based
manufacturer recently received FDA marketing clearance for the
Band-It--after a two-year wait--and is currently seeking one or more
distribution partners to help sell its new product.

The Band-It Syringe Delivery System, all of which is disposable,
consists of a patented syringe driver and a flow control set. The
driver provides the energy to deliver medication from a 10cc Becton
Dickinson syringe. The set controls the flow from the syringe via
restrictor-tubing technology. Currently, two infusion times are
available: 10cc over 15 minutes and 10cc over 30 minutes.

I-Flow says the product not only cuts I.V. supply costs but also
minimizes pharmacy fill-time and storage. To prove its point, the
company has produced a specially priced evaluation package that
gives providers a chance to try the Band-It on patients. The package,
which is aimed at nurses and pharmacists, emphasizes not only
clinical advantages but provides a detailed cost analysis as well. The
cost analysis offers supply costs when using the Band-It set
between two and 12 times. For two uses, the set costs a user $2.47
per dose in supplies. But at a 12-time rate, the cost drops to 60 cents
per dose. I-Flow says that little training time is needed for clinicians.

I-Flow president and CEO Don Earhart says he is looking for
partners ranging from independent medical distributors to full-line
distributors, especially distributors that could bundle the Band-It
with other products.

Once those distributor/partners are found, journal advertising and
direct mail efforts will begin. So far, I-Flow has displayed the
product at last month's 30th annual midyear clinical meeting of the
American Society of Health-System Pharmacists in Las Vegas. The
company plans to exhibit at a number of nursing shows later this
year as well. Both hospitals and alternate care facilities are expected
to be end-users of the Band-It system.

For I-Flow, only a $10 million company, even a modicum of Band-
It sales success will have a major effect on its bottom line.
According to figures Earhart quoted from industry I.V. leaders
Baxter Healthcare Corp., McGaw Park, Ill., and Abbott
Laboratories, Abbott Park, Ill., approximately 300 million
antibiotic/anti-infective doses are delivered outside the hospital each
year in the U.S. Although not every dose can fit into a 10cc syringe,
Earhart believes that between 40% and 50% can. In addition, a 20cc
version of the Band-It system is expected to be marketed later this
year.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

OUTCOMES STUDIES BECOMING A "MUST" FOR
SUCCESSFUL DEVICE SALES

As demand increases for proof of not only safety and efficacy, but
the economic impact of today's medical devices and pharmaceuticals
(especially biotech drugs), manufacturers in great numbers are
turning to outcomes studies to prove their points to customers. The
cost may be high--from $100,000 into the multimillions for a
complex, peer-reviewed study complete with the accompanying
publicity effort to drive the information--but in many cases, sharp
competition among vendors and cost-conscious, managed care-
influenced providers can make a well-documented outcomes study
the difference between a sale and no sale.

R. Thomas Swem, principal, management consulting, for Boston-
based Deloitte & Touche LLP, is heavily involved in the production
of outcomes studies. He will deliver a keynote address in San Diego
during a Feb. 28-March 1 meeting titled Outcomes Studies for
Medical Devices presented by Global Business Research (1-800-
868-7188).

Swem says that the typical outcomes study on medical devices may
evaluate a new piece of equipment and its effect on a hospital's
department, the effect of a new machine replacing multiple
installations or potential FTE reductions associated with a new
equipment acquisition. Studies on disposable vs. reusable issues
and prepackaged approaches to vs. a la carte procurement are also
common.

A well-produced and promoted outcomes study "makes a coherent,
well-supported case for an outcome that may be somewhat
surprising," he said. An example of such a study was an early
evaluation of the benefits of laparoscopic vs. open surgery.
"Everyone seemed to have a sense that lap cholys were expensive,"
Swem said. "But the benefits proved they overshadow the costs."

Once an outcomes study has been completed, it must be marketed to
potential customers, chiefly physicians. On one occasion, Deloitte &
Touche mailed 300,000 copies of such a study to clinicians. A
popular approach today is to present the study on a video-quality,
PC-based format. To a modern medical device sales force armed
with automation tools, this delivery is a great help in making a case
to physicians.

Despite the best of intentions, manufacturers must overcome a
degree of skepticism in making their outcomes studies credible. This
is done by countering skepticism with hard data--and reams of it.
Swem reports that a toll-free telephone number was set up for one
study to take calls concerning the study. Another time, he invited
doubters to peruse documentation of blinded papers. A well-
prepared outcomes study generates a huge volume of painstakingly
assembled, complicated reports, often including medical records.
Such a study may involve investigative reports from 15 or 20
different institutions.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

EXCITEMENT AND FLASH SEEMED MISSING FROM 1995
RSNA SHOW

Although a number of last year's works-in-progress are now
available for purchase, there was general agreement that the 1995
trade show at the Radiological Society of North America meeting in
Chicago produced few, if any, surprises. Even the "tech junkies"
who wandered the vast floor space at Chicago's McCormick Place
to get their fill of new developments reported a lack of eye-openers.
One even went so far as to call the 1995 RSNA "a boring show."
Slow sales--rather than a lack of innovation or imagination--over the
past few years have assumed a rightful role as the culprit for the
missing excitement. There were few, if any, major product
introductions in the big ticket MR and CT segments. Enhancements
substituted for introductions.

Total attendance (60,161, including 23,883 non-exhibitors) was up
6.9% over 1994, when 56,262 viewed the displays on the
373,000sf show floor. By most accounts, vendors pulled back to a
more conservative approach to their presentations, cut the number of
personnel staffing the exhibits and threw fewer and less lavish
parties. Gone too were at least some of the multi-story "cities"
masquerading as booths, which some said signals an approaching
close to the RSNA as the "Disneyland of health care shows."

More administrators than before were on hand. There was also "a
new blending of focus on the radiology department head as the chief
information officer of digital imaging," said Mary Ann Kelly,
director of radiology and facilities for Los Angeles-based Purchase
Connection. She sees a tie-in of all imaging modalities into
information systems "from the viewbox, into the system and onto
the screen."

CR Gains Exposure

As it was with the 1994 show, smaller and faster were the dominant
themes for 1995. Open-architecture, low-end MRI systems were in
abundant supply for $750,000 or less through many vendors. MRI
sales are still down, by between 25% and 40% some say. But open-
architecture could save this segment as the horsepower race draws to
an end.

There were a few hot properties, of course. Computed radiography
(CR) was such an item, with several pieces offered at a "reasonable"
price for the first time. "Until the past year or two, the cost of CR
outweighed the benefits and the capabilities of the systems weren't
fully usable," said one attendee. One CR piece stood out: the direct
radiography prototype developed by DuPont Medical Products,
Newark, Del., that displayed how X-ray transmissions could be
converted into electronic data and presented via a satellite link
between the show floor and Chicago's Loyola University, providing
instant pictures on a monitor.

The competition has begun to heat up as several other manufacturers
have joined the CR chase, most notably major players like Fuji
Medical Systems, Stamford, Conn.; GE Medical Systems,
Milwaukee; Picker International, Cleveland, and Siemens Medical
Systems, Inc., Iselin, N.J. Agfa Technical Imaging, Ridgefield
Park, N.J., and the Health Sciences Division of Eastman Kodak
Co., Rochester, N.Y., are also in the fray. At the meeting, Kodak
and Siemens announced an agreement covering sales and service of
the Kodak Digital Science(TM) CR system 400. Predictions are that
the deluge of vendors will work to drive CR prices down.

The vendors' marketing approaches to CR vary, of course.
Siemens, for example, offers CR as an overall system along with its
Picture Archiving Communication Systems (PACS), while Fuji sells
its version of a horizontal CR table as a standalone item for general
radiography.

More players are entering the dry laser camera market. Until
recently, most felt that the Medical Imaging Systems division of
Polaroid Corp., Cambridge, Mass., had the largest share of the
market to itself with its Helios line. Its new large format Helios
1417 system, which began shipments in 1995, is aimed at the high
end of the market with a list price of about $100,000. Polaroid's
smaller format Helios 810 was introduced in 1993. Now, Agfa has
a prototype on the way, and 3M, St. Paul, Minn., is offering its
version with the 3M Dry View Laser Imaging Systems. 3M, in fact,
announced that it intends to launch its imaging systems and data
storage business as part of an independent, publicly owned
company in mid-1996.

Laser Mammography Debuts

Several attendees were impressed with one of the few truly new
technologies on display: laser mammography. One startup company,
Imaging Diagnostic Systems, Sunrise, Fla., made a splash with its
CTLM (CT Laser Mammography) that utilizes light generated by a
high-speed laser to view the breast. Sales are probably a couple of
years away, however, as clinical trials have yet to begin for the new
technology.

Siemens Enters U.S. Ultrasound Market

The entry by Siemens into a relatively mature U.S. ultrasound
market at a time when most observers feel there are already too
many ultrasound vendors scrambling for market share was a
surprise. Siemens introduced the Sonoline ultrasound system family
at RSNA to go with its CT and MR systems as the company rounds
out its offerings to hospitals. Siemens will face stiff competition
from GE Medical Systems in the ultrasound market in this country.

Remanufactured Equipment Posts Gains

With cost-conscious hospitals tightening their belts even more and
integrated systems eliminating equipment redundancies, imaging
equipment remanufacturers keep picking up steam. Companies like
Comdisco, Inc., Rosemont, Ill., Refurbco, Grand Rapids, Mich.,
and Picker's PTS (Picker Technical Services) Division appear to be
finding more acceptance than ever.

Price is becoming more critical too, particularly as the responsibility
for big ticket purchasing decisions radiologists share with
administrators who are beginning to regard imaging equipment as
commodities. Hospitals are just now beginning to consider life cycle
costs over five-year periods when making purchasing decisions.

Editor's note: Special thanks to Dave Natale, director of technical
assessment for SunHealth Alliance, Charlotte, N.C.; John Sutton,
contract manager for AmeriNet, St. Louis; and Derwood Dunbar,
Jr., president and CEO of MAGNET, Harrisburg, Pa., for their
help in preparing this report.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Conmed Corp., Utica, N.Y., will acquire New Dimensions in

Conmed Corp., Utica, N.Y., will acquire New Dimensions in
Medicine, Inc. (NDM), Mellville, N.Y., for approximately $32
million in cash. The deal is expected to close either this month or
early in 1996 and does not include NDM's international wound care
business. New Dimensions in Medicine is a developer and
manufacturer of electrocardiograph monitoring devices,
electrosurgical products and hydrogel wound dressings. Annual
sales of those products covered in the Conmed deal are estimated at
$28 million. NDM's electrocardiograph and electrosurgical products
will complement Conmed's line, while the wound care business
represents a new offering by Conmed. Prior to signing the
agreement with Conmed, NDM had been in discussions with Tyco
International, Exeter, N.H. The company is expected to sell its
international wound care business at a later date.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Mallinckrodt Medical, Inc., St. Louis, opened nuclear medicine

Mallinckrodt Medical, Inc., St. Louis, opened nuclear medicine
pharmacies in Miami, Fla., and in Columbus, Ohio, to supply
diagnostic imaging and therapy products to hospitals and nuclear
medicine clinics. The facilities became part of Mallinckrodt's
nationwide network of 36 diagnostic imaging services nuclear
medicine pharmacies.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

United States Surgical Corp., Norwalk, Conn., reported that a

United States Surgical Corp., Norwalk, Conn., reported that a
French surgical team has successfully completed the first minimally
invasive coronary bypass operation performed in France using the
company's instruments. Surgeons there developed the technique at
U.S. Surgical's training and research center in Elancourt, outside
Paris. More instruments for the technique are under development.
The procedure took only 3.5 hours and was performed without
stopping the 50-year-old patient's heart, a common practice in
coronary bypass surgery. In July, surgeons completed the first
aortic bypass procedure ever performed through minimally invasive
incisions at California's San Ramon Regional Medical Center. A
few days later at the UCLA Center for Health Sciences in Los
Angeles, a similar procedure was performed using the totally
minimally invasive approach.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Innovative Technologies Group, Cheshire, England, and

Innovative Technologies Group, Cheshire, England, and
Minneapolis-based 3M have reached agreement on a contract that
establishes 3M as a global marketer of a new alginate wound care
dressing. The deal makes 3M responsible for international
marketing, sales and service activities. Marketing for the new
dressing, which is approved for use on moderate to heavily
exudating partial-to full-thickness wounds, will begin early in 1996.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Picker International, Cleveland, relocated its Nuclear Medicine

Picker International, Cleveland, relocated its Nuclear Medicine
Division to the company's world headquarters building in the
Cleveland suburb of Highland Heights, Ohio. The move to the
85,000sf facility doubles the manufacturing and engineering space
for the division, which was formerly located in Bedford Heights,
Ohio.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Invacare Corp., Elyria, Ohio, was named by Financial World

Invacare Corp., Elyria, Ohio, was named by Financial World
magazine as one of the top 50 "best and brightest" mid-cap
companies in America, defined as operations that have been public
for at least six years and having a market capitalization of between
$300 million and $3 billion. Invacare had sales of $411 million for
its fiscal year ended Dec. 31, 1994.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

EDAP Technomed International, a French manufacturer, learned that

EDAP Technomed International, a French manufacturer, learned that
a device it hopes to sell in the U.S. has passed muster from an FDA
advisory panel. The device, known as Prostatron, is the first in a
new class of products that can shrink enlarged prostates without
surgery by using microwaves. Although it is not as effective as
surgery, use of the device requires no hospital stay and has few side
effects, the panel was told.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

SangStat Medical Corp., Menlo Park, Calif., has filed a 510(k) with

SangStat Medical Corp., Menlo Park, Calif., has filed a 510(k) with
the FDA for market approval of its Celsior(TM), a product designed
to preserve the heart prior to cardiac transplantation and to promote
graft function in the initial 48 hours post-cardiac transplant surgery.
In October 1993, SangStat acquired exclusive rights to develop and
market Celsior in the U.S. and Canada from Pasteur Merieux
Serums et Vaccins, Lyon, France, a subsidiary of Rhone Poulenc.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

UroMed Corp., Needham, Mass., signed a five-year multi-national

UroMed Corp., Needham, Mass., signed a five-year multi-national
distribution agreement with Astra Tech, a member of the
Scandinavian-based Astra Group, for its Reliance(TM) Urinary
Control Insert. The contract gives Astra Tech exclusive rights to
distribute the Reliance Insert in the Scandinavian countries of
Sweden, Norway, Denmark and Finland, as well as the Netherlands
and the United Kingdom. Including a $16 million advance
commitment from Astra Tech, the deal is estimated to be worth as
much as $31 million over its term. Launch of the Reliance Insert in
the selected nations will take place throughout 1996. Worldwide
launch of the device began in the fall in Germany through a separate
distribution agreement.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "36"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

The American Occupational Therapy Assn. (AOTA) in November

The American Occupational Therapy Assn. (AOTA) in November
began publishing OT Practice, a new monthly magazine that covers
the profession and the association. The magazine is designed in a
64-page, four-color format.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "37"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

 Vollrath Group, Inc., Memphis, Tenn., says it is nearing

 Vollrath Group, Inc., Memphis, Tenn., says it is nearing
completion of a five-year, $10 million capital improvements
program at its 150,000sf Gallaway, Tenn., production facility
located about 35 miles northeast of Memphis. The program featured
the recent installation of a $2 million, state-of-the-art urinal
manufacturing cell. When fully operational, the new manufacturing
cell is expected to reinforce Vollrath's position as a large supplier of
urinals as well as other assorted patient care utensils, including
bedpans. The new cell is capable of producing more than 3,000
disposable polyethylene urinals per hour.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "38"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Oliver Products Co., Grand Rapids, Mich., a supplier of roll stock

Oliver Products Co., Grand Rapids, Mich., a supplier of roll stock
and blister lids for medical packaging in the U.S., has reached
agreement to purchase the pre-formed medical pouch product line
from Denver-based OnGard Systems, Inc. Oliver's plan is to move
the pouch production to Grand Rapids and incorporate the line into
its current medical product packaging line.

Separately, Oliver named Flexible Medical Packaging Ltd.,
Lancaster, England, as its exclusive converter/distributor for the
United Kingdom and all of Ireland in a deal that Oliver hopes will
expand its marketing reach internationally.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "39"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Dade International, Deerfield, Ill., and Intracel Corp., Cambridge,

Dade International, Deerfield, Ill., and Intracel Corp., Cambridge,
Mass., completed the sale to Intracel of Dade's wholly owned
Bartels subsidiary. The Bartels subsidiary, based in Issaquah,
Wash., markets a line of viral-testing and related products under the
Bartels name. Dade will now focus on its "core strategic strengths"
in hemostasis, microbiology, controls, chemistry and cardiac
diagnosis. Intracel is a major supplier of genetically engineered viral
proteins and antibodies. Terms of the deal were not available.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "40"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Bracco Diagnostics Inc. has relocated its corporate headquarters to

Bracco Diagnostics Inc. has relocated its corporate headquarters to
Princeton, N.J. The diagnostic imaging agent manufacturer
company formerly occupied space in the Bristol-Myers Squibb
building in Plainsboro, N.J.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "41"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

3M, St. Paul, Minn., connected the first commercial 3M Dry View

3M, St. Paul, Minn., connected the first commercial 3M Dry View
8700 Laser Imager in the U.S. when it installed the unit at the Mayo
Clinic in Jacksonville, Fla. The institution's department of
diagnostic radiology will use the 8700 laser imager to support its
new electronic imaging practice. The installation marks the
beginning of 3M's commercial roll-out of the new laser imaging
technology. The 8700 prints medical images on the preferred
14"x17" format and accommodates virtually all imaging modalities.
The systems range in price from $55,000 to $85,000. Placement of
units in Japan and Europe will soon follow.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "42"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Healthcare Materials Services (HMS), a pharmacy and materials

Healthcare Materials Services (HMS), a pharmacy and materials
services outsourcing concern, and a division of Houston-based
Owen Healthcare, Inc., and Kowalski-Dickow Associates, Inc.,
Milwaukee, have formed a strategic alliance designed to promote
materials management-related services to health care clients. The two
companies have been working together since 1994, with Kowalski-
Dickow using HMS' Supplyline, a proprietary hospital product
pricing database, for several of its clients.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "43"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Cantel Industries, Inc., Clifton, N.J., will acquire MediVators,

Cantel Industries, Inc., Clifton, N.J., will acquire MediVators,
Inc., Cannon Falls, Minn., through a stock swap agreement.
MediVators designs, manufactures and markets endoscope
disinfection equipment and supplies medical waste disposal
systems. Through its Canadian subsidiary, Carsen Group Inc.,
Cantel markets and distributes a variety of instruments, including
flexible and rigid endoscopes.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "44"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Heraeus Surgical, Inc., Milpitas, Calif., and Minneapolis-based

Heraeus Surgical, Inc., Milpitas, Calif., and Minneapolis-based
CVAC, Inc. have agreed on an exclusive licensing arrangement in
which Heraeus Surgical will exclusively manufacture, use and sell
CVAC's Centralized Airborne Evacuation System worldwide. The
system works to improve overall air quality and safety in the
operating room during surgical procedures.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "45"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

United States Surgical Corp., Norwalk, Conn., introduced a

United States Surgical Corp., Norwalk, Conn., introduced a
minimally invasive breast biopsy system at the recent meeting of the
American College of Surgeons in New Orleans. The system, known
as the Advanced Breast Biopsy Instrument (ABBI(TM)) system, is
said to be more accurate in identifying the tumor site, which means
less pain, disfigurement and scarring for the patient. USSC also
says that the ABBI system can reduce costs by as much as $2,000
per procedure. The company is hoping for April clearance for ABBI
from the FDA.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "46"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Image Diagnostic Systems, Inc., Sunrise, Fla., took an unusual tact

Image Diagnostic Systems, Inc., Sunrise, Fla., took an unusual tact
when it unveiled its new CTLM ultra-fast laser mammography
device. Company CEO Richard Grable appeared on a Donahue
show segment that aired on Nov. 20 to discuss the CTLM, which he
invented.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "47"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

WORTH READING . . .

A brief review of some articles of interest to Health Industry Today
readers for January:

+ Hospital Materials Management analyzes the blockbuster Baxter
split from the perspective of hospital purchasers, focusing on its
impact on service, possible switches to other medical-surgical
suppliers and future price hikes for both products and services.
HMM's January price survey tracks current prices for needles and
syringes. SunHealth's merger with Premier/AmHS will also be
examined from the buying group angle.

+ Health Care Strategic Management covers the attitudes among
hospital planners and administrators toward outsourcing. There's
also an article on The Revolt Against the One-Day Stay and its
consequences for today's hospital.

+ Profiles in Healthcare Marketing reviews a survey titled "Patient
Care: Bridging the Gap with Hispanic Consumers," believed to be
the first comprehensive study of Hispanic attitudes, usage patterns
and needs concerning health care providers and facilities. One
surprise finding: Hispanics surveyed say they were more uneasy
about young physicians' disheveled dress than their fluency in
Spanish.

+ Financial Advertising Review explains how integrated delivery
systems use marketing campaigns to help overcome consumers'
indifference and managed care organizations' skepticism to their
structure.

Please address inquiries concerning the above newsletters to The
Business Word, Inc., publishers of Health Industry Today, 303-
290-8500, or FAX 303-290-9025.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "48"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

OUTCOMES ANALYSIS CAN WIN OVER TOUGH
AUDIENCES

By Michael T. Kelly
The medical device industry isn't usually thought of as a high-
fashion business. It's a long way from orthopedic implants and
intra-aortic balloons to Bill Blass and Calvin Klein. Even so, the
medical device industry has its own "fashions"--trends that gather
momentum and buzzwords that hang in the air. And the trend of the
moment is "outcomes."

There's good reason for this, of course. The rise of outcomes
analysis is the product of two interwoven revolutions under way in
the health care industry. The first is the emphasis on cost and
performance. The second comes from advances in information
technology. As we become more adept at digital manipulation, our
understanding of the health care landscape becomes sharper and
more sophisticated. And it is here that cost and performance
concerns intersect with data-gathering ability. The development of
information-based health care delivery allows opportunities to be
pinpointed with greater precision than ever before. To think in terms
of outcomes--of the cost and success rate of a complete course of
therapy rather than the price of its individual components--is a
natural extension of this point of view.

So it is that the health care vendor today finds himself or herself in a
transitional environment that requires skillful navigation. For while
there may be agreement in theory regarding the benefits of an
outcomes approach, as with so many things the actual practice lags
behind. "It's very easy for a purchasing agent to look at a 10%
discount and grasp immediately what he is getting," Joseph
Laptewicz, president and CEO of Empi, a manufacturer of
neurological and urological devices, told me recently. "Selling him
on a new therapy that represents up-front expense but a 30% to 40%
reduction in total therapeutic cost is more difficult."

That there should be resistance in the face of such a payoff is a
frustrating predicament, but not without its reasons. A large part of
the problem is rooted in the fact that it is much more difficult to sell a
new therapy than a new product. It involves not just making space
on the stockroom shelves, but changes in the treatment protocol--the
"operating manual" that lies at the heart of the customer's business.
Prescribing a pain management device means more than incurring
the $500 cost of the product--it means asking physicians to adopt a
more time-and labor-intensive approach than writing the traditional
prescription for narcotic medication. Calling for such a fundamental
shift is a tall order--and one that requires winning over people at all
levels within the network, from M.D.s and R.N.s to plan
administrators and medical directors--each of whom has a natural
loyalty to "tried and true" methods. "It's easiest not to change,"
explains Laptewicz. "And at times it seems like there are a thousand
people who can say no, and no one who can say yes."

The key to convincing such a tough audience lies in taking their
"show me" attitude and turning it to your advantage. Empi solved
that problem by developing a limited outcomes trial that providers
can conduct at one of their sites. "It's easier to convince an HMO to
try our incontinence devices at one of their locations than to change
over the entire network at once," says Laptewicz. "After the
providers see cost and performance data on a group of 30 of their
own patients over a six-month period, they are much more receptive
to our message."

Indeed, while the emphasis on outcomes may be the result of new
thinking, today's vendor will do well to be guided by the old and
reliable standard of customer needs. For if hospitals are beginning to
judge by outcomes, so too are they being judged--by payers and
patients. Customer education also plays a key role, as sophistication
on this issue will vary greatly from account to account. There is no
uniform measurement for outcomes, after all, and as the health care
industry gropes toward standards for various indications, there is an
opportunity for the device maker to contribute its expertise to the
dialogue. "An institution may want to claim that it can wean patients
off ventilators within a certain period of time. We need to give them
support to help them make that claim," says Jim Hickey, president
and CEO of Aequitron Medical, whose products include sleep apnea
equipment and infant monitors. Doing so means designing devices
that provide the raw information that makes such a statement
possible. For while there will always be debate on how to define an
outcome, you can't even begin the discussion unless you have the
data. Thus, customers are placing a greater premium on remote
monitoring and recording functions. Hickey lists two things he
wants his sales force to be able to offer: a positive outcome at a
competitive cost, and the data to support those cost and performance
claims. As medical software houses develop increasingly complex
clinical decision support systems, the value of such data will only
increase.

Ultimately, the focus on outcomes is part of a larger matrix of
factors controlling health care purchasing, including patient
compliance, cost and quality of life. But as Aequitron's Jim Hickey
points out, these are just a modified version of the factors that we
already use when buying something for ourselves. "If you are
thinking about buying a car, for example, you ask four things:
'How much will I use it? How much does it cost? How well does it
work? and How much will it improve my quality of life?' It's
becoming the same with buying a medical device."

Michael T. Kelly, a former vice president at St. Paul, Minn.-based
St. Jude Medical, is a managing director of Russell Reynolds
Associates, a global executive recruiting firm.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "49"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

OWENS, HENRY SCHEIN MARKETING TANDEM CREATES
"VIRTUAL ORGANIZATION"

Owens & Minor, Inc., and physicians' office supplier Henry
Schein, Inc., Melville, N.Y., have signed a multi-year joint
marketing agreement designed to broaden the product offerings of
both companies. The "virtual organization" formed by the pact,
known as Net/GAIN(TM), will give Richmond, Va.-based Owens
access to the physicians' office market for the first time and help
Henry Schein gain entry to new business through integrated delivery
systems across the country. To compensate Owens & Minor for its
efforts in bringing in new business, Henry Schein will pay an
unspecified fee to Owens based on a percentage of sales.

The arrangement is scheduled to be launched this month. Henry
Schein executives will address the Owens & Minor sales force on
the Net/GAIN project at the end of the month at a national sales
meeting.

Owens will inject its sales and marketing expertise, in particular its
proficiency in the areas of rebates and chargebacks, into the virtual
organization. Henry Schein brings access to its more than 200,000
physician customers, many of them in the dental segment, which
will allow the Net/GAIN organization to offer a range of services to
integrated delivery systems. Through the venture, Net/GAIN will
offer a "one-stop shop" to physicians, including pharmaceuticals,
office supplies and diagnostic products. The combination will also
boost the purchasing power of both companies.

Henry Schein will handle the logistics for Net/GAIN customers--
taking orders and completing shipments--and be responsible for
direct marketing and enrollment of individual practitioners in the
program. The company has about 200 sales reps, all of whom work
over the telephone, along with 50 direct field reps, with plans to
double that to 100 over time.

The 60-year-old company, which went public in early November,
operates distribution centers in Port Washington, N.Y., Indianapolis
and Reno, Nev., plus five more overseas. The company says that
37% of its customers receive one-day shipping service, while 88%
receive their shipments in two days, all through common carriers.
Due to the small nature of the vast majority of Henry Schein
shipments to doctors (mostly under $200 each), the company has
few back orders and boasts a 99%-plus fill rate.

That remarkable fill rate is reached through use of a supply
formulary approach that has worked to reduce both the number of
vendors with which it works and the number of SKUs it offers. For
example, Owens & Minor carries approximately 320,000 SKUs
while Henry Schein lists only about 90,000.

In early December, Net/GAIN signed up its first customer. The
program will provide medical-surgical supplies, laboratory,
imaging, diagnostic, health and beauty aids and office products to
physicians affiliated with the Montgomery General Hospital System,
Olney, Md. The agreement includes service to 229-bed Montgomery
General Hospital. Other pilot Net/GAIN programs are in place as
well.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "50"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

BAXTER'S NEW SUPPLY CHAIN PLAN WORRIES SOME
VENDORS

A program instituted by Baxter Healthcare Corp., Deerfield, Ill.,
designed to cut its costs and raise service levels for its hospital
customers has become a worry for a few medical-surgical supply
manufacturers. In September, Baxter's rationalized supply chain
program began to place slower moving items into the company's
new national drop-ship center in Chicago in a strategy that affects
both Baxter-made and non-Baxter-made supplies. The company
says that about 5% of its lines have been relocated to that Chicago
center.

The new stocking system is based on the number of times a line item
product is picked. Items that are picked more than 300 times a year
will remain stocked locally at one of the company's distribution
centers. Items that are picked between 80 and 300 times have been
moved to the Chicago drop-ship center. Items that are picked fewer
than 80 times will be drop-shipped from the manufacturer,
according to Baxter's plan, which is aimed at improving efficiency
and reducing dead inventory.

Despite all this, at least one vendor told Health Industry Today that
as a partner with Baxter, it feels that Baxter should maintain its local
stocking of all items. "We want our products stocked locally if
they're going to be a distributor for us," said the supplier, who
asked to remain anonymous. The vendor said he feels Baxter's new
system will serve to slow the distribution chain. On the other hand,
Baxter is convinced that its plan will improve fill rates, fill times and
predictability.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "51"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

KENTUCKY DISTRIBUTORS TO MERGE

An upcoming merger of two Kentucky-based medical-surgical
supply distributors was done, at least in part, to counter the trend of
acquisitions of med-surg distributors by publicly owned national
companies. Independent suppliers Ransdell Surgical, Inc.,
Louisville, Ky., and Grogan's Healthcare Supply Inc., Lexington,
Ky., announced plans to merge last month and said that avoiding
such an acquisition and maintaining local control was a "specific
objective" of their plans. The merger is expected to be completed
sometime in mid-1996.

The companies hope that such local control will protect jobs and
keep tax revenue at the local level.

The unnamed merged company will hold a dominant position in
each of the markets it serves, with more than 15,000 customers
throughout Kentucky and southern Indiana. Ransdell focuses on the
hospital market, especially in Louisville, Lexington, western
Kentucky and southern Indiana. Grogan's concentrates on
expansion into new product areas in non-hospital segments,
particularly in central and eastern Kentucky. The new company will
carry approximately 20,000 products from more than 1,500
manufacturers. It sells, rents and services these items for hospitals,
sub-acute nursing facilities, surgery centers, clinics and other
alternate site providers.

Ransdell also has two sister companies: Choice Medical, Inc., and
Medical Business Associates, which provides technologies and
management information to providers.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "52"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

SHOW BIZ . . .

One From The Heart

HIT couldn't make the recent American Heart Assn. annual meeting,
but a report from New York analysts C.J. Lawrence Inc. summed
up the proceedings. "One adjective that comes to mind to describe
the exhibit floor is . . . jammed," wrote C.J.'s Jill Topkis Weiss.
"Although a wave of consolidation has been sweeping through the
medical device industry, the number of vendors populating the
exhibit floor appears to have increased. The explanation for this
peculiarity may lie in heightened responsiveness from our nearest
and dearest friend, the FDA. We believe that the recent wealth of
new product approvals is responsible for the crop of new vendors at
this year's event." What was hot: continued focus on minimally
invasive products, potential therapies for atrial fibrillation and stent
studies galore.

Virtuality

Varian Associates has come up with a way to put all of its customers
and potential customers right down in the front row to see its latest
products. The Palo Alto, Calif.-based manufacturer set up a
"virtual" trade show "booth" that allows customers to see its
products from their desktops. The company believes that the virtual
booth, located inside of Varian Oncology Systems' Web Site (which
can be accessed at Varian's URL, http://www.varian.com.) is most
helpful for customers who cannot attend trade shows.

Role Playing

NCI will host a conference in Phoenix, Feb. 4-6, entitled
"Orchestrating New Roles: Group Strategies for the Health Care
Evolution." Senior executives from major GPOs and chains will
lead the discussions.

Call 714-589-6500.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "53"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

TRADING PLACES . . .

In response to reader requests, Health Industry Today provides this
listing of key health care trade shows. To add one, contact Curt
Werner at 303-290-8928, Ext. 138, or FAX 303-290-9025.

Dates Meeting Location Exhibitor types Single booth cost Est.
Attend. Contact

February

5-8 Med. Design & Manufacturing West Conference Anaheim,
Calif. m-s, or, lab, h/s $2,600 10,000 310-392-5509

8-13 American Assn. for Advancement of Science Baltimore h/s
1,350 5,200 202-326-6450

9-12 Dermatology Nurses Assn. Wash., D.C. Rx, m-s 1,050 1,000
609-256-2300

10-15 American Academy of Dermatology Wash., D.C. Rx, m-s,
or, ce 1,700 5,000 708-330-1090

22-26 American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons Atlanta m-s, ce,
or 2,100 12,500 708-823-7186

March

4-7 Soc. of Cardiovascular & Interventional Radiology Seattle ce
2,500 1,000 703-691-1805

5-7 Assn. of Operating Room Nurses Dallas Rx, m-s, or, ce 2,000
7,200 303-755-6304

10-12 American Pharmaceutical Assn. Nashville, Tenn. Rx, hc, h/s
2,500 5,500 202-429-7547

13-16 Society of Amer. Gastrointestinal Endo. Surgeons
Philadelphia m-s, or 1,700 1,200 310-314-2404

14-17 American Burn Assn. Nashville, Tenn. Rx, m-s, ce 1,600
2,500 708-824-5700

16-18 American Society on Aging Anaheim, Calif. Rx, m-s 800
3,500 415-974-9600

27-29 Federation of American Health Systems Wash., D.C. Rx, m-
s, h/s, or, ce 3,600 1,900 800-880-3247

April

12-14 Arthroscopy Assn. of North America Wash., D.C. m-s, or
2,000 1,200 708-292-2262

15-16 American Society for Laser Medicine & Surgery Orlando,
Fla. laser supplies 1,265 1,100 715-845-9283

21-23 The Healthcare Forum San Francisco h/s, co, pub 1,895
2,000 415-356-4322

21-23 American Assn. for Cancer Research Wash., D.C. Rx, lab,
pub, h/s 1,450 7,000 609-848-1000

22-23 American Society of Clinical Pathologists Boston lab, h/s,
pub 1,000 3,500 312-738-1336

22-24 American Society of Post Anesthesia Nurses Phoenix Rx, m-
s 1,150 1,700 609-848-1000

25-27 National Kidney Foundation Anaheim, Calif. Rx, m-s, h/s,
pub 1,700 2,600 816-221-9559

26-5/3 Occupational Health Nurses San Antonio, Tex. Rx, m-s, h/s,
pub 1,500 5,000 609-848-1000

28-30 American Assn. for Thoracic Surgery San Diego Rx, m-s, or
1,600 2,500 508-526-8330

29-5/1 American Assn. of Neurological Surgeons Minneapolis Rx,
m-s, lab 1,800 6,200 708-692-9500

29-5/1 American College of Obstetricians & Gynecologists Denver
Rx, pub, lab 1,600 10,000 202-638-5577

Exhibitor Legend: pharmaceutical (Rx); medical-surgical supplies
(m-s); laboratory (lab); hardware/software (h/s); packaging (pkg);
home care (hc); managed care providers (mc); operating room (or);
capital equipment (ce); consultants (co); publishers (pub)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "54"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

PRODUCER PRICE INDEX INCHES 0.1% HIGHER IN
NOVEMBER; MEDICAL CARE COMMODITIES INCREASE BY
0.3%

Analysis:
The finished goods component of the Producer Price Index inched
higher by 0.1% in November, putting it at 128.6. This index, which
tracks wholesale level prices, stands at its highest point since 1982,
and is 2.0% higher than its November 1994 level.

Only two of the 16 selected categories tracked in this month's PPI
report registered price increases, led by surgical instruments,
including suture needles, prices of which rose by 0.6%. Five
categories decreased, led by catheter prices, which dropped by
2.5%. Eight categories went unchanged for the month.

November's unadjusted urban Consumer Price Index (for all
consumer items) slipped 0.1% to 153.6. Over the past 12 months,
this index is up 2.6%.

Medical Care Commodities rose 0.3% to 206.3 in November. Over
the past 12 months, this index is up 1.8%.

For most data, 100 equals the price level in 1982. For ophthalmic
goods and surgical implants, the base year is 1983. Drugs are based
in 1984. The medical X-ray index base is 1990. Figures are not
seasonally adjusted.

(Table omitted for online service. See print edition.)

Source: U.S. Dept. of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1995



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "55"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

PURCHASING MANAGERS: MANUFACTURING SLOWS
FOR FOURTH STRAIGHT MONTH

In November, for the fourth consecutive month, economic activity
slowed in the manufacturing sector, and at a slightly faster rate of
decline than in October, according to the most recent report from the
National Assn. of Purchasing Management. While this was
happening, the overall economy continued to grow, but at a slower
rate of growth than in the previous month.

The NAPM Purchasing Managers' Index decreased a bit in
November to 46.5%, compared with 46.8% in October. The NAPM
Production Index dropped to 45.8%, the lowest reading since June
1995 (44.8%). Both New Orders and Backlog of Orders indexes
have reversed direction each month for the past five months. The
New Orders Index for November rose to 50.1%, while the Backlog
of Orders Index increased to 41.5%.

The Supplier Deliveries Index for November recorded its fourth
straight month of faster delivery times, with a reading of 45.8%, the
speediest delivery indication since April 1991 (45.0%). The
Inventories Index increased to 43.2%, possibly indicating that
inventory reduction activity may have passed its peak. Half of the
purchasers polled said their own materials and supplies levels were
about right, but 44% said the levels were too high. Of the 20
manufacturing industries tracked, just four reported November
improvement, compared with eight improving in October over
September.

Purchasing Managers' Index (over 50% indicates that manufacturing
economy is generally expanding)

November '95: 46.5%
October '95: 46.8%
November '94: 59.9%

Production Index (over 50%, over time, is generally consistent with
growth)

November '95: 45.8%
October '95: 48.2%
November '94: 66.7%

Inventories Index (over 42%, over time, is generally consistent with
growth)

November '95: 43.2%
October '95: 40.7%
November '94: 47.2%

Price Index (over 47%, over time, is consistent with price increases)

November '95: 44.5%
October '95: 46.7%
November '94: 77.9%



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "56"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Wright Medical Technology, Inc.: Richard D. Nikolaev was elected

Wright Medical Technology, Inc.: Richard D. Nikolaev was elected
president and CEO of this Arlington, Tenn.-based manufacturer of
orthopedic products and instrumentation. Nikolaev has had more
than 30 years of experience in the orthopedic business, first as a
senior executive at DePuy, Inc., Warsaw, Ind., then as president of
Protek, Inc., now a subsidiary of the Swiss firm Sulzer Medica, and
most recently as president of Minneapolis-based Orthomet, Inc.,
which was acquired by Wright in December 1994. Herbert W.
Korthoff will stay on as chairman of Wright Medical, though he will
step back from day-to-day company management duties to focus on
long-term objectives following Nikolaev's appointment.

Wright Medical also promoted Terry Finley to general manager of
Canadian and European Operations. Finley has more than 20 years
in the orthopedic industry, with experience in finance and in sales
and marketing. He was most recently general manager of the
Howmedica Canada Division of Pfizer Hospital Products, Ltd.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "57"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Baxter International: William B. Graham retired as senior chairman

Baxter International: William B. Graham retired as senior chairman
and resigned from the board of directors of this Deerfield, Ill.-based
medical supply corporation. Lester B. Knight and Harry M. Jansen
Kraemer Jr. were named to the board. Graham, 84, joined Baxter in
1945 as vice president and manager and was named to the board of
directors that same year.

Baxter also appointed Marvin L. Miller president and CEO of Baxter
Healthcare Corp.'s Princeton, N.J.-based Nextran unit, which
handles the development and commercialization of organ transplant
technologies and services. Most recently, Miller served as vice
president of biotechnology licensing for American Cyanamid Co.,
Wayne, N.J. Prior to that, he was vice president of Johnson &
Johnson International, New Brunswick, N.J.

Finally, Baxter promoted Manuel A. Baez to executive vice
president, where he will continue to be responsible for expanding
worldwide markets for the company and globalizing Baxter's
hospital products manufacturing operations.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "58"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Medline Industries, Inc.: Susan Hall was named president of the

Medline Industries, Inc.: Susan Hall was named president of the
Medcrest(R) Cubicle/Drapery Division of this Mundelein, Ill.-based
manufacturer and distributor of health care supplies and textile
products. The Medcrest division provides health care institutions
with stock and custom decorative textiles, coordinated bed linen and
upholstery, and wall and floor coverings. Hall joined Medline in
1994 as director of marketing communications. She previously
worked for ConAgra, Rand McNally and New York-based Bristol-
Myers Squibb.

Medtronic, Inc.: Robert H. Kayser was promoted to vice president,
pacing, Europe, for this Minneapolis-based medical technology
manufacturer. He will be responsible for the overall leadership of
pacemaker marketing in Europe and for assisting Medtronic's
organizations in Europe in meeting marketing and financial goals of
the pacing business. This month, Kayser began his new duties at the
new headquarters of Medtronic Europe near Lausanne, Switzerland.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "59"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

HIDA: Cara C. Bachenheimer, director of government relations for

HIDA: Cara C. Bachenheimer, director of government relations for
the Health Industry Distributors Assn., was named executive
director of HIDA's Home Health Care and Long-Term Care Market
Groups. She succeeds Craig Jeffries, who has joined Healthspan
Services Inc., Kingsport, Tenn.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "60"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Behring Diagnostics: Rudi Steinmann was appointed head of

Behring Diagnostics: Rudi Steinmann was appointed head of
worldwide sales and marketing for global operations by this
Frankfurt, Germany-based immunodiagnostics company. He joins
Behring after spending the past 17 years at Abbott Laboratories,
Abbott Park, Ill., most recently as general manager of Abbott
Diagnostics Germany.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "61"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Rusch International: Frank Sodha was promoted to president of this

Rusch International: Frank Sodha was promoted to president of this
Duluth, Ga.-based manufacturer of urological and anesthesia
medical devices, where he will be responsible for all global
operations. Sodha, who joined the company three years ago,
previously was responsible for global manufacturing.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "62"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

B&G Equipment Co.: John Jefferson Dykstra was named director

B&G Equipment Co.: John Jefferson Dykstra was named director
for the cleaning and maintenance division of this Plumsteadville,
Pa.-based manufacturer of sprayers and spraying equipment for
pesticides and other chemicals. Dykstra will head up all sales and
marketing functions to the industrial, commercial and retail markets,
including health care facilities.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "63"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Varian Associates, Inc.: David A. Berkowitz was named national

Varian Associates, Inc.: David A. Berkowitz was named national
accounts manager for this Palo Alto, Calif.-based medical
accelerator manufacturer. He previously served as vice president of
the health systems group at ECRI, Plymouth Meeting, Pa.

Varian also promoted Scott J. Mestman to director of national
accounts. He joined the company in 1981 as a biomedical engineer
and served in a variety of positions, most recently as southwest
district sales manager.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "64"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Imagyn Medical, Inc.: Chris Bova joined this Laguna Niguel,

Imagyn Medical, Inc.: Chris Bova joined this Laguna Niguel,
Calif.-based manufacturer of minimally invasive devices for
women's infertility and gynecological surgery as vice president of
sales. Most recently, Bova served as director of sales, access
division, for Sims Deltec, St. Paul, Minn.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "65"></A>Copyright
HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet
January 1996

Owens & Minor, Inc.: Larry Sapp was promoted to Denver division

Owens & Minor, Inc.: Larry Sapp was promoted to Denver division
vice president for this Richmond, Va.-based medical-surgical supply
distributor. He succeeds Virgil Alonzo, who resigned that position.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-5</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B039-204</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh56.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015404 text/html 65320
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:52:06 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:39 GMT
Content-length: 65133
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh56.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
HEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet <BR>
January 17, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>UNIV. OF PA DOCTORS SETTLE WITH GOVT. ON FALSE CLAIMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(515 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>8TH CIR. MODIFIES STANCE ON INSURERS' OBLIGATION TO ASSURE&nbsp;PAYMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(482 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>SC MAN ASKS 4TH CIR. TO REVIEW STATE HEALTH POOL'S HIV EXCLUSION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(594 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>SUP. CT. ASKED TO REVIEW PA'S CONDITIONS ON MEDICAID-FUNDED&nbsp;ABORTIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(815 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>U.S. SUP. CT. DENIES REVIEW OF INJUNCTION ON NE'S COVERAGE LIMITS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(773 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>MAINE MEDICAID PROGRAM AGREES TO LOOSEN NUTRITION SUPPLEMENT&nbsp;REQUIREMENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(331 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>9TH CIRCUIT REFUSES REHEARING ON ABORTION RECUSAL ISSUE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(713 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>PETITION SEEKS ANSWER ON STANDARD FOR CONSTITUTIONAL CHALLENGES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(775 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>6TH CIR. FINDS EXCESS INSURER LIABLE FOR MEDICAL EXPENSES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(438 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>4TH CIR.: INSURER MUST REVIEW DENIAL OF 'OUTSIDE SERVICE AREA'&nbsp;COVERAGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(359 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>NEW ENGLAND INSURER TARGETED FOR UNLAWFUL DISCOUNTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(560 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>AR BLUE CROSS ACCUSED OF CHEATING POLICYHOLDERS OUT OF DISCOUNTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(563 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>U.S. SUP. CT. DENIES REVIEW OF HMO VICARIOUS LIABILITY CLAIM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(404 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>PETITIONER SAYS ERISA AUTHORIZES INJUNCTIONS OF STATE COURT&nbsp;ACTIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1096 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>6TH CIRCUIT: CARDIAC SURGEON FAILED TO SHOW CONCERTED ACTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(337 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>DISCOVERY CONTINUES IN PRIVACY SUIT AGAINST INDIANA HOSPITAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(390 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 17, 1996

UNIV. OF PA DOCTORS SETTLE WITH GOVT. ON FALSE CLAIMS

     Without admitting wrongdoing, the approximately 600 doctors
of the University of Pennsylvania's medical faculty agreed to pay
$30 million to deflect further government action for false
Medicare claims revealed by auditors.  United States v.
University of Pennsylvania Health System (ED PA).

     According to published reports, audits of the Clinical
Practices of the University of Pennsylvania (CPUP), which
comprises Penn's faculty, revealed approximately $10 million in
false billing to Medicare from 1989 to mid-1994.  The false
claims were reported to be of two types: (1) "upcoding" " where
Medicare was billed for more expensive procedures or examinations
than those actually performed; and (2) billing by faculty doctors
for procedures actually performed by resident doctors in
training.  This latter category represents "double dipping,"
since Medicare already pays for teaching costs in its direct
reimbursement to hospitals.

     The settlement, entered into by the parties Dec. 12,
requires CPUP to pay the government $30,013,490 in reimbursement
for the false claims, with the remaining $20-odd million
constituting a monetary penalty.  In return, the government
releases CPUP from civil liability and potential exclusion from
participation in the Medicare and Medicaid programs.

     CPUP is not released from liability under the Internal
Revenue Code nor from criminal prosecution by the settlement.  In
fact, the settlement specifies that CPUP may not label the
settlement as punitive for the purpose of invoking a double
jeopardy defense to any criminal charges.  The settlement also
does not preclude the government from pursuing civil actions
against individual doctors.

     The settlement binds CPUP to continue the implementation of
a compliance program.  According to the compliance program
summary, "CPUP is committed to providing the highest quality
medical care to all patients in full compliance with billing
requirements."  The compliance program includes: (1) the
centralization of billing functions beginning with centralized
inpatient chart abstraction; (2) annual external audits and
continuous internal audits through the creation of a new Office
of Billing Compliance; (3) the continuation of the mandatory
education and training of physicians and billing personnel begun
in mid-1994; and (4) the establishment of two telephone lines
dedicated to billing information and reporting.

     However, the settlement may not be the last word on CPUP's
billing practices.  According to Doug Smith, a spokesman for
Pennsylvania Blue Shield, Medicare's fiscal intermediary in
Pennsylvania and New Jersey, Blue Shield has begun its own
intensive investigation of CPUP.  Smith said that its
investigation arose out of its normal provider utilization
reviews simultaneous with the government's investigation.  He
indicated that Blue Shield and the federal government have been
working together on the matter following receipt of a letter from
an anonymous tipster describing CPUP's fraudulent billing
practices.

     There is no timeframe for the completion of the
investigation, says Smith, but he said Blue Shield will be
thorough in an effort to recoup any monies overbilled.  According
to published reports, Blue Shield sells "Medigap" insurance under
its "Security 65" plan to 800,000 Pennsylvanians over age 65.
Smith says that Blue Shield investigators will look at claims
filed under that plan as well as those under its regular and HMO
plans.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 17, 1996

8TH CIR. MODIFIES STANCE ON INSURERS' OBLIGATION TO ASSURE
PAYMENT

     Health care insurers are not necessarily excused from
providing assurances of payment to plan participants under the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), a panel of the Eighth
Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals held recently.  Henderson et al. v.
Bodine Aluminum et al., No. 95-2469 (8th Cir.).

     The panel's amended opinion follows its earlier grant of a
preliminary injunction barring Bodine Aluminum, Inc. from
refusing to cover the high-dosage chemotherapy treatment (HDCT)
needed by breast cancer sufferer Karen E. Henderson, the wife of
a Bodine employee and beneficiary to its health care plan.  The
panel found the exclusion on HDCT for breast cancer contained in
Bodine's plan to be discriminatory because the HDCT was not
excluded for other cancers for which it is an accepted treatment.

     In its original Sept. 27 decision, the panel held, "We agree
with the appellees Healthy Alliance Life Insurance Company and
Alliance Blue Cross and Blue Shield that because they do not
employ Henderson's husband but merely provide insurance services
to Bodine Aluminum, Inc. and its health benefits program, they
are not responsible for giving the assurance of payment that [the
plaintiffs] seek.  The...appellees are not covered under the
ADA."

               However, the panel, in amending its opinion on Oct. 31,
backed off a clear conclusion on the insurers' responsibilities.
The amended opinion reads, "Appellees...argue that because they
do not employ Henderson's husband but merely provide insurance
services to Bodine Aluminum, Inc. and its health benefits
program, they are not responsible for giving the assurance of
payment that [the plaintiff] seeks.  We express no opinion on
this issue, leaving it instead to be decided in the first
instance by the district court."

     The panel went on to note that its findings of fact and
conclusions of law in granting a preliminary injunction to the
plaintiff were not binding on the district court "so that none of
the substantive issues discussed in this opinion are foreclosed
from being litigated on remand."

     When contacted by the Health Law , Henderson's attorney,
Sheldon Weinhaus of Weinhaus and Dobson in St. Louis, said he
moved for an amended opinion because he was "upset with the
exculpation of Blue Cross."

     "Insurers act far more than simply issuing an insurance
policy," said Weinhaus.  Weinhaus noted for example that insurers
often reserve the power to act as plan sponsors and change
benefit levels, making them de facto employers.

     Since Henderson's participation in the HDCT trials was
randomized, and she ultimately received only an "intensive"
regimen of chemotherapy that Blue Cross would have paid for,
Weinhaus advised that the district court asked the parties to
address why the action should not be dismissed as moot.  Weinhaus
said that the matter of damages remains at issue.  Also remaining
at issue is the question of what happens should the intensive
chemotherapy prove inadequate and Henderson needs the HDCT
treatment, said Weinhaus.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 17, 1996

SC MAN ASKS 4TH CIR. TO REVIEW STATE HEALTH POOL'S HIV EXCLUSION

     A Columbia, SC, man with AIDS on Dec. 4 asked the Fourth
Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals to review a federal judge's recent
ruling that the South Carolina Health Insurance Pool (SCHIP) does
not violate the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) by refusing
coverage for persons with HIV and AIDS.  Givens v. South Carolina
Health Insurance Pool et al., No. 95-2791 (4th Cir.).

     On July 14, U.S. District Judge Dennis Shedd said plaintiff
Samuel P. Givens Jr. could not challenge the SCHIP's restriction
under the ADA because ADA Section 501(c) bars the act from being
construed to prohibit "underwriting..., classifying..., and
administering...risks that are based on or not inconsistent with
State law."  The judge, who did not reach the Pool's claim that
it is not an ADA-covered entity, said the statutory decision to
exclude people with HIV and AIDS "is essentially an underwriting
decision," and that "HIV and AIDS are legitimate risk
classifications for underwriting purposes."

     In his appeal, Givens, who was substituted for now-deceased
original plaintiff John Doe in 1994, says the ruling is wrong
because HIV/AIDS is the only disease singled out by SCHIP.  He
adds that the ruling was entered despite the state's failure to
submit supporting actuarial data that persons with HIV/AIDS are
more costly to care for than those with cancer, heart disease or
other ailments.  He observes the irony that while he was denied
admittance, the Pool was created in 1989 by the South Carolina
General Assembly expressly to provide coverage "to all residents
of South Carolina denied insurance due to a preexisting health
condition."

     "Since it began operating, the Pool has followed the
statutory mandate to exclude people with HIV/AIDS from coverage
for medical care of any condition," said Givens' Fourth Circuit
petition.  "The Pool has no knowledge of any research undertaken
by the South Carolina General Assembly to estimate how many South
Carolina residents have HIV/AIDS and would qualify for Pool
coverage and the impact their inclusion on the Pool would have."
The petition said SCHIP has yet to conduct such research itself.

     "It is not surprising that the Pool offered no evidence to
justify the exclusion of people with HIV/AIDS alone because there
is no evidence that could ever support the exclusion," Givens
argued.  "Study after study has shown that the costs of treating
HIV/AIDS are comparable to, and oftentimes less than, the costs
of treating other medical conditions.  While not a substitute for
sound actuarial data, these studies are instructive and
demonstrate that there is no basis for excluding only people with
HIV/AIDS from the Pool."

     Givens estimated that although the lifetime costs of
treating HIV/AIDS averages in the "$60-80,000 range" and is not
covered by SCHIP, all other diseases are covered, including end
stage renal disease, "estimated at $175,000," multiple sclerosis,
"$207,000," and cancers, which he said "generally cost $114,000
for a lifetime of treatment."  He offered no comparison of the
rates of frequency between HIV/AIDS and the other ailments.

     He concluded by reiterating that the Pool is a covered
entity of the ADA by virtue of the ADA's self-stated application
to "public entit[ies]" including "any department, agency, ...or
other instrumentality of a state," 42 U.S.C. Section 12115(1)(B).

     Givens is represented by Peter Tepley of Turnipseed &
Associates, and Doak Wolfe, both of Columbia, SC; and by Marc
Elovitz, Matthew Coles and Ruth Harlow of the American Civil
Liberties Union Foundation in New York City.  SCHIP is
represented by Douglas McKay Jr. and Ruskin C. Foster of McKay,
McKay, Henry & Foster, also in Columbia.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 17, 1996

SUP. CT. ASKED TO REVIEW PA'S CONDITIONS ON MEDICAID-FUNDED
ABORTIONS

     The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, by petition for writ of
certiorari filed Nov. 22, seeks Supreme Court review of a Third
Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals decision invalidating
Pennsylvania's reporting and physician certification requirements
for Medicaid-funded abortions.  Knoll et al. v. Elizabeth
Blackwell Health Center for Women et al., No. 95-820 (U.S.).

     The circuit panel had adjudged that the requirements were
preempted by the 1994 version of the Hyde Amendment, a rider to
appropriations legislation that has governed in various forms
Medicaid coverage of abortions since 1976.

     The petitioners assert that the Third Circuit panel "upset
the balance of federal-state relations in a way which justifies
the Court's review" by "extend[ing] an unwarranted deference to
the decisions of a sub-cabinet level official" and by "allow[ing]
those decisions to override an otherwise valid state statute."

     Citing the U.S. Supreme Court's opinion in Gregory v.
Ashcroft, 501 U.S. 452 (1991), the petitioners maintain that if
Congress intended to alter the constitutional balance between the
federal government and the states, it must do so clearly and
unequivocally.  The petitioners note that the panel agreed that
the Hyde Amendment is silent with respect to the reporting
requirements at issue, but that the majority looked to
"bureaucratic fiat" to discern congressional intent.

     The petitioners also argue that the Third Circuit panel's
decision raised the ancillary issues of the deference due "an
agency position first asserted in litigation," and whether the
Secretary of Health and Human Services has any rulemaking
authority under the Hyde Amendment.

     In their Dec. 19 brief in opposition, the respondents argue
that the Third Circuit panel correctly affirmed the striking down
of Pennsylvania's reporting and certification requirements as
conflicting with its "obligation under federal law to fund all
abortions for which funding is not proscribed by Congress."  This
ruling is consistent with those of six other circuits and of
numerous district courts that have not been appealed or for which
appellate rulings have not yet come down, say the respondents,
the petitioners' "attempts to manufacture the appearance of a
circuit conflict" notwithstanding.

     The respondents also deny that the panel based its decision
on "an agency interpretation first asserted in litigation."
Instead, the petitioners argue that the decision was made "on the
basis of a long-standing, properly promulgated federal
regulation" that was entitled to deference.

               Finally, the respondents assert that "because this case
revolves in large part around the peculiarities of Pennsylvania
law, a decision by this Court on the merits will have an
extremely limited application outside of Pennsylvania."  As a
result, "it would be improvident for the Court to use its limited
resources at this time to decide this case, say the respondents.

     The instant litigation had its genesis when the Elizabeth
Blackwell Health Center, a provider of first trimester abortions,
and its two co-appellees, Greater Women's Medical Fund, a
provider of general health care services to the indigent, and
CHOICE, a health care information hot line, challenged those
portions of Pennsylvania's Abortion Control Act that placed
reporting requirements on women seeking Medicaid-funded abortions
for pregnancies arising from rape or incest.  Also challenged
were those provisions of the Act which require that a physician
without a pecuniary interest in performing abortions verify that
carrying the pregnancy to term would place the woman's life in
danger.

     The district court had granted summary judgment in favor of
Blackwell, noting that the 1994 version of the Hyde Amendment
lacked the reporting and physician certification requirements of
the Pennsylvania statute. The district court interpreted the
omission to indicate Congress's intent to eliminate these
requirements.

     A majority of the Third Circuit panel agreed that the
provisions of the Act at issue were preempted by the Hyde
Amendment.  The majority rejected the district court's conclusion
that by omitting reporting and physician certification
requirements from the 1994 Hyde Amendment, Congress intended to
prohibit these types of requirements.  However, the majority
deferred to the Health Care Financing Administration's
interpretation of the Hyde Amendment " that any state law not
including a waiver of the rape or incest reporting requirement in
cases where the patient is unable to comply for physical or
psychological reasons " unlawfully restricted access to abortion
services.

     Also given deference by the panel was the HCFA's
interpretation that one " and only one " physician need attest
that a patient's life would be endangered by carrying a pregnancy
to term.

     Representing the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania is John G.
Knorr III, Chief Deputy Attorney General and Chief, Litigation
Section, Harrisburg, PA.  Representing the respondents are Linda
J. Wharton and Susan J. Frietsche of the Women's Law Project,
Philadelphia; Mary A. McLaughlin and Cynthia L. Randall of
Dechert Price & Rhoads, Philadelphia; Kathryn Kolbert and Eve C.
Gartner of the Center for Reproductive Law and Policy, New York
City; and Seth Kreimer of the University of Pennsylvania School
of Law, Philadelphia.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 17, 1996

U.S. SUP. CT. DENIES REVIEW OF INJUNCTION ON NE'S COVERAGE LIMITS

     The U.S. Supreme Court on Jan. 16 denied the State of
Nebraska's petition for review of a lower court's decision
enjoining it from enforcing its abortion coverage limits.  Nelson
et al. v. Orr et al., No. 95-766 (U.S.).

     In his Dec. 7 brief in opposition to the state's petition,
Dr. G. William Orr, a Nebraska physician, pointed out that the
Eighth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals' decision "is in complete
accord with every standing decision of the federal appellate and
district courts" to decide the question of whether "state
Medicaid programs must cover abortions for which federal funding
is not proscribed."

     Among the cases cited by Orr were Elizabeth Blackwell Health
Ctr. for Women v. Knoll, 61 F.3d 170 (3rd Cir. 1995) and Hern v.
Beye, 57 F.3d 906 (10th Cir. 1995).

     Further, Orr argued that these federal court decisions are
"supported by the structure of the federal Medicaid Act"
(Title XIX) and the Court's decision in Harris v. McRae, 448 U.S.
297 (1980).  In McRae, the Court rejected the claim that a state
had the obligation to unilaterally cover medically necessary
abortions for which federal funding was being withheld.  Orr
argued that this decision implies "that Title XIX requires states
to cover those medically necessary abortions for which the
funding obligation is not unilateral...and for which federal
funding is available under the Hyde Amendment."

     Additionally, Orr pointed out that the Health Care Financing
Administration, the federal agency charged with overseeing the
Medicaid program, had issued a directive interpreting the change
in the Hyde Amendment in a manner consistent with the Eighth
Circuit panel's ruling.  That interpretation is "entitled to
substantial deference" by the Court, said Orr.

     Finally, Orr argued that the courts below correctly ruled
that Title XIX created a federal right for which 42 U.S.C.
Section 1983 provides a remedy.  Orr distinguished Suter v.
Artist M., 503 U.S. 347 (1992), where the court found no private
right of action attached to the Adoption Assistance and Child
Welfare Act of 1980, "because no such privately enforceable right
was 'unambiguously' conferred by Congress."  Orr said that Suter
is inapplicable here since "the obligation of participating
states to provide Medicaid coverage for those medically necessary
abortions for which federal funding is available is unambiguous."

     The state of Nebraska had filed suit in the name of Gov. E.
Benjamin Nelson, after receipt of a letter from HCFA announcing a
change in the Hyde Amendment, an annual appropriations bill rider
restricting federal reimbursement for abortions.  That letter
included HCFA's interpretation that the change mandated state
funding for abortions of pregnancies resulting from rape or
incest.  At the time of receipt of the letter, Nebraska's
Medicaid Manual limited state funding to abortions where the
woman's life was in danger.

     The district court granted summary judgment in favor of the
respondents on Nov. 4, 1994, and enjoined enforcement of the
Medicaid Manual's abortion coverage limits.  A panel of the
Eighth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals affirmed the district
court's decision on July 25, 1995, holding that Title XIX
mandated that the states fund all medically necessary procedures
for which federal funding is available.

     In their Nov. 14 petition for writ of certiorari, the
petitioners asserted that the Eighth Circuit failed to recognize
Nebraska's authority under Title XIX to create coverage plans
"which are reasonable and consistent with the objectives of the
Medicaid Act."  Quoting the court's decision in Beal v. Doe, 432
U.S. 438, 444 (1992), the petitioners maintained that "[n]othing
in Title XIX requires participating states to fund every
procedure that falls within the delineated categories of medical
care."

     The petitioners added that the Eighth Circuit decision is
irreconcilable with a line of cases, including Zbaraz v. Quern,
596 F.2d 196 (7th Cir. 1979) and Preterm, Inc. v. Dukakis, 591
F.2d 121 (1st Cir. 1979), which recognize a state's discretion to
construct Medicaid plans to suit their own circumstances.

     The petitioners also advanced the argument that the court in
Harris "implicitly rejected the contention that the Hyde
Amendment substantively amended Title XIX."

     Finally, the petitioners asserted that the supremacy clause
does not give the respondents the right, under 42 U.S.C. Section
1983, to nullify a state law.

     "Section 1983 was not intended to give a cause of action to
individuals where the only "wrong" committed by a state is
misapprehending the precise location of the boundaries between
state and federal power," the petitioners said.

     Representing Orr were Simon Heller and Janet Benshoof of the
Center for Reproductive Law and Policy, New York City, and
Lawrence I. Batt of Batt & Associates, Omaha, NE.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 17, 1996

MAINE MEDICAID PROGRAM AGREES TO LOOSEN NUTRITION SUPPLEMENT
REQUIREMENTS

     Avoiding the progression of a legal battle to the First
Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals, the Maine Department of Human
Services on Nov. 14 agreed to expand its state Medicaid coverage
to include liquid dietary supplements for clinically malnourished
AIDS patients who do not yet use a feeding tube.  Fisher et al.
v. Sheehan (previously, Hines v. Sheehan), No. 94-326-P-H (D ME).

     In September, the attorney for now-deceased plaintiff
Raymond Hines filed a notice of appeal with the First Circuit,
challenging U.S. District Judge D. Brock Hornby's July ruling
affirming the Maine Medicaid rule governing supplement coverage.
Hines was previously denied Medicaid coverage for supplements he
was taking.

     The trial judge said that although the state failed "even to
articulate a plausible reason" for limiting liquid dietary
supplement coverage only to persons with end stage renal disease
while denying coverage for those diagnosed as clinically
malnourished, such a requirement could not be found to violate
the Americans With Disabilities Act, the federal Medicaid Statute
and regulations (42 U.S.C. Sections1396, 1396r-8; 42 C.F.R.
Section 440.230[c]), or the U.S. Constitution's equal protection
clause.

     Under a stipulation of dismissal filed with the First
Circuit by both parties, the Department has agreed to amend its
Maine Medical Assistance Manual to provide coverage of liquid
nutrition to Medicaid recipients who are: "A) Currently
malnourished...; and B) At significant risk for malnourishment
secondary to an underlying medical condition...."

     The Department was instructed to propose such amendments to
current rules by Dec. 31, 1995, and to "promptly identify any
current Medicaid recipients who have a request pending (including
any pending appeals) for coverage of liquid nutrition.  The
state, which did not admit to any liability in entering the
agreement, will pay $4,105 in legal costs and filing fees and pay
substitute plaintiff William Herbert Fisher $300.

     Hines was represented by Jack Comart of Pine Tree Legal
Assistance, Inc.  Andrew M. Gattine of the Maine Department of
the Attorney General represented the state.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 17, 1996

9TH CIRCUIT REFUSES REHEARING ON ABORTION RECUSAL ISSUE

     The Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on Nov. 27 rejected
the suggestion for a rehearing en banc in the matter of a judge's
refusal to recuse himself from an appeal of two abortion protest
convictions.  Feminist Women's Health Center et al. v. Codispoti
et al., No. 90-35266 (9th Cir.)

     The panel members had polled all active judges of the
circuit, and none requested a vote on whether to rehear the
matter en banc.

     The plaintiffs, in their Nov. 21 motion for rehearing,
asserted the importance of the question of "whether a judge
should recuse himself in a case concerning the rights of those
who provide abortions, who has written that Catholic judges
should ignore controlling judicial precedent if following
precedent would support abortions and who has also expressed
hostility in his writings toward the providers of abortions."

     The plaintiffs said that in denying their earlier motion for
recusal, Judge John T. Noonan Jr. incorrectly construed the issue
to be his membership in the Catholic church.  Rather, the
plaintiffs contended that the issue was whether a judge, based on
his specific writings, "can follow his judicial oath rather than
his published views."

     The plaintiffs opened their clinic (the Center) in Everett,
WA, in 1983.  The named defendants began protesting at the site
before the opening of business and engaged in harassing tactics
during the eight months the center operated in Everett.

     Beyond pickets and harassing phone calls, the clinic was set
on fire on three separate occasions; after the last and most
severe fire, the plaintiffs opted not to reopen.  Co-defendant
Curtis Beseda was subsequently convicted for setting the fires.

     The plaintiffs had sued in state court to obtain an
injunction against the protesters.  (The third clinic fire had
been set in the midst of the April 1994 trial.)  The state trial
judge granted an injunction barring the defendants from engaging
in illegal conduct; the order proved ultimately unnecessary, as
the Center never reopened.

     In 1986, the plaintiffs then brought the instant suit under
Sections1962(c)-(d) in the U.S. District Court for the Western
District of Washington, alleging predicate acts of arson and
Hobbs Act extortion.  The jury concluded that Beseda had violated
Section 1962(c), and that Beseda, Dottie Roberts and Sharon
Codispoti conspired to commit the substantive violation.  The
court divided the attorney's fees equally among the defendants.

     Roberts and Codispoti argued on appeal that the plaintiffs
could have raised the RICO allegations in their state court
action; the Ninth Circuit agreed in reversing the judgment.  "We
conclude that the RICO claims were ripe at the time the state
court judgment was filed, and therefore, the Center could have
brought them in the earlier trial," the panel wrote.

      The trial court had rejected the defense's res judicata
arguments, concluding that the RICO claims were based on
different infringements of the plaintiff's rights and sought
different redress, and that the RICO claims were not mature at
the time of the state trial because the plaintiffs had not yet
decided not to reopen.

     However, the Ninth Circuit panel, by decision dated Aug. 27,
held that the appellants satisfied the four requisite elements
for res judicata.  The panel ruled that both lawsuits concerned
identical subject matter, parties and "quality of the persons for
or against whom the claim is made."  The panel also determined
that the two suits concerned the same cause of action after
concluding, in an admittedly closer call, that the suits involved
infringement of the same right.

     "In essence, the Center is merely seeking remedies under a
new legal theory: treble damages under RICO for the same conduct
on behalf of appellants," the panel wrote.  "This does not
establish an independent cause of action."  The panel reversed
the decision of the district court on that basis.

     Judge Noonan, a member of the panel, denied the plaintiff's
motion for recusal Nov. 7, pointing to the provision of
Article VI of the U.S. Constitution, which holds that "no
religious Test shall ever be required as a Qualification to any
Office or public trust under the United States."

     Representing the plaintiffs were Kristin Houser of
Schroeter, Goldmark & Bender and William J. Bender of Skellenger,
Bender, Mathias & Bender, both of Seattle.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 17, 1996

PETITION SEEKS ANSWER ON STANDARD FOR CONSTITUTIONAL CHALLENGES

     South Dakota's governor and attorney general on Nov. 29
filed a petition for writ of certiorari with the U.S. Supreme
Court, maintaining that the Eighth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals
erred in striking down South Dakota's one-parent notification
requirement for minors seeking abortions.  Janklow et al. v.
Planned Parenthood et al., No. 95-856 (U.S.).

     The petitioners assert that granting the writ will resolve
the disagreement among the circuits on the precedent to follow in
challenges to the constitutionality of abortion statutes.

     In striking down South Dakota's parental notification
requirements, the Eighth Circuit panel applied the "undue burden"
standard for determining the facial constitutionality of an
abortion law set forth in Planned Parenthood of Southeastern
Pennsylvania v. Casey, 112 S.Ct. 2791 (1992).  The court in Casey
held that an abortion law is unconstitutional if it operates as a
substantial obstacle to the choice to undergo an abortion "in a
large fraction of cases in which [it] is relevant, ...[i]t is an
undue burden, and is therefore invalid."

     Prior to Casey, the applicable precedent was the strict
burden placed on challengers to constitutionality enunciated in
United States v. Salerno, 481 U.S. 739 (1979) ("the challenger
must establish that no set of circumstances exist under which the
Act would be valid").

               The petitioners note that the Fifth Circuit U.S. Court of
Appeals, in Barnes v. Moore, 970 F.2d 12 (1992), explicitly
refused to interpret Casey as overruling Salerno.

     The petitioners also note that granting the writ would allow
the Supreme Court to decide the important question of whether a
judicial bypass is required in a single-parent notice statute.
The court, in Ohio v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health, 497
U.S. 502, 510 (1990), said that the question of the need for
bypass procedures in parental notification statutes has not been
decided, noted the petitioners.  Answering this question, say the
petitioners, would allow state legislatures "[t]o function
properly in an area which touches on constitutional rights."

     The petitioners also argue that the Eighth Circuit panel's
decision disregards the "rational relationship" test for notice
statutes subscribed to by a court majority in Hodgson v.
Minnesota, 497 U.S. 417 (1990).  In Hodgson, the court examined a
two-parent notification statute in terms of its "rational
relationship" with legitimate state interests.

     Finally, even if the undue burden standard of Casey is
adjudged to be applicable, the petitioners maintain that the
notice requirement does not place an undue burden on minors
seeking abortions.  First, the statute gives no veto power to
parents, say the petitioners.

     Second, the petitioners argue that the Eighth Circuit panel
erred in (1) "treating South Dakota's one-parent notice statute
as equivalent to a two-parent statute"; and (2) "extend[ing] the
rationale of Casey for striking down spousal notice to the issue
of one-parent notice with regard to 'mature minors.'"

     Third, South Dakota's exception to the notice requirement
for minors who are abused by their parents "provides better
protections for abuse victims than are available in judicial
bypass states," argue the petitioners.

     Fourth, the petitioners take the stance that the struck-down
statute would "maintain the confidentiality of the abortion
requested."

     Last, there was no evidence before the Eighth Circuit panel
supporting "the existence of a large fraction of minors who would
be unduly burdened by [the] South Dakota parental notice
statute," the petitioners say.

     The instant controversy arose when the U.S. District Court
for the District of South Dakota ruled that the parental
notification provision of South Dakota's abortion law was
unconstitutional because it did not allow for mature minors or
for those immature minors whose "best interests" do not include
parental involvement to bypass the requirement.

               In affirming the district court's decision, the Eighth
Circuit panel held that the state had no legitimate interest in
"placing a substantial obstacle" in the path of these categories
of minors when they seek "pre-viability" abortions.  The law's
exception to the notification requirement for abused or neglected
minors did not adequately bypass the notification requirement
because it did not protect the minor's confidentiality, said the
panel.  Additionally, the panel observed that the exception did
not provide access to an independent decisionmaker for a
determination on the minor's maturity and on whether it was in
the minor's "best interests" to involve a parent.

     South Dakota's abortion law, enacted in 1993, prohibited,
with some exceptions, the performance of abortions on
unemancipated minors prior to 48 hours after written notice was
delivered to at least one parent.

     Representing the petitioners are Mark W. Barnett, Attorney
General, State of South Dakota; and John P. Guhin and Janine
Kern, Deputy Attorneys General, Pierre, SD.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 17, 1996

6TH CIR. FINDS EXCESS INSURER LIABLE FOR MEDICAL EXPENSES

     An excess insurer is liable for $128,232 in medical expenses
incurred by a dependent covered by an employer's self-funded
medical benefit plan, the Sixth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals
ruled Nov. 29, rejecting the insurer's interpretation of the
contract provision governing coverage for disabled beneficiaries.
Thorn Apple Valley Inc. v. Allianz Life Insurance Co. of North
America, No. 94-1841 (6th Cir.).

     Thorn Apple Valley sponsored and administered a self-funded
benefit plan for its employees.  Under an excess risk policy,
Allianz Life Insurance Co. was obligated to provide coverage
above a $200,000 deductible or attachment point for 1987 and a
$75,000 deductible for 1988.  An employee's husband, Ralph
Hoffer, was added as a dependent in 1981.  Their marriage
certificate described him as "unemployed-handicapped" because he
was blind due to insulin-dependent brittle diabetes mellitus.  He
enjoyed activities in and outside their home until late 1987,
when he was hospitalized for end-stage kidney disease.  Hoffer
died in 1988 in the hospital.

     Thorn Apple was billed about $650,000 for Hoffer's medical
expenses and notified Allianz it planned to file a claim under
the excess risk policy.  Thorn Apple then decided Hoffer was
ineligible for benefits because the plan excluded dependents who
are "in a disabled condition" when they initially become eligible
for coverage.  Thorn Apple then reversed its position, deciding
Hoffer was covered, but Allianz denied liability.

     A diversity-based complaint was filed in U.S. District Court
for the Eastern District of Michigan.  After a bench trial, Judge
Lawrence P. Zatkoff ruled that Hoffer was not disabled within the
meaning of the policy, ordered Allianz to reimburse $128,232 to
Thorn Apple and awarded post-judgment interest under federal and
state law.

     The Sixth Circuit affirmed the award but modified by
allowing only federal, not state, post-judgment interest in an
opinion by Judge James L. Ryan.  The panel found Hoffer eligible
for benefits because he was not in a "disabled condition" when
first covered by the plan, despite blindness and diabetes.  The
unambiguous language of the plan provides that a person is
disabled only if confined by illness or injury in a hospital,
institution or at home and if unable to carry on any substantial
part of customary activities for someone of a similar age and
gender.  Hoffer did not fit that definition, the panel held.

     Next, the panel found no error in admission of hospital
bills as business records.

     Finally, the panel held that Judge Zatkoff had improperly
awarded both federal and state post-judgment interest, thus
creating an impermissible double recovery.  Although it was a
diversity-based action, only the federal statutory interest
provision applies, the panel found.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 17, 1996

4TH CIR.: INSURER MUST REVIEW DENIAL OF 'OUTSIDE SERVICE AREA'
COVERAGE

     A trial judge must have an adequate administrative record
when reviewing the discretion of a health plan administrator
under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, even when the
plan gives the administrator sole authority to determine the
eligibility of beneficiaries under the plan, the Fourth Circuit
U.S. Court of Appeals ruled Dec. 4.  Bernstein v. CapitalCare
Inc., No. 94-2448 (4th Cir.).

     Philip Bernstein filed suit to recover the medical expenses
his late brother Jeffrey Bernstein incurred for treatment of AIDS
while the brother was in New York and outside the area covered by
CapitalCare, a health maintenance organization.  The plan said it
would not cover treatment outside the Washington, DC, area if the
need for such treatment was foreseeable.

     "Whether [the brother's] need for care was reasonably
foreseeable is a factual determination that must be supported by
competent medical evidence" that was not before the court when it
made its ruling, the panel said.  The panel said the
administrative record developed by CapitalCare before it
rejected the claim was so skimpy that the trial court had to rely
on facts not before it.

     Because the court had to review CapitalCare's decision under
an abuse of discretion standard since the plan gave it sole
discretion to determine eligibility for benefits, "the
administrative record must document the decision-making process.
If the evidence before the plan administrator is inadequate, the
district court should remand the case to the administrator to
receive additional evidence and to make a new determination."

     The panel further emphasized that the deference the trial
judge should accord the decision depends on how much of a
conflict the administrator has.  In this case, "Capital Care
operates under a conflict of interest when it makes benefit
determinations, because it both administers the plan and pays for
benefits received by its members.  In other words, if CapitalCare
denies health benefits to its members, it generally profits by
the amount of expenses avoided."

     Bernstein's estate is represented by Richard Carter and
Jacqueline Bennett of Hudgins Carter & Coleman in Alexandria, VA.
Charles Steele and Mary Atchley Jester of Foley & Lardner in
Washington, DC represent CapitalCare.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 17, 1996

NEW ENGLAND INSURER TARGETED FOR UNLAWFUL DISCOUNTS

     A class action was filed against United Health Plans of New
England in U.S. District Court in Boston Dec. 5, alleging
deception in the secret negotiation of discounts with hospitals
and health care providers and the failure to pass those discounts
on to the insureds.  Powers et ux. v. United Health Plans of New
England, No. 95-12633 (D MA).

     The suit maintains that this practice caused insureds to
overpay their required copayment for medical procedures.

     Lead plaintiffs Lisa and Patrick Powers, who are insured by
United Health Plans of New England, brought suit on their behalf
and on behalf of class members insured from Jan. 1, 1990, through
Dec. 31, 1995.

     The Powerses purchased health care insurance from United for
the period from March 1993 through Oct. 1, 1994.  Lisa Powers
underwent a Caesarean section on Aug. 9, 1994, for which she was
billed $3,900 by her physician.  The insurance agreement with
United required that the insured pay 30% of the charges and the
Powerses paid the physician $1,170.  The plaintiffs were unaware
of the pre-existing fee arrangement United had negotiated with
the physician, whereby he had agreed to a total payment of
$2,100.  United paid the difference between what the plaintiffs
had paid and the secret fee schedule the physician had accepted,
resulting in United's paying $930 " 44% of the total rather than
the 70% provided for in the contract.

     The plaintiffs allege that as a result of United's unfair
and deceptive acts, they and the class paid more than the 30%
copayments they were obligated to pay according to their
contracts.  Plaintiffs allege violations of ERISA Section
502(a)(1)(B), 29 U.S.C. Section 1132(a)(1)(B), claims for
benefits; ERISA Section 409(a), 29 U.S.C. Sections1109(a) and
1106(b), breach of fiduciary duty; breach of contract; deceit and
misrepresentation; and unjust enrichment.  Plaintiffs also seek a
declaratory judgment and an accounting.

     The suit alleges that United breached its fiduciary duty to
class members by negotiating discounts with hospitals and health
care providers that applied only to United's portion of the
charges and did not benefit the class members.  Thus, class
members paid amounts in excess of what they were contractually
obligated to pay and United retained the difference, violating
the terms of its own agreements.

     The suit further claims that United has recorded payments
against certain class members' lifetime, annual or procedure
maximums, in excess of what United actually paid, resulting in
restriction of benefits to which certain class members should be
entitled.  In keeping the discounts secret, United allegedly
misled class members and hid the fact that it was using its
fiduciary position for its own exclusive benefit.  As a result of
United's breaches of fiduciary duty, class members ended up
paying millions of dollars more in health care costs than they
were contractually obligated to pay.

     The plaintiffs seek a declaratory judgment, pursuant to
ERISA Section 502(a)(1)(B), 29 U.S.C. Section 1132(a)(1)(B), as
to their entitlement to benefits of discounts negotiated and
obtained by United.  They also seek certification of class
status, an accounting for damages and economic harm allegedly
caused by United, award of damages for overpayment of insurance
copayments, award of prejudgment, and post-judgment interest, and
award of reasonable attorneys' fees.

     The plaintiffs are represented by Norman Berman, Glen
DeValerio and Jeffrey C. Block of Berman, DeValerio & Pease in
Boston.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 17, 1996

AR BLUE CROSS ACCUSED OF CHEATING POLICYHOLDERS OUT OF DISCOUNTS

     Arkansas Blue Cross and Blue Shield is cheating policy
holders by not passing along discounts it negotiates with
hospitals, clinics and other health care providers, contend two
policyholders in a class action filed Nov. 15 in federal court in
Little Rock.  Hause et al. v. Arkansas Blue Cross and Blue
Shield, No. LR-C-95-729 (ED AR).

     The suit contends that policyholders and others covered
under plans governed by the Employee Retirement Income Security
Act of 1974 are forced to pay disproportionate shares of hospital
costs because the mutual insurance company negotiates discounts
for itself but not for policyholders.  As a result, the suit
contends, policyholders pay their copayment share on the basis of
the full hospital bill while the company pays only a discounted
share of the bill.

     Among other allegations, the plaintiffs assert the company
violates the civil provisions of the Racketeer Influenced and
Corrupt Organizations Act, as well as ERISA and its fiduciary
duties.  The plaintiffs also contend the company was guilty of
misrepresentation to policyholders and concealed "its tortious,
contract-breaching, statutorily prohibited, inequitable conduct
from the class," which is defined as "all individuals who are or
were participants, insureds/certificate holders under sickness
and accident benefit plans maintained by an employer or employee
organization constituting employee welfare benefit plans covered
by ERISA (within the meaning of ERISA Section 3(1) and 4,
29 U.S.C. Sections 1002(1) and 1003), which plans were written,
underwritten or administered" by the company.

     The suit asserts that under a typical plan, the company
would cover 80% of the costs, and the policyholder would pay 20%.
The plaintiffs allege that the company would negotiate discounts
with hospitals and clinics but that the discounts would not apply
to the insureds' copayments, meaning that policyholders would pay
the full 20% of the total bill, but the company would pay only
80% of the negotiated, discounted portion it covered.  This had
the effect of increasing the burden on the policyholders beyond
the 20% they were obliged to pay, the suit contends.

     The plaintiffs allege that similar systems are used in at
least 13 other states and the District of Columbia.  However,
they are not seeking to represent possible class members.

     Arkansas Blue Cross breached its fiduciary duties, assert
the plaintiffs, because it negotiated discounts for itself but
not the beneficiaries; as a result, it paid less than the
proportion of the actual bill it contracted to pay.  The suit
also contends that the company kept the discounts secret from the
beneficiaries, and recorded the shares paid by beneficiaries
against their "lifetime maximums or procedure maximums in excess
of what Arkansas Blue Cross paid."

     The plaintiffs further allege that the company violated the
RICO Act by receiving "income derived directly or indirectly from
a pattern of racketeering activity."

     The suit asks the court to declare a class action as soon as
possible, award compensatory damages based on the alleged
overpayments by policyholders because of the discounts, triple
damages under the RICO allegation, prejudgment interest, a full
accounting of the unwarranted profits and disgorgement of those
profits, and an injunction requiring the company to disclose the
discounts and pass along the benefits to the beneficiaries.

     The plaintiffs are represented by David S. Mitchell of the
Little Rock firm of McHenry and Mitchell and by Jay Youngdahl of
the firm of Youngdahl and Sadin of Albuquerque.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 17, 1996

U.S. SUP. CT. DENIES REVIEW OF HMO VICARIOUS LIABILITY CLAIM

     The U.S. Supreme Court on Dec. 4 denied the petition of a
health maintenance organization seeking preemption of the
vicarious malpractice claim filed against it by two of its
subscribers.  U.S. Healthcare, Inc. et al. v. Dukes et al.,
No. 95-442 (U.S.).

     In its Sept. 15 petition for writ of certiorari, U.S.
Healthcare, Inc. (USHC) asserted that a panel of the Third
Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals erred in remanding the plaintiffs'
vicarious malpractice action against it to state court.  USHC
argued that removal to federal court was required under the
complete preemption doctrine of the Employee Retirement and
Income Security Act.

     In their Oct. 11 response brief, the respondents argued that
remand to state court was proper because their complaint was
based on only state law negligence, malpractice and agency
theories.

     The litigation arose after the deaths of two individuals
being cared for by USHC network providers.  One, Darryl Dukes,
died with a highly elevated blood sugar level that allegedly
could have been diagnosed with a timely blood test.  The other
was the stillborn infant daughter of USHC subscriber Linda
Visconti.  Visconti developed symptoms of preeclampsia during
pregnancy, but her obstetrician allegedly did not react to those
symptoms.

     Both plaintiffs brought medical malpractice suits against
the various providers involved.  They also alleged medical
malpractice against USHC under ostensible and/or actual agency
theory.  The actions were removed to federal district court in
Philadelphia on the motion of USHC.

     The district court subsequently dismissed both claims
against on the basis that they were "related to" an ERISA plan
and thus were preempted by ERISA.

     The Third Circuit reversed the district court's dismissal of
the claims against USHC and remanded them to state court.  The
panel said that preemption hinged on whether the claims were
filed "to recover benefits due...under the terms of [the] plan,
to enforce...rights under the terms of the plan, or to
clarify...rights to future benefits under the terms of the plan."
The panel ruled that the claims were filed strictly over the
quality of the health care received under the plan and thus fell
into none of these categories.

               Dukes and Visconti were represented by Attarah B. Feenane
and Stephen C. Josel of Stephen C. Josel and Associates, P.C.,
Philadelphia.  U.S. Healthcare was represented by John T. Kelley
of Kelley, Wardel & Craig, Haddonfield, NJ, and David F. Simon of
its corporate legal staff.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 17, 1996

PETITIONER SAYS ERISA AUTHORIZES INJUNCTIONS OF STATE COURT
ACTIONS

     An employee welfare plan fiduciary in a Nov. 27 petition for
writ of certiorari claimed that the courts below erred in
declining to enjoin the Commonwealth of Virginia from subjecting
the plan to its statutory and regulatory requirements.  Employers
Resource Management Co., Inc. et al. v. Shannon et al., No. 95-
823 (U.S.).

     In its brief in opposition filed Dec. 19, the Commonwealth
argued that the petitioners' stance "would place state insurance
regulations into turmoil, and would effectively jettison
fundamental principles of federalism and comity."

     Employers Resource Management Co. (ERM) provides "co-
employment" services to client employers in 13 states.  As part
of its agreements with the client employers, ERM assumes
responsibility for employee payroll and benefits in return for
control over employee training, performance, discipline and other
areas.  ERM maintains an employee benefit plan that provides
medical, dental, accidental death and dismemberment, and
occupational injury benefits and others for its "co-employees."

     The Commonwealth of Virginia, through its State Corporation
Commission and Commissioner of Insurance, notified ERM that it
intended to move to enjoin ERM from operating in Virginia on the
basis that ERM's benefit plan was a multiemployer welfare
arrangement (MEWA) subject to Virginia's insurance laws and
regulations.  ERM had apparently failed to obtain the license to
operate required by the Commonwealth.  ERM filed its own suit in
federal district court, seeking to enjoin the Commonwealth from
taking that action.  In its action, ERM argued that its plan was
an employee welfare benefit plan under ERISA and was not a MEWA.
ERM contended that the federal courts had the jurisdiction to
enjoin any state action in violation of ERISA.

     The Commonwealth responded to ERM's action with a motion to
dismiss, arguing that (1) the injunctive relief sought by ERM was
barred by the Anti-Injunction Act, 28 U.S.C. Section 2283;
(2) the district court must abstain, pursuant to Younger v.
Harris, 401 U.S. 37 (1971), from exercising its jurisdiction; and
(3) ERM's plan was a MEWA subject to its laws and regulations.

     On Nov. 22, 1994, the district court granted the
Commonwealth's motion to dismiss.  While it did not reach the
merits of ERM's argument that its employee benefit plan is an
ERISA plan, the district court did rule that ERM did not make a
"facially conclusive" ERISA preemption claim.  It also ruled that
ERM's claim for injunctive and declaratory relief was barred by
the Younger abstention doctrine.

     That decision was affirmed by a panel of the Fourth Circuit
U.S. Court of Appeals on Sept. 19, 1995.  The Fourth Circuit
panel said that "[w]hile we appreciate that Congress intended for
ERISA to operate primarily in the federal sphere, we do not
believe that ERISA created the type of 'unique' federal right or
remedy [that qualifies as an exception to the Anti-Injunction
Act]."  The panel also rejected ERM's claim that "extraordinary
circumstances" existed warranting bypass of the Younger
abstention doctrine.

     In its petition for writ of certiorari, ERM pointed to a
conflict among the circuits as to "whether ERISA is a statute in
which Congress has 'expressly authorized' the federal courts to
enjoin state court proceedings within the meaning of the Anti-
Injunction Act."  ERM cited as an example the decision in General
Motors Corp. v. Buha, 623 F.2d 455 (1980), wherein the Sixth
Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals concluded that federal courts were
not barred from enjoining state court proceedings violating
ERISA's preemption provisions.  U.S. Supreme Court review could
resolve this conflict, said ERM.

     Also subject to resolution, said ERM, is the apparent
conflict among earlier U.S. Supreme Court decisions on the
question of "whether federal courts have the power under the
Anti-Injunction Act to enjoin state court proceedings involving
matters over which Congress has conferred exclusive jurisdiction
upon the federal courts."  ERM cited to Capital Service, Inc. et
al. v. NLRB, 347 U.S. 501 (1954), as teaching that federal
agencies with exclusive jurisdiction over a class of claims may
enjoin state actions that tend to invade that jurisdiction.  On
the other side, ERM cited to the lead opinion in Vendo Co. v.
Lektro-Vend Corp., 433 U.S. 623 (1977), wherein exclusive
jurisdiction under the Clayton Act did not support a stay in
state court proceedings.

     Finally, ERM asserted that the district court erred in
finding abstention mandated under Younger.  In its petition, ERM
stated, "ERISA, among all of the federal statutes, makes one of
the most compelling cases for federal courts to refuse to abstain
on Younger grounds.  ERISA preemption is a class of 'field
preemption' which has been categorized as 'super preemption,'
displacing virtually all state laws from the field of employee
benefit plans, even state laws which are fully consonant with
ERISA.  Congress has coupled ERISA's expansive preemption with a
grant to the federal courts of exclusive jurisdiction over
equitable suits to enjoin violations of ERISA or enforce its
provisions, which, in effect, is a manifestation of Congress'
intention to have preemption claims resolved by federal courts
rather than the state courts."
               In its brief in opposition, the Commonwealth argued that the
petitioners incorrectly contended "that ERISA's preemptive effect
wholly deprives state courts of the ability to determine their
own jurisdiction in an area expressly left to the states by
Congress in the McCarran-Ferguson Act."

     The Commonwealth said that the federal courts "should not
interfere with the state enforcement proceedings pending in the
Virginia court, which [is] fully capable of determining, and
which should determine, both ERM's status as a MEWA under
Virginia law and whether such proceedings had been preempted by
Congress under ERISA."  As a result, it maintained that the
district court and the Fourth Circuit panel correctly ruled that
the Anti-Injunction Act and the Younger abstention principles
compelled them to avoid interfering with the state proceedings.

     Finally, the Commonwealth argued that ERISA does not meet
the two-prong test for an "expressly authorized" exception to the
Anti-Injunction Act as specified in Mitchum v. Foster, 407 U.S.
225, 238 (1972).  ERISA does not "create the type of uniquely
federal right considered in Mitchum," said the Commonwealth, nor
does it "expressly authorize or its legislative history
contemplate injunctions against state court proceedings."

     Employers Resource Management Co., Inc. is represented by
Allan J. Graf of Farmer & Ridley, Los Angeles, Robert W. Ridley,
of counsel.  The Commonwealth is represented by Patrick H.
Cantilo, Randolph N. Wisener, and Steven E. Adkins of Cantilo,
Maisel & Hubbard, L.L.P., Austin; and by Anthony Gambardella,
General Counsel; Peter B. Smith, Senior Counsel; and Michael D.
Thomas, Associate General Counsel of the Virginia State
Corporation Commission, Richmond.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 17, 1996

6TH CIRCUIT: CARDIAC SURGEON FAILED TO SHOW CONCERTED ACTION

     The Sixth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals in an unpublished
Nov. 22 decision upheld summary judgment against a cardiac
surgeon who filed a Sherman Act complaint against a hospital and
a number of cardiologists.  Schwartz et al. v. Aultman Health
Services Association d/b/a Aultman Hospital et al., No. 94-3967
(6th Cir.).

     The court found insufficient evidence to support claims of
conspiracy and monopoly stemming from the physicians' refusal to
refer patients to him for surgery.

     Richard Schwartz, a cardiothoracic surgeon, had privileges
at Aultman Hospital.  He failed the thoracic surgery board exam
three times, then stopped performing cardiac surgery from 1990 to
1992.  After he decided to resume surgery, Aultman Hospital
required him to undergo further training before granting
temporary privileges.  Even when his privileges were restored,
the defendant cardiologists allegedly did not refer patients to
him.

     Schwartz's Sherman Act complaint in the Northern District of
Ohio alleged a conspiracy among the cardiologists and hospital to
restrain trade and a monopoly or attempted monopoly of the
relevant market for cardiac surgery.  Judge Ann Aldrich granted a
defense motion for summary judgment.

     Affirming in a per curiam opinion, the Sixth Circuit stated
that there was no direct evidence of a conspiracy, nor was there
circumstantial evidence of a conspiracy in restraint of trade.
None of the defendants competed with Schwartz for cardiac surgery
cases, and Aultman Hospital, in fact, lost revenue when patients
were sent to surgeons elsewhere.  It also said the purported
conspiracy makes no practical sense and noted the cardiologists
received no referral fee and, therefore, had no financial reason
to prefer other surgeons over Schwartz.

     The court rejected the monopolization claim due to the lack
of evidence of concerted action.  It said there was no attempted
monopolization because the defendants were not Schwartz's
competitors and were not motivated by incentives that would show
an intent to monopolize or to destroy competition.  Nor was there
data defining a relevant geographic market to support his claim
for actual monopolization, it said.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 17, 1996

DISCOVERY CONTINUES IN PRIVACY SUIT AGAINST INDIANA HOSPITAL

     A July 1996 trial date is set in an HIV-positive man's
confidentiality suit against an Evansville, IN, hospital where he
claims the failure of emergency room personnel to use universal
precautions in treating him resulted in the disclosure of his HIV
status to others and the loss of his job when his employer heard
the news.  Conway v. St. Mary's Medical Center et al., No. 82D03-
9503-CT-637 (IN Super. Ct., Vanderburgh Cty).

     Although an Americans With Disabilities Act-based suit over
plaintiff Larry Conway's firing from an Evansville restaurant
settled in October for $25,000, his personal suit against St.
Mary's Medical Center and two nurses there continues and is now
in discovery.

     Conway says that because of emergency room nurse Donna
Elder's failure to use proper precautions in treating the hand he
cut severely while at work in 1993, he warned her of his HIV
status and she refused to provide him with continued treatment.
His suit alleges that he was sent to a patient waiting room where
nursing supervisor Robin Zeibell soon told him, in earshot of
others, that he would have to submit to HIV and hepatitis B
testing before he could be treated.  Because of his need for
immediate medical attention, Conway says he submitted to the
tests.

               The suit says because Conway's HIV infection was noted on
his medical chart, "one or more" St. Mary's employees observed
the entry and told him that a copy of the record would be sent to
his employer, "The Pub" restaurant.  Upon learning of his HIV
status, the restaurant effectively terminated Conway by failing
to schedule him for work hours.

     Conway's suit says St. Mary's was negligent in the hiring,
training and retention of Elder and Zeibell, and that the
plaintiff's privacy rights were violated under the Indiana
Communicable Disease Confidentiality Law (IN Code 16-41-8-1).

     The hospital has denied violating Conway's privacy rights
and failed in an attempt to have the case reviewed by a medical
review panel under the claim that the complaint sounded in
medical malpractice.

     Conway is represented by Paul Chase and Sandra Gosling of
the Indiana HIV Advocacy Program and John Jay Boyce of Legal
Services Organization of Indiana's HIV/AIDS Legal Project.  All
are located in Indianapolis.  Patrick A. Shoulders of Ziemer,
Stayman, Weitzel & Shoulders in Evansville represents the
defendants.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-6</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B039-231</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh22.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015427 text/html 57966
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:52:25 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:45 GMT
Content-length: 57779
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh22.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
HEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNet <BR>
NOVEMBER 20, 1991<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>President Vetoes HHS Funding Bill</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(366 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>House Set To Block Medicaid Rules As White House Negotiations Drag</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(480 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Self-Insured Tax Credit Could Expire</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(270 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>No Hill Override Expected On Medicare Physician Fee Plan</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(512 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Disease Prevention Services Bill Readied For House Consideration</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(153 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>House VA Panel Backs Drug Discount Bill</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(170 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>Democrats Call Off Health Reform Vote, Mitchell Scrambles for&nbsp;Support</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(329 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Health Professions, Prevention Bills Travel On Senate Fast Track</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(155 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>Cohen, Pryor Propose DME Reforms</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(181 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>HCFA Needs More Enforcement Authority Over Medicare HMOs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(198 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>LEGISLATIVE SUMMARIES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>S.1933</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(83 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>Health Professions Education</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1279 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>Nurse Training</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(199 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>H.R.3508</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(22 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>Health Professions Amendments</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1846 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>Nurse Education</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1229 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEW BILLS IN CONGRESS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>Following is a summary of health-related bills introduced in the</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(39 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>HOUSE BILLS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(153 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>SENATE BILLS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(234 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 20, 1991

President Vetoes HHS Funding Bill

As promised, President Bush Nov. 19 vetoed the fiscal 1992 HHS
appropriations bill (H.R.2707) because of its provision overturning
1988 regulations barring abortion counseling at federally funded
family planning clinics. A quick vote to override the veto was
defeated Nov. 19, 276 to 156, or 12 votes short of the needed two-
thirds majority. "I will sign a bill that does not include language
that prohibits implementation of the abortion counseling and
referral rule," Bush said in his veto message. The President made it
clear that his argument with Congress is over abortion. "I have
informed the Congress on numerous occasions that. . .I would veto
any legislation that would entangle Title X with abortion." Title X of
the Public Health Service Act authorizes funds for family planning
clinics and bars provision of abortions. In 1988, HHS issued rules
prohibiting Title X clinics from referring patients to abortion
clinics; in May, the Supreme Court found the rules constitutional. A
bipartisan team of legislators amended the HHS funding bill to block
implementation of the rules until Oct. 1, 1992. In his message, Bush
says the rules do not inhibit the doctor/patient relationship and
allow women to receive "complete medical information." Speaking on
the Senate floor shortly after Bush's veto was received, Sen. Edward
Kennedy (D-MA) sharply criticized the President. "Abortion for
women is not the issue -- free speech for doctors is. The White
House is pandering to the right wing, and their position is
indefensible," Kennedy said. Twenty members of the House
Congressional Caucus for Women's Issues urged an veto override in a
Nov. 18 letter members of the House. "This is an unconscionable
intrusion on the right of free speech, on the right of health
professionals to advise their patients, and on the right of women to
make an informed decision," the letter read.

In 1992, Congress will take another shot at overturning the regs as
part of a Title X reauthorization. The House may try to vote on its
version (H.R.3090) before adjourning; the Senate already has
approved a freestanding bill (S.323) to overturn the ban. But final
votes wouldn't occur until 1992, moving the fight closer to the
election.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 20, 1991

House Set To Block Medicaid Rules As White House Negotiations Drag

Congress appears poised to enact a short-term delay in Bush
Administration regulations limiting states' Medicaid fundraising.
With negotiations between the White House and the nation's
governors dragging, lawmakers seem determined to pass a bill
delaying an Administration bid to ban state use of provider tax
revenues to gain federal matching dollars. The question now is for
how long? A House bill (H.R.3595) scheduled for a Nov. 19 floor vote
would hold off the regulations until Sept. 30, 1992. That would
prompt a veto by President Bush, says HCFA Administrator Gail
Wilensky. The House is expected to approve the bill but may not have
the two-thirds majority needed to override a veto. Senators are
waiting for the House to act before moving forward. Finance
Committee Chairman Lloyd Bentsen (D-TX) may push for a shorter
moratorium, perhaps until April or July. That would allow for
continued negotiations while blocking states from creating new
programs in the interim. HCFA and the National Governors' Assn.
(NGA) staff have negotiated a tentative agreement that would
eliminate use of "voluntary" donations by hospitals and others and
limit use of provider taxes to 22 percent of each state's Medicaid
budget. But that plan appears to be gaining little support from
individual states. The deal would have to be ratified by Congress,
which plans to adjourn by Thanksgiving. With time running out,
Wilensky says she would favor a short term moratorium that also
would block states from starting new programs. Otherwise, "the
short-term federal exposure to increased Medicaid spending will be
virtually unlimited," she says. Steps should be "taken now to revise
our approach to donations and taxes," she told the Finance
Committee Nov. 19. Bentsen says HCFA should "be prepared to freeze
frame the issue" so negotiators can spend the next weeks working
toward a "reasonable" deal.

A key sticking point in the negotiations is state designation of
disproportionate share hospitals. HCFA wants to limit states' ability
to choose those hospitals. Some states are giving all of their acute
care hospitals that status and paying the higher rates with income
derived from provider taxes. HCFA and the NGA have suggested
limiting the size of payment increases to 11-to-12.5 percent. But
hospital groups are threatening to go to court if any limits are
included. A coalition of 61 groups representing hospitals, children,
and labor are urging lawmakers to block the regulations. The
governors efforts are "well intentioned," says National Assn. of
Public Hospitals President Larry Gage but the compromise is "ill
conceived and unacceptable." NAPH filed suit Nov. 14 to try to
declare the regulations illegal. Alabama also has filed suit. But
Texas Gov. Ann Richards told the Finance Committee Nov. 19 that
most states would be willing to accept a cap on disproportionate
share payments if HCFA gives states flexibility "to spend the money
in the way that works best."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 20, 1991

Self-Insured Tax Credit Could Expire

The 25 percent health insurance tax deduction for self-employed
workers appears likely to expire at the end of 1991 but may be
resurrected in 1992. The credit, which was created in 1986, was
extended in 1990 for one year and is due to expire Dec. 31. Sen. John
Danforth (R-MO) and Rep. Frank Guarini (D-NJ) have offered
legislation (S.1950, H.R.3752) to extend the credit for one year, but
sources say it is unlikely Congress will act before adjourning for
1991. Also due to expire: a 20 percent tax credit for research and
development and a 5 percent tax credit for orphan drug development.
Danforth and Guarini also would extend those for one year. But
extension of the expiring tax breaks would cost the government
about $5 billion over the next five years, a move that would bust the
budget. House Ways & Means Committee Chairman Dan Rostenkowski
(D-IL) also is concerned that a small tax bill would become a
"Christmas tree" on which to hang other tax breaks. Senate Finance
Committee Chief Lloyd Bentsen (D-TX) predicts the credit will be
extended retroactively if a free standing bill fails to pass.
Individuals and corporations wouldn't be affected by the delay since
they still get a writeoff for 1991. Hoping to pull those nails from
the coffin, 76 Senators sent a Nov. 14 letter to Senate leaders
George Mitchell (D-ME) and Robert Dole (R-KS), saying they will
"oppose any amendment to a bill which extends these 12 expiring tax
provisions." Bentsen and Rostenkowski recently proposed expanding
the credit for the self-insured from 25 percent to 100 percent.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 20, 1991

No Hill Override Expected On Medicare Physician Fee Plan

Congress won't try to override HCFA's decision to reduce 1992
Medicare physician fees to offset an expected surge in the volume of
services provided the elderly and disabled. On Nov. 15, HCFA
announced the final terms of the fee schedule, which kick in Jan. 1.
As expected, the agency decided to reduce fees paid under that
schedule by 6.5 percent in expectation of a 3 percent rise in volume.
Doctors have been protesting the so-called behavioral offset for
months but despite sympathetic rhetoric, lawmakers don't appear to
have an interest in fighting HCFA. Under the rules, which HCFA plans
to publish this week in the Federal Register, fees paid for primary
care services and to rural doctors will rise while payments to
surgeons and other specialists will decrease. A fight with Congress
was avoided when HCFA agreed in August to eliminate an
asymmetrical transition to the new schedule that would have
resulted in lower fees (HLeg. 8/28/91). More than 300 members of
the House had cosponsored a bill (H.R.3070) by Rep. Pete Stark (D-
CA), chairman of the House Ways & Means Health Subcommittee, to
override that proposal. Nearly 30 members of the Senate had signed
a companion measure (S.1810) by Jay Rockefeller (D-WV). While the
Stark-Rockefeller proposal also would have blocked the behavioral
offset, lawmakers were more concerned with the cumulative effect
of the proposed rules. In the final plan, HCFA Administrator Gail
Wilensky says fees will be 13.2 percent higher than those included
in the earlier version. Wilensky argues that the behavioral offset --
which she now calls a baseline adjustment -- is needed to keep the
new system budget neutral. The 1989 law creating the schedule
requires the program to cost no more and no less than the old
system.

By eliminating the skewed transition, HCFA was able to raise the
conversion factor -- which translates the relative value scale (RVS)
into dollars -- from $26.87 in the June proposed rules to $31 in the
final version. Counting inflation, Wilensky says overall payments to
physicians will rise from $27.3 billion in 1991 to $47.5 billion in
1996. The 74 percent jump in physician spending over the next five
years also encompasses inflation, the aging of the population, and
introduction of new technology. But despite that cumulative rise, in
1992 many doctors will see their fees fall. Reductions include a 14
percent cut for thoracic surgeons, an 11 percent reduction for
anesthesiologists and ophthalmologists, and a 10 percent chop for
gastroenterologists, radiologists, pathologists and neurosurgeons.
Fees will rise sharply for primary care specialists including general
practitioners, who will get a 17 percent increase, family
practitioners, 15 percent, and optometrists, who will see a 20
percent hike. To buffer the effects of the behavioral offset,
Wilensky has made other changes to the rules to help specific
specialties. HCFA has agreed to temporarily let anesthesiologists
count the actual time they spend with a patient until a better coding
system is developed and to count only services provided the day
before surgery rather than 30 days when figuring global surgical
fees.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 20, 1991

Disease Prevention Services Bill Readied For House Consideration

A new private nonprofit foundation would be created to supplement
disease prevention efforts by the Centers for Disease Control under
a bill (H.R.3635) moving toward the House floor. Approved Nov. 15 by
the House Commerce Committee, the bill would extend for five years
the preventive health services block grant at $135 million for fiscal
1992 and "such sums as necessary" through FY96. It also would
authorize use of part of the preventive block grants for states to
develop trauma care systems. The plan by Commerce Health
Subcommittee Chairman Henry Waxman (D-CA) also would require
states to submit by Apr. 1, 1992, a list of health goals for the year
2000, and authorizes $10 million for that effort. A Senate
companion bill (S.1912) introduced Nov. 4 by Peter Domenici (R-NM),
the ranking minority member of the Budget Committee, is pending in
the Finance Committee. No action is expected until after recess.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 20, 1991

House VA Panel Backs Drug Discount Bill

Legislation to roll back prescription drug prices paid by veterans'
hospitals won approval Nov. 13 from the House Veterans' Affairs
Committee. The bill (H.R.2890), would set prices at the level paid on
Sept. 1, 1990, in order to negate a year of sharp price increases. It
also would limit annual price hikes of veterans' medical inflation
rates. The legislation comes a year after Congress required drug
makers to give Medicaid their "best price." That triggered price hikes
to Veterans Administration (VA) facilities and others who had been
receiving deep discounts. The House bill, by Veterans' Committee
Chairman Sonny Montgomery (D-MS) would exempt VA from
calculation of Medicaid prices. That concerns members of the House
Commerce Committee who worry that exempting the VA will raise
drug prices for Medicaid and various public health clinics. Commerce
Committee member Ron Wyden (D-OR) plans to amend Montgomery's
bill to roll back drug prices for all government buyers. Montgomery
is said to be receptive "as long as it doesn't leave the VA
vulnerable."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 20, 1991

Democrats Call Off Health Reform Vote, Mitchell Scrambles for
Support

Senate Democrats were forced to call off a planned vote on their
health reform plan because of continued disagreement among party
members. Human Resources Committee Chairman Edward Kennedy (D-
MA) hoped to report the bill (S.1227) out of his committee Nov. 14
but was ordered to cancel the session by Majority Leader George
Mitchell (D-ME), the bill's chief sponsor. Mitchell still is trying to
gain support for the plan from Finance Committee Chairman Lloyd
Bentsen (D-TX), who balks at the proposal to mandate employer-paid
insurance. Kennedy had rewritten the bill to circumvent Finance, but
Mitchell didn't like that tactic. Instead, the vote was "postponed"
until Jan. 22, the first scheduled day of the Senate's 1992 session.
Mitchell meanwhile plans to conduct five field hearings in December
and early January "to hear from individual Americans and businesses
that have been bankrupted by the current system." The hearings will
be held in Tampa FL, Atlanta GA, Cleveland OH, Detroit MI, and Denver
CO. Mitchell's orders didn't sit well with Democrats on the panel who
want to build on the momentum created by the Nov. 5 election of
Pennsylvania Sen. Harris Wofford, who ran on a health reform
platform. Republicans label Mitchell's hearings "a show designed to
make Republicans look bad." "If we don't work together we'll end up
with a partisan piece of junk," said the panel's senior GOP member
Orrin Hatch (R-UT).

House Democrats appear no closer to agreement than their Senate
counterparts. After failing to develop a consensus behind one
proposal, the House Democratic Caucus last week backed a
resolution to support legislation that would guarantee universal
health care. The resolution is supposed to "keep the process moving
along," says an aide to Caucus Chairman Steny Hoyer (D-MD). Earlier
this summer, House Speaker Thomas Foley (D-WA) asked his senior
committee chairmen to draft a reform plan. So far there is little
agreement and Ways & Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski (D-IL)
introduced his own bill (H.R.3626).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 20, 1991

Health Professions, Prevention Bills Travel On Senate Fast Track

Congress hopes to quickly complete work on a bill to reauthorize aid
to medical and nursing students and the schools that train them
along with another measure to continue several disease prevention
programs. Introduced by Sen. Edward Kennedy (D-MA), the bills were
approved a week later by the Human Resources Committee. The first
(S.1933) would authorize $525 million in fiscal 1992, $555 million
in FY93, $610 million in FY94, $636 million in FY95, and $660
million in FY96 to support training of nurses, nurse midwives, nurse
anesthetists, physician assistants, and primary care physicians. The
measure also would require grantees to provide instruction on
universal precautions and infection control for HIV transmission.
The second (S.1944) would authorize $275 million in FY92 and "such
sums as necessary" for FY93-96 to provide grants for breast and
cervical screening, hypertension and cholesterol screening, health
education, emergency medical technician training, rodent control,
water fluoridation, and dental health.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 20, 1991

Cohen, Pryor Propose DME Reforms

The number of Medicare carriers handling claims for durable medical
equipment (DME) would be reduced from 34 to five under a bill by
Sens. William Cohen (R-ME) and David Pryor (D-AR). An investigation
by Cohen's staff of the Senate Aging Committee uncovered as much
as $200 million in annual fraud and abuse in Medicare's DME program.
The bill (S.1988) is similar to measures (S.1736, H.R.2534) offered
by Sen. Jim Sasser (D-TN) and Rep. Benjamin Cardin (D-MD) earlier
this year (HLeg. 9/11/91). The reforms are supported by the National
Assn. of Medical Equipment Suppliers (NAMES). The Cohen/Pryor bill
also would prevent DME suppliers from shopping for the best-paying
carrier by establishing uniform coverage and utilization criteria and
requiring HHS to set requirements for issuing and renewing provider
numbers. The Senate bills primarily address fraud and abuse in the
DME system, while the House bill also tries to solve some of
administrative problems facing carriers, says Corrine Parver, NAMES
president. The bills will probably not see action before Congress'
recess but could be a 1992 priority.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 20, 1991

HCFA Needs More Enforcement Authority Over Medicare HMOs

HCFA should be given broader authority to penalize Medicare HMOs
that fail to comply with quality standards, says the General
Accounting Office. In Nov. 15 testimony to the House Commerce
Health Subcommittee, GAO said its investigation into a Florida HMO
revealed that HCFA has "not been effective in getting certain HMOs
to take corrective actions promptly." The GAO investigation of
Humana Inc. found abuses of federal standards of marketing, claims
payment, processing of beneficiary appeals, and implementation of
an internal quality assurance system. Humana enrolls about 15
percent of the 1.3 million Medicare HMO members. In 1987, following
problems with the previous owners of the Humana plan, Congress
gave HCFA the power to levy fines and short suspensions against
HMOs that violate federal rules. Since then, HCFA has terminated
two contractors from Medicare. HCFA should be allowed to suspend
Medicare enrollments when HMOs fail to respond to violations
notices, says GAO. HCFA Administrator Gail Wilensky defended the
agency's record, pointing to development of a "strengthened and
streamlined enforcement" process. Wilensky also cited publication
of a July 22 proposed rule to implement intermediate sanctions and
civil monetary penalty authority, which defined eight violations for
which sanctions can be imposed.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 20, 1991

S.1933

S.1933
Health Professions Training and Nurse Education Improvement and
Reauthorization Act as reported by the Senate Human Resources
Committee Nov. 7, 1991

Sen. Kennedy (D-MA) has introduced, and the Labor and Human
Resources Committee has approved, legislation to extend and amend
the federal programs of support for training of health professionals,
allied health professionals, and nurses. The bill emphasizes the
training of primary care physicians, nurse practitioners, nurse
midwives, nurse anesthetists, and allied health professionals in
fields in which there are shortages.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 20, 1991

Health Professions Education

MISCELLANEOUS AMENDMENTS: Graduate programs in social work that
offer a training concentration in health or mental health care and
graduate programs that provide training in a concentration leading
to a graduate degree in marriage and family therapy would be
included among the programs for which support could be provided.

A Subcommittee on Allied Health would be established to the
National Advisory Council on Health Professions Education. The
Subcommittee would advise with respect to a broad range of issues
relating to allied health education and placement.

Prohibitions against discrimination in administration of the program
would be expanded. Health professions data collection requirements
would be expanded to include information pertaining to health
profession shortage areas.

GRANT PRIORITY: In awarding grants under the health professions
program and under the nurse education program, the HHS Secretary
would give priority to entities with programs designed to help meet
the National Health Promotion and Disease Prevention Objectives
established for the year 2000 and that either have a high permanent
rate for placing graduates in settings to serve underserved
populations or provide for at least four of six specified activities
designed to encourage graduates to practice in such areas.

Preference in the awarding of competitive grants to health
professions schools would be given to schools that can demonstrate
that at least 20 percent of their graduates practice in shortage
areas or that the number of graduates practicing in such areas has
increased by at least 50 percent over that for the previous two-year
period.

STUDENT ASSISTANCE: Funding for the federal student loan insurance
program would be provided through fiscal 1996. Certain changes
would be made with regard to the period to begin repaying loans and
the maximum interest that could be charged for such loans. Health
professions education institutions would have to agree to assist in
the collection of delinquent loan payments by providing information
concerning the borrower to the Secretary and to lenders.

The Secretary would establish performance standards and fees to be
paid by lenders and loan holders for the servicing of loans and for
the processing of default claims. The bill would redefine the term
"default rate." The Secretary would assess a risk-based premium on
an eligible borrower and, if required, an eligible institution based on
the default rate of the institution. For institutions with default
rates below 5 percent, the borrower would be assessed 6 percent of
the loan amount.

If the default rate of the institution is between 5 percent and 15
percent, the borrower would be assessed a premium of 10 percent
and the institution a premium of 5 percent. If the institution's
default rate is between 15 percent and 25 percent, the borrower and
the institution each would be assessed a premium of 10 percent of
the loan amount. Other procedural provisions are set out.

There would be no statute of limitations with regard to loan
repayment obligations. An annual report concerning default rates
would be required for each institution that participates in loan
programs as well as for each lender and for each loan holder. A list
of borrowers who are in default would be compiled and published in
the Federal Register.

The Secretary would promulgate regulations to ensure that tuition
and fees for borrowers are equal to or less than those for
nonborrowers; to require institutions to submit information
concerning each loan that is made; to allow the withholding of
services from an institution to a borrower who is in default; and to
have lenders offer borrowers a variety of repayment options.
Institutions would be required to conduct workshops for student
borrowers.

The National Health Service Corps would give priority to borrowers
who enter and remain in the primary care fields of general internal
medicine, general pediatrics, and family medicine.

An Office for Health Education Assistance would be created to study
loans and loan defaults, to respond to circumstances that may lead
to defaults, to carry out activities to reduce defaults, and to carry
out other similar activities.

DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM: The bill would establish a direct student
loan demonstration program to examine the viability of such a
program and to determine whether such a program will reduce
default costs and provide loans on more favorable terms and to
determine whether the current Health Education Assistance Loan
authority should be replaced by a direct loan program in which
schools rather than lenders make loans directly to borrowers.

The bill outlines the detailed procedures and conditions that would
apply in creating this direct student loan demonstration program.
The program would involve at least 20 institutions.

OTHER ASSISTANCE AUTHORITIES: The loan repayment program for
allied health personnel would be extended through FY96 as would
authority for scholarships for first year health professions students
of exceptional financial need, the scholarship authority for students
from disadvantaged backgrounds, and the faculty loan repayment
program. The Lister Hill Scholarship Program would be repealed.

SPECIAL PROGRAM GRANTS: Funding would be provided through FY96 to
assist departments of family medicine. Area Health Education Center
(AHEC) agreements would be for six years. Preference in awarding AHEC
grants would be for applicants that would establish new programs.
Priority would go to applicants that establish linkages with a school
of public health if such a school exists in the area. Various other
expansions would be authorized for the AHEC program.

Funding would continue for programs of excellence in health
professions education for minorities; for training, traineeships, and
fellowships in general internal medicine and general pediatrics; for
dentistry residency programs; and for family medicine residency
programs. There would be new authority for assistance for training
in dental public health. Educational assistance to individuals from
disadvantaged backgrounds also would be continued. There would be
a new program of minority faculty development fellowships.
Authority to assist schools that provide the first or last two years
of medical education would be replaced by demonstration grant
authority for the improvement of health professions education and
for the assurance of competency of health personnel. There would be
new authority for chiropractic training and demonstration grants.

Also extended would be assistance for training in preventive
medicine, physician assistant programs, and podiatric medicine
programs. AIDS education and training program authority would be
expanded. Also extended would be authority for geriatric education
centers and geriatric training.

Programs of assistance for projects for schools of public health
would be extended as would various other public health training
authorities.

There would be new grant authority for projects related to allied
health professions with personnel shortages. An extensive listing of
possible project areas is provided. Assistance also would be
authorized for training centers for allied health professions to
provide fellowships to students. The program of traineeships for
advanced training of allied health personnel would be extended and
expanded. A Division of Allied Health would be created.

OTHER PROGRAMS: Changes would be made in the mission of the
Council on Graduate Medical Education to place greater emphasis on
the adequacy of current and future supplies of primary care
physicians, to study the impact of Medicare graduate medical
education funding, and the feasibility of including health promotion
and disease prevention as a part of graduate medical education.

New activities would be required under the rural health training
program with emphasis on research on the processes involved in
health care decisionmaking and development of training models
focusing on disease prevention and health promotion.

An advisory Council on Medical Licensure would be created. It would
advise the Secretary concerning the establishment and operation of
the American Medical Association system for verifying and
maintaining information regarding the qualification of individuals to
practice medicine. The Secretary also would conduct a study of state
licensure procedures for domestic medical graduates as compared to
international medical graduates.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 20, 1991

Nurse Training

SPECIAL PROJECTS: Various changes would be made in the special
project authority to emphasize assistance to nurses serving in
shortage areas. The bill would extend the advanced nurse education
programs, the nurse practitioner and nurse midwife programs,
nursing education opportunities for individuals from disadvantaged
backgrounds, traineeships for advanced education of professional
nurses, the nurse anesthetist program, the nurse loan repayment
program, and assistance for undergraduate education of professional
nurses. New authority would provide funds to assist schools of
nursing to support projects to develop resources or strengthen
programs or faculty to address the National Health Objectives for
the year 2000.

A new program would provide fellowships to licensed vocational or
practical nurses, nursing assistants, and other paraprofessional
nursing personnel to assist them in obtaining a professional nursing
education. Such individuals would agree to work in long term care
facilities for a period of time at least equal to the period during
which the individual received assistance.

A new primary care program authority also would be established.
The funds would be used to establish or expand clinical nurse
training sites to provide training in the delivery of primary care in
rural areas or areas within 50 miles of Indian country.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 20, 1991

H.R.3508

H.R.3508
Health Professions Education Amendments
introduced Oct. 3, 1991
by Rep. Henry Waxman (D-CA)
referred to the House Commerce Committee




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 20, 1991

Health Professions Amendments

The bill would amend and extend various authorities for educational
assistance for schools and students of the health professions. The
bill also would amend and extend the Nurse Training Act.

PRIMARY SERVICES PRIORITY: The bill would add a general provision
to the Public Health Service Act provisions authorizing support for
health professions education providing that in the case of any entity
applying for federal financial assistance under that authority, the
HHS Secretary would give priority to the applicant if a substantial
percentage of the providers who have completed the applicants
program of training in the health or allied health professions are
providing primary health services to a substantial number of
medically underserved individuals or if the applicant has established
policies that may reasonably be expected to result in a substantial
percentage of the program's participants providing their services to
a substantial number of such individuals.

Schools of medicine and osteopathy, in order to qualify for priority
consideration, also would have to have an academic administrative
unit to provide clinical instruction in family medicine and would
have to require, as a condition of receiving a degree, that each
student have had significant clinical training in family medicine by
the end of the third year of the curriculum.

Applicants with residency programs would receive priority in
receiving federal support only if a substantial percentage of the
individuals completing the residency program have had, through
participation in the applicant's program, significant experience in
providing primary health services to medically underserved
individuals or significant experience in providing such services in
ambulatory health facilities.

GRADUATE STUDENT INSURED LOANS: The total principal amount of
new loans and installments paid to borrowers covered by federal
graduate student loan insurance could not exceed $365 million, $425
million, and $475 million respectively for fiscal years 1992-1994.
Currently repayment of loans must begin within twelve months of
completing a program or ceasing to be a participant in a program for
which the loan was made. The bill would allow initial repayment to
begin up to 21 months after the determining event has occurred.

The premium charged by the Secretary for insured loans currently
cannot exceed eight percent. The bill would increase the maximum
allowable premium to 13 percent. Different percentages could be
charged for different health professionals.

The bill would authorize the Secretary to impose on eligible
institutions, eligible lenders, and holders reasonable limits on
default rates for borrowers. If any such limit is exceeded, the
Secretary could suspend, terminate, or otherwise restrict the
authority for students to obtain insured loans from the school or
lender in question or, if it is a holder who exceeds such a limit, for
the holder to purchase insured loans.

The term "default rate" means the percentage constituted by the
ratio of the principal amount of insured loans that are made with
respect to an entity and enter repayment status after Apr. 7, 1987,
and for which amounts have been paid to insurance beneficiaries,
exclusive of any loans for which amounts have been paid as a result
of death or total and permanent disability of the borrowers, and
exclusive of any loans for which amounts have been paid but have
been recovered or are being recovered by the Secretary, to the total
principal amount of insured loans that are made with respect to the
entity and enter repayment status after Apr. 7, 1987.

OFFICE OF DEBT COLLECTION: The bill would establish an Office on Student
Loan Debt Collection. The Director of the Office would coordinate efforts
within the HHS Department and the Department of Justice to recover
payments from health professionals who have defaulted on insured student
loans. In cooperation with the Secretary of Education, the Director would
develop a uniform deferral form or process to ensure coordination in
deferment certification requirements for in-school, residency, and
internship deferments.

The Director would provide advice to eligible lenders, institutions,
and holders of deferrals of the provisions that relate to collection
of the principal and interest on insured loans. The Director would
assist students in avoiding default by making information on loan
deferments, forbearance, and correction of default readily available
and, directly or through the provision of grants and contracts, would
carry out projects to reduce the extent of defaults on insured loans.
The Director annually would report to Congress on the total amounts
recovered and would provide a plan for improving the extent of
recoveries during the year.

NEEDY STUDENTS: Any funds from a student loan fund that are
returned to the Secretary could not be available for any purpose
other than allotment for other student loan funds. The bill would
authorize $9,760,000 for FY92, $11 million for FY93, and $13
million for FY94 for scholarships for first year students of
exceptional need and $17 million for each of FY92 and 1993 for
scholarships and other purposes regarding disadvantaged students.

Current faculty, and anyone who has been on the faculty of a school
during the previous 18 months, would be ineligible for the loan
repayment program regarding service by disadvantaged students on
faculties of health professions schools. Loan repayments under the
program would be reduced from 50 percent a year to 20 percent a
year of the outstanding principal and interest on loans.

FAMILY MEDICINE: The bill would authorize $6,830,000 for FY92 to
assist in the establishment of departments of family medicine.
Authority for this assistance would be repealed as of Oct. 1, 1992.

FUNDING OF SPECIFIC PROGRAMS: The area health education center
authority would be funded at $20 million, $22 million, and $24
million for FY92-94 respectively. The bill would provide $15 million
and $16 million for FY92 and FY93 for programs of excellence in
health professions education for minorities.

The bill would provide $17,260,000, $18.5 million, and $20 million
for FY92-94 respectively for training, traineeships, and fellowships
in internal medicine and general pediatrics. Currently the first two
purposes for which these funds can be utilized are for the planning,
development, and support of residency training programs and
residents in these practice areas. The bill would expand the eligible
programs for these funds to include professional training programs,
including residencies and internships, in these areas for medical and
osteopathy students, interns, residents, or practicing physicians and
financial support for the individuals participating in these programs.

Funding for residency programs in the general practice of dentistry
would be provided at $3,830,000, $4.5 million, and $6 million for
1992-1994. Authorized for family medicine programs would be
$36.1 million, $43 million, and $45 million.

Educational assistance to individuals from disadvantaged
backgrounds would be authorized at $30,820,000 and $31.5 million
for FY92 and FY93. The Secretary would assure that these grants are
equitably distributed geographically and that services of individuals
from disadvantaged backgrounds are equitably allocated among the
various racial and ethnic populations.

The bill recodifies provisions relating to training in preventive
medicine authorizing $1,650,000, $2 million, and $2 million for
1992-1994 respectively, for these activities. Authority to assist
schools which provide the first two or last two years of medical
education and to aid in faculty and curriculum development and
clinical training sites would be deleted.

There would be new authority for health professions research.
Recipients of grants and contracts would conduct research on one or
more of the following: the impact of student indebtedness on
specialty choice and practice location; the impact of minority health
professional programs in majority schools on recruitment,
retention, and practice choices of minority health personnel; the
effects of graduate medical education payments on the distribution
of physician specialties; and the effectiveness and variation of
state licensing authorities in identifying problem providers and
undertaking disciplinary actions. Funding would be authorized at
$1,320,000, $1.5 million, and $1.5 million. The bill also would
authorize $7 million, $8 million, and $10 million for 1992-1994 for
physician assistant projects and $600,000, $750,000, and $750,000
for podiatric physician projects.

AIDS TRAINING: Schools of marriage and family therapy would be added
to those eligible to receive grants to train faculty to teach health
professions students to provide for the health care needs of
individuals with Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome. Funding for
this general training program would be authorized at $17,020,000, $19
million, and $21 million. For such training at schools of dentistry
the bill would authorize $6 million, $8 million, and $10 million.

MEDICAL SOCIAL WORK: Graduate programs of medical social work
would be added to those eligible for aid to assist individuals from
disadvantaged backgrounds as well as to those which can receive
assistance for training with respect to AIDS.

The term "graduate program in medical social work" is defined to
mean an accredited graduate program which provides training
leading to a graduate degree in social work and which emphasizes
the provision of social services related to health care or mental
health care.

GERIATRIC TRAINING: Current authority to train physicians and
dentists who plan to teach geriatric medicine or dentistry would be
expanded to include optometrists who plan to teach geriatric
optometry.

Currently such programs are for one year. The bill would eliminate
the one year specification. Also currently, with regard to dental
geriatric training programs, training is available to dentists who
are faculty members at schools of dentistry or hospital departments
of dentistry. The bill would amend these eligibility provisions to
make this training available to dentists who have demonstrated a
commitment to an academic career, and who have completed
postdoctoral dental training programs or who have relevant training
or experience.

Funding for geriatric education centers and geriatric training would
be authorized at $13,710,000, $14 million, and $15 million
respectively for FY92-94.

YEAR 2000 HEALTH OBJECTIVES: Current authority for special
projects conducted by schools of public health would be replaced by
authority for special projects by such schools to establish
comprehensive programs of education that are appropriate with
respect to meeting the objectives established by the Secretary for
the health status of the population of the U.S. for the year 2000.
Also authorized would be projects to recruit individuals for
education in health specialties in which an increased number of
practitioners is necessary to meet the year 2000 objectives and to
improve access to community-based health prokbe emphasized in the
awarding of public health traineeships. Under the bill students would
have to be pursuing a course of study in a field the entry into which
is appropriate with respect to meeting the Secretary's health status
objectives for the year 2000.

ALLIED HEALTH: In awarding project grants regarding allied health
personnel the Secretary would give special consideration to unique
needs regarding the supply of physical therapists, occupational
therapists, and clinical laboratory technologists.

Currently recipients of traineeships for advanced training of allied
health personnel must be doctoral students in doctoral programs.
The bill would allow traineeships to postgraduate students in
postgraduate programs. Special consideration to the unique needs
regarding the supply of the above mentioned therapists and
technologists also would be provided with regard to these
traineeships.

HEALTH CARE FOR RURAL AREAS: Schools or programs for marriage
and family therapy would be eligible for grants to improve the
delivery of health services for rural areas.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 20, 1991

Nurse Education

SPECIAL PROJECTS: The bill would delete authority for special
projects to provide continuing education for nurses, to demonstrate
improved geriatric training in preventive care, acute care, and long
term care, and to collect the names of health facilities willing to
repay loans for nurses who agree to serve in the facilities. Also
authority to develop curricula for the achievement of baccalaureate
degrees by registered nurses would be replaced by authority for
projects for nursing assistants and other paraprofessional nursing
personnel to become licensed vocational or practical nurses for
nursing facilities.

There are provisions to allow continuation of already funded
projects of the types to be deleted.

ADVANCED NURSE EDUCATION: The bill would delete authority to
provide assistance to maintain programs which lead to masters' and
doctoral degrees and which prepare nurses to serve as
administrators, researchers, or to serve in clinical nurse specialties
determined by the Secretary to require advanced education.
Assistance still would be provided to plan, develop, operate, or
significantly expand such programs but only with regard to programs
that prepare nurses to serve in clinical nurse specialties. No more
than 10 percent of funds appropriated for advanced nurse education
could be used for programs leading to doctoral degrees.

NURSE PRACTITIONERS AND MIDWIVES: Authority to assist
traineeship programs for nurse practitioners and nurse midwives
would be repealed.

PROJECTS FOR DISADVANTAGED INDIVIDUALS: Funding for special
projects for individuals from disadvantaged backgrounds would be
authorized at $4 million, $5 million, and $6 million for 1992-1994.

ADVANCED EDUCATION TRAINEESHIPS: Authority for project grants
for nursing school faculty investigations into alternate health care
modalities, nursing interventions that result in positive outcomes
and similar matters would be deleted. The current authority to
provide traineeships for nurses in advanced degree programs would
be expanded to allow traineeships for individuals in these programs.
Only individuals in master's degree programs would be eligible for
these traineeships. Doctoral candidates no longer would be eligible.
Authority to provide these traineeships for programs to train
individuals to serve in and prepare for practice as nurse
administrators, nurse educators, and nurse researchers would be
deleted.

In awarding these traineeships for advanced education special
consideration would be given to programs that provide significant
clinical experience in any of the following: an Indian Health Service
health center; a Native Hawaiian health center; a public hospital; a
migrant or community health center or other nonprofit community
clinic; a nursing facility; a rural health clinic; or a health facility
located in a health professional shortage area determined by the HHS
Secretary to have a critical shortage of nurses.

Funding for advanced nursing education traineeships would be
authorized at $17 million, $19 million, and $21 million with at least
25 percent of appropriated funds to be used for traineeships for
students who are enrolled at least on a half-time basis in programs
that offer a master's degree in nursing and who agree to complete
the requirements for the degree by the end of the academic year in
which the traineeship is provided.

NURSE ANESTHETISTS: The bill would add a provision indicating that
in making grants for nurse anesthetist training grants the Secretary
would give special consideration to applications for traineeship
programs whose participants gain a significant experience in
providing health services at rural hospitals or rural clinics.

The nurse anesthetist program would be funded at $3 million, $4
million, and $5 million respectively for FY92-94.

STUDENT LOAN PROGRAMS: Current law authorizes $5 million a year
for loan repayments for service in facilities such as those referred
to above in the advanced education traineeship provisions. The bill
would authorize $3 million, $4 million, and $5 million for FY92-94
respectively.

OTHER PROVISIONS: The authority for undergraduate scholarships for
nursing students would be ended. The bill also would make schools of
nursing eligible, along with already authorized health professions
schools and schools of allied health, for geriatric training and
related activities. This authority is similar to that which relates
only to schools of nursing and which would be repealed as outlined
above.

LABORATORY TECHNOLOGIST STUDY: The Secretary would conduct a
study with respect to the shortage of clinical laboratory
technologists. The purpose of the study would be to determine the
extent of the shortage, determine the causes of the shortage, and
develop recommendations on the manner in which the shortage can
be alleviated.

In developing recommendations the Secretary would consider any
special or unique factors affecting the supply of clinical laboratory
technologists in rural or urban areas and would consider the
effectiveness of any mechanisms that are available for alleviating
the shortage in rural areas, urban areas, or both, including
competency-based examinations as an alternative route for
certification of the competence of individuals to serve as such
technologists, and consider the role of entities that provide such
certification.

MEDICAL LICENSURE ADVISORY COUNCIL: The Secretary would
establish an Advisory Council on Medical Licensure. The Advisory
Council would advise the Secretary regarding the establishment and
operation of the system established by the American Medical
Association for verifying and maintaining information regarding
qualifications of individuals to practice medicine.

The Advisory Council would monitor the operation of the private
verification system and develop recommendations for improvement.
The Council would determine to what extent the system has
expedited and otherwise improved the efficiency and equitable
operation of the process of licensure in one state of individuals who
previously have been licensed in another.

The Council would review the policies and practices of the states in
licensing international medical graduates and in licensing domestic
medical graduates and would consult with appropriate organizations
regarding the establishment of nondiscriminatory policies and
practices of licensing individuals to practice medicine.

The 14-member Advisory Council would consist of a representative
from each of the following; state licensure authorities, practicing
physicians, the private verification system, medical schools, an
organization that tests international medical graduates, an
organization that tests graduates of U.S. medical schools, a native of
the U.S. who attended a U.S. medical school, an international medical
school graduate from a coalition of such graduates as well as
international medical school graduates to represent schools from
southern or eastern Asia; Europe, Australia or New Zealand; a
subsaharan African country; and a Latin American or Caribbean
country, and a native of the U.S. who is an international medical
school graduate.

During FY96 the Secretary would determine whether the private
verification system is operating with a reasonable degree of
efficiency and whether the policies and practices of the system are
nondiscriminatory.

If the Secretary finds that the system fails to meet either of these
criteria, the Secretary would develop a plan for the establishment of
a national verification system. If the Secretary finds that the
private system meets the criteria, the Advisory Council would
terminate.

INTERNATIONAL MEDICAL GRADUATE LICENSURE REPORTS: With
respect to licensure by the states of individuals to practice
medicine, the Secretary annually would conduct a study of at least
10 states. The study would determine the average length of time
required for the states involved to process the licensure
applications of domestic medical graduates and the length of time
for such processing for international medical graduates and the
reasons underlying any significant differences.

The study also would determine the percentage of licensure
applications from domestic applicants that are approved and the
percentage of international medical graduate licensure applications
that are approved, and the reasons underlying any significant
differences.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 20, 1991

Following is a summary of health-related bills introduced in the

Following is a summary of health-related bills introduced in the
House of Representatives and Senate, along with sponsors and
committees to which the measures were referred.  The key words
that identify each bill's subject matter have been underlined.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 20, 1991

HOUSE BILLS

H.R.3696. To provide for assessments in each state of the incidence
and prevalence of substance abuse and of the extent to which the
availability, from public and nonprofit private providers, of
treatment for such abuse is insufficient to meet the need for such
treatment. (Rangel) Commerce.

H.R.3698. To amend the Public Health Services Act with respect to
services for mental health and substance abuse, including
establishing separate block grants to enhance the delivery of such
services. (Waxman) Commerce.

H.R.3724. To authorize appropriations for Indian health programs,
and for other purposes. (Miller) Interior and Insular Affairs and
Commerce.

H.R.3725. To require Senators and Members of the House of
Representatives to pay for medical services provided by the Office
of the Attending Physician. (Moody) House Administration.

H.R.3736. To repeal the $2 copayment requirement for medication
furnished certain veterans on an outpatient basis. (DeFazio)
Veterans Affairs.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
HEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 20, 1991

SENATE BILLS

S.1803. To prohibit recoupment of certain Medicare payments to
certain Uniformed Services Treatment Facilities. (Gorton) Finance.

S.1810. To provide for corrections with respect to the
implementation of reform of payments to physicians under Medicare.
(Rockefeller) Finance.

the treatment of voluntary contributions and provider-specific taxes
by states as a source of a state's expenditures for which federal
financial participation is available under Medicaid and to maintain
the treatment of intergovernmental transfers as such a source.
(McConnell) Finance.

S.1886. To delay until Sept. 30, 1992, the issuance of any
regulations by the HHS Secretary changing S.1887. to establish the
National Center for Nursing Research as a National Institute.
(Harkin) Human Resources.

S.1891. To permit the HHS Secretary to waive certain recovery
requirements with respect to the construction or remodeling of
facilities. (Thurmond).

S.1902. To require certain review and recommendations concerning
applications for assistance to perform research and to permit
certain research concerning the transplantation of human fetal
tissue for therapeutic purposes. (Adams) Human Resources.

S.1912. To increase the availability of primary and preventive health
care. (Domenici) Finance.

S.1933. To amend Titles VII and VIII of the Public Health Service Act
to reauthorize and extend programs under such titles. (Kennedy)
Human Resources.

S.1936. To provide improved access to health care. (Chafee) Finance.

S.1944. To strengthen the nation's health promotion and disease
prevention activities. (Kennedy) Human Resources.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-7</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B039-247</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh01.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015453 text/html 26651
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:52:49 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:48 GMT
Content-length: 26464
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh01.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
HEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNet <BR>
January 2, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>* TODAY's NEWS *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>Medicaid per-capita cap proposals may change current&nbsp;entitlement status, promise state funding conflicts, CBO says; budget&nbsp;talks stretch into weekend.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(698 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Medicare growth rate increases likely under MedicarePlus&nbsp;provisions in White House, Republican budget plans, American Academy&nbsp;of Actuaries report concludes.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(678 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>Ivax begins shipping generic albuterol metered-dose inhaler&nbsp;Dec. 29 following approval of generic equivalent to Glaxo's Ventolin.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(333 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>FDA sets RDIs for six nutrients, including vitamin K and&nbsp;selenium; agency publishes DSHEA implementing regs Dec. 28.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(598 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* BRIEFS *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>PEOPLE: Senate Finance Committee.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(25 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>PEOPLE: Dura.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(34 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>PEOPLE: Endogen.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(24 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>REGULATORY NEWS: KV Pharmaceutical.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(44 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>RESEARCH: OXiGENE Sensamide.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(74 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>RESEARCH: Lidak's LP 2307.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(60 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>RESEARCH: Alpha-Beta Technology.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(49 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>FINANCIAL NEWS: Arris.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(116 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>FINANCIAL NEWS: ChiRex Inc..</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(82 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>FINANCIAL NEWS: Boston Life Sciences.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(41 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>INDUSTRY NEWS: Quantum.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(77 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>INDUSTRY NEWS: Quantum/Glaxo Wellcome.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(22 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>INDUSTRY NEWS: Sepracor.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(71 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>INDUSTRY NEWS: Fountain Pharmaceuticals.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(24 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

Medicaid per-capita cap proposals may change current
entitlement status, promise state funding conflicts, CBO says; budget
talks stretch into weekend.

MEDICAID PER-CAPITA CAP COULD EXCLUDE ELIGIBLE POPULATIONS, the
Congressional Budget Office concludes in an outline of the provsion
included in President Clinton's Medicaid reform proposal. In a
December memo, CBO states that such "proposals would not necessarily
maintain a true federal entitlement to benefits for the eligible
population groups." CBO states that a "program that capped federal
expenditures per enrollee probably could not meet all" criteria of an
entitlement program; an entitlement program's establishing law "must
describe who is eligible and the benefits to which they are entitled,
as well as assuring that federal funds accommodate changes in
enrollment and in the cost of benefits."
 
The CBO memo raises two specific issues in its discussion of a
per-capita federal "entitlement." First, it notes that "there would
be no guarantee that all populations currently covered by the
Medicaid program would continue to be eligible," since "states might
cut back on coverage of high-cost optional groups" or eliminate
optional services as a means of keeping "expenditures below the cap
amounts."
 
Secondly, according to CBO, "it is much less clear...what would
happen if the caps were sufficiently constraining in some states that
access to services for entitled populations was seriously limited."
CBO explains further that whether beneficiaries could accordingly sue
the state and/or federal governments, "and the resulting implications
for Medicaid expenditures, would depend critically on whether and how
the individual entitlement was defined in the law."
 
While congressional Republicans included in their vetoed budget
package a move from Medicaid's individual entitlement to a
"Medigrant" block grant to states, the White House and several
centrist groups of lawmakers have offered per-capita cap proposals
that they claim would preserve an individual entitlement. However,
both the White House and the conservative House Democratic
"Coalition" have been denied CBO scoring of any savings to their cap
as CBO has cited insufficient legislative detail.
 
The gap between the block grant and per-capita cap in Medicaid
policy may be the most contentious aspect of budget negotiations.
Talks resumed Dec. 29 involving President Clinton, House Speaker Newt
Gingrich (R-Ga.), and Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole (R-Kan.);
Gingrich forecast that "this is the weekend where we get it all
done." Both sides expressed their willingness to work through the
weekend into the new year.
 
Earlier in the day, White House Chief of Staff Leon Panetta met
with congressional Budget Committee leadership, after which Rep. John
Kasich (R-Ohio) reported that both sides began a "give and take." The
budgeteers planned to reconvene that evening following the White
House session, and Dole said talks with the President would continue
on Dec. 30. Both sides expected to rapidly pass legislation over the
weekend allowing furloughed federal employees to return to work.
 
Addressing another issue with Medicaid per-capita caps, the CBO
memo also notes that states "could use a variety of methods to keep
their average expenditures below the cap amounts" and that some
methods "might raise, rather than lower, aggregate federal Medicaid
expenditures." Since "improvements in efficiency alone would probably
be insufficient to maintain expenditures below the cap" under tight
constraints, states might employ tactics such as shifting enrollees
from lower-cost groups to higher-cost groups that have higher
per-capita caps. CBO added that states might also "increase their
efforts to shift more of the costs of the elderly and the disabled to
the Medicare program, likewise lowering average Medicaid expenditures
per enrollee but raising total federal spending."
 
As a further consideration with per-capita cap proposals, CBO
reported that funding to states "would raise some of the same equity
questions as block grants." Both determining base year per capita
amounts and annual growth rates would be important policy decisions.
Since states' caps would likely be based on their historical
expenditure patterns, "states with high expenditures per beneficiary
would be able to lock in higher caps than states with low
expenditures per beneficiary." Low-cost states with rapid beneficiary
growth could receive a mixed bag; "some of the negative effects" of
lower caps "might be mitigated by the fact that enrollment would not
be constrained." However, for other low-cost states, "basing the per
capita caps on the existing wide discrepancies among the states would
be more problematic."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

Medicare growth rate increases likely under MedicarePlus
provisions in White House, Republican budget plans, American Academy
of Actuaries report concludes.

GOP/CLINTON MEDICAREPLUS FINANCIAL INCENTIVES COULD INCREASE
PROGRAM GROWTH rates rather than reduce Medicare expenditures,
according to a recent report prepared by the American Academy of
Actuaries. Commenting on the congressional Republican and the Clinton
Administration Medicare reform plans, AAA concludes that "the
intended geographic reconfiguration of the payment rates will tend to
increase Medicare expenditures, rather than reduce them." The report
authors are AAA Medicare workgroup chairman Guy King and members
David Axene, Solomon Mussey, David Kerr, Walter Liptak, Robert Lynch,
and David Wille.
 
The report states that in areas where new capitation payments
will be higher than under current law, new enrollment in Medicare
Plus plans will increase expenditures; however in these areas
financial incentives for beneficiaries to join new plans will be
increased. AAA argues that in areas where new capitation payments
will be less than under current law, new enrollment will reduce
expenditures; however, these are areas where financial incentives for
beneficiaries to join new plans will be diminished. The academy
emphasizes that the growth rate targets may not be reachable due to
the lack of incentives in areas where new enrollment could achieve
savings from the program.
 
AAA also states that capitation payments under the GOP plan will
rise faster than the rates designated by law. The report notes that
the Medicare Preservation Act specifies a minimum capitation payment
of $300 per month in 1996, and $350 in 1997. "But the law also says
that no capitation payment can ever increase by less than 2%
annually," according to the report. AAA concludes that "the increases
in capitation payments in the counties where these minimums apply
will make average rates rise more rapidly than the rates designated
in the law."
 
"Two significant deficiencies" in both the GOP and Clinton
Administration proposals are that they rely heavily on provider
payment reductions, the report states. The academy argues that
"reducing unit payments won't produce incentives for reducing the
rate of growth in health expenditures." The report notes "in many
cases, the rate of growth in volume and intensity of services,
increases when unit payments are lowered." In addition, the fail-safe
mechanism in the GOP plan provides no incentives for more
cost-effective delivery of health care, according to the report.
 
Second, the academy states that the structure of payments in both
proposals allows providers to choose capitation over fee-for-service
payments "if it turns out that capitation payments provide more
revenue" to providers. The Administration and GOP proposals "merely"
offer providers an alternative payment mechanism for maximizing
Medicare revenues, the academy contends.
 
The academy predicts that the Administration proposal would not
significantly impact the long-range actuarial deficit in the Hospital
Insurance program. The report states that President Clinton's
proposal employs "an accounting trick," by transferring part of the
obligation to pay for home health benefits from the HI trust fund to
the supplementary medical insurance trust fund, without a
corresponding increase in the Part B premium. Expected to make the HI
program meet short-range solvency standards, the tactic undermines
"the fiscal discipline imposed by the trust fund, and makes it
possible to avoid producing genuine, effective reform," AAA
concludes.
 
The academy lists several recommendations for improving the
proposals, in addition to suggesting less reliance on provider
payment reductions, elimination of "tricks in the HI program" and
substitution of market- based capitation rates under the MedicarePlus
plan. One recommendation includes providing financial incentives for
beneficiaries to join MedicarePlus plans in the form of increased
out-of-pocket payments such as co-payments and deductibles for
beneficiaries desiring to stay in fee-for-service.
 
Also the Academy's workgroup notes that the fail-safe mechanism
should be retained, but should be modified to increase program
deductibles if expenditures exceed the allowances. The report states
that this modification will ensure that providers do not refuse care
to Medicare beneficiaries because payments are inadequate. A final
recommendation notes that the legislation should provide a mechanism
to deal with long-range financial instability of the HI program,
"even if the mechanism is nothing more than the appointment of a
bipartisan commission to study the problem."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

Ivax begins shipping generic albuterol metered-dose inhaler
Dec. 29 following approval of generic equivalent to Glaxo's Ventolin.

IVAX BEGINS SHIPMENTS OF GENERIC VERSION OF GLAXO's VENTOLIN
metered-dose inhaler on Dec. 29, less than 24 hours after FDA
approval of the albuterol product. The company will market the
albuterol metered-dose inhaler approved on Dec. 28 through its Zenith
Goldine subsidiary. The asthma treatment is made at Ivax' Norton
subsidiary Waterford, Ireland plant. Schering-Plough also markets an
albuterol MDI under the brand name Proventil.
 
Ivax has sold over 28 mil. albuterol inhalers in over 30
countries worldwide. The albuterol approval gives Ivax a total of 18
ANDA approvals in 1995 for 12 different chemical compounds, the
company reports.
 
The FDA approval for the controversial generic drug during the
late 1995 holiday season ends an almost seven-year effort by brand
name manufacturers to block clearance of the nonsystemically absorbed
product. As of Dec. 29, none of the innovator companies had taken
legal action against the approval.
 
In a Dec. 29 "Talk Paper," FDA declared the Ivax product "safe
and effective as the brand name product" based on "a series of
laboratory analyses and in vivo tests in humans."
 
FDA lays out the bioequivalence tests that supported the approval
of the generic albuterol MDI, which included in vitro particle and
plume tests, bronchoprovocation studies in asthmatics, and
cardiovascular and metabolic tests in healthy volunteers.
 
In vitro performance tests for aerosol products "determined the
equivalence or similarity of the generic and brand name products for
the delivered amount of albuterol, the particle size and the shape of
the aerosol cloud produced by both products."
 
In the bronchoprovocation study, "the equivalence of the
pharmacological action of albuterol MDIs was established by comparing
the generic version and the brand name product's capacity to protect
the airways from constriction induced by histamine."
 
The agency adds that "the bioequivalence of the generic albuterol
MDI and Ventolin MDI was also confirmed by comparing the
cardiovascular and metabolic effects of these products in healthy
people at exposure levels substantially exceeding the recommended
therapeutic doses."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

FDA sets RDIs for six nutrients, including vitamin K and
selenium; agency publishes DSHEA implementing regs Dec. 28.

FDA SETS RDIs FOR SIX NUTRIENTS, INCLUDING SELENIUM, CHROMIUM,
vitamin K, molybdenum, chloride and manganese in a final rule
published in the Dec. 28 Federal Register. Initially, in a proposed
rule published in January 1994, the agency considered reference daily
intakes (RDIs) for seven nutrients--these six and fluoride. The
agency established the rule in order to extend RDIs to essential
nutrients not covered in previous rules.
 
"These actions are intended to assist consumers in understanding
the nutritional significance of foods in the context of a total daily
diet and are in recognition of the fact that the National Academy of
Sciences (NAS) established Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) and
Estimated Safe and Adequate Daily Dietary Intakes (ESADDIs) for"
these six nutrients, FDA states. The agency develops RDIs as a way of
communicating dietary information to consumers on the new "nutrition
facts" and "supplement facts" boxes on food and dietary supplement
products.
 
FDA decided to drop fluoride from consideration for an RDI
because, it notes, "fluoride does not meet the first criterion" for
assigning a nutrient an RDI, "namely, that there is significant
scientific consensus as to the essentiality of the nutrient." NAS,
the agency explained, said that study results so far justify no
classification of fluoride as essential.
 
The agency clarified that it had, in the proposed rule,
"mistakenly proposed an RDI for each nutrient listed in the NAS' RDA
and ESADDI tables...[failing] to focus on the fact that, unlike other
nutrients listed, the supporting text did not conclude that fluoride
is an essential element."
 
The RDIs set for vitamin K (80 mcg), selenium (70 mcg) and
chloride (3,400 mg) are the same as those proposed by FDA in the
earlier rule. However, because of a change in methodology for
determining RDIs for nutrients with ESADDIs, FDA is proposing lower
RDIs for manganese (previously 3.5 mg, now 2 mg); chromium
(previously 130 mcg, now 120 mcg); and molybdenum (previously 160
mcg, now 75 mcg).
 
The agency "intends to propose to establish RDIs for infants,
children less than four years, and pregnant and lactating women in
the near future. In that proposal the agency intends to address all
nutrients for which RDIs have been established for adults and
children four or more years of age."
 
The final rule establishing new RDIs is one of four rules
affecting dietary supplement labeling published in the Dec. 28
Federal Register. Also published are three proposed rules --
essentially implementing regs for the Dietary Supplement Health and
Education Act of 1994 -- that cover the "how tos" of nutrition and
ingredient labeling, nutritional support claims, and "high potency",
"antioxidant", and "sugar-free" claims.
 
The nutrition and ingredient labeling proposed rule sets out
FDA's interpretation of dietary supplement labeling under DSHEA and
the Nutrition Labeling & Education Act. Under FDA's proposal, some
dietary supplements, including herbal and fatty acid products, may
have to include information on calories and amounts of carbohydrates
(sugars) or fats. In addition, FDA is proposing to list ingredients
and amounts on a "per serving" basis rather than on a per dose basis.
 
FDA would allow "high potency" claims for products with one
dietary ingredient at a level of 100% of the RDI. For dietary
supplement products that contain more than one dietary ingredient, at
least two-thirds of the ingredients in the product for which there is
an RDI or DRV (daily reference value) would have to be at 100% of
that level. The proposal will only allow "antioxidant" claims to be
made for dietary supplements that contain beta carotene, vitamin C
and/or vitamin E.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

PEOPLE: Senate Finance Committee.

Senate Finance Committee: Chief Medicaid aide Roy Ramthum leaves
to join Humana starting Jan. 8. Finance welfare staffer Dennis Smith
is acting in Ramthum's capacity....



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

PEOPLE: Dura.

Dura: President and CEO Cam Garner is appointed chairman,
replacing James Blair, who resigned but continues to serve on the
board of the San Diego-based company. Garner has been president and
CEO since 1990....



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

PEOPLE: Endogen.

Endogen: Dennis Walczewski is appointed VP-sales of the
Cambridge, Massachusetts-based company. Walczewski comes from T-Cell
Diagnostics, with previous experience at Boehringer-Mannheim and
Fisher Scientific....



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
HEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

REGULATORY NEWS: KV Pharmaceutical.

KV Pharmaceutical: FDA certifies manufacturing operations as
compliant with current Good Manufacturing Practices. In June 1993,
the St. Louis, Missouri-based company signed a consent decree to
correct cGMP violations and recondition certain products, following
FDA's April 1993 seizure of solid-dose prescription and OTC
pharmaceuticals....



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
HEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

RESEARCH: OXiGENE Sensamide.

OXiGENE Sensamide: Phase I/II trial results for metoclopramide
formulation used as a sensitizer of radiation in treating patients
with inoperable non-small cell lung cancer published in the European
Journal of Cancer showed "no drug induced amplification of
radiation-induced side effects." In the 23-patient trial, half the
patients had complete or partial tumor response, the Swedish company
reports. Since May 1994, OXiGENE has been accruing patients in a
226-subject multicenter Phase II/III trial of Sensamide....



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
HEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

RESEARCH: Lidak's LP 2307.

Lidak's LP 2307: Melanoma vaccine Phase I/II trial initiated. LP
2307 is a high concentration of isolated melanoma antigens attached
to cell-size microspheres. The one-year, 18-patient study will
examine LP 2307's safety and ability to elicit tumor-specific immune
responses in patients with late-stage disease and will be conducted
at the University of California at San Diego by Malcolm Mitchell,
MD....



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
HEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

RESEARCH: Alpha-Beta Technology.

Alpha-Beta Technology: Betafectin Phase III trial for prevention
of serious post-operative infection will switch to using commercially
produced lots of Alpha-Beta's anti-infective. "This validates our
commercial manufacturing capability and, given a successful Phase III
trial, should speed our introduction of Betafectin to the market,"
the Worcester, Massachusetts-based company says....



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
HEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

FINANCIAL NEWS: Arris.

Arris: Acquisition of Khepri Pharmaceuticals is complete with
Arris' purchase of all of Khepri's outstanding stock. San
Francisco-based Arris transferred 1.4 mil. shares of its common stock
to Khepri security holders and a second payment is scheduled to occur
Dec. 30, 1996, when at Arris' option, approximately 530,000
additional shares will be issued to Khepri security holders. About
350,000 shares of Arris Common Stock are reserved for issuance upon
exercise of options, warrant and exchange rights. In the fourth
quarter of 1995, Arris will write off $20.5 mil. in in-process R&D
costs associated with the acquisition, according to the company.
Cowen and Company advised Arris, and Hambrecht and Quist provided
financial advice to San Francisco-based Khepri....



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
HEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

FINANCIAL NEWS: ChiRex Inc..

ChiRex Inc.: Newly-formed U.S. company files registration
statement with the Securities & Exchange Commission for an initial
public offering of 5.5 mil. shares at a maximum price of $16.50 per
share. Proceeds from the offering will be used to combine Sepracor's
chiral chemistry business with Sterling Organics Limited in the new
company. The offering will be overseen by CS First Boston, Lehman
Brothers and Smith Barney. ChiRex will have 9.8 mil. shares
outstanding after the offering; Sepracor will hold a 38% stake....



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
HEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

FINANCIAL NEWS: Boston Life Sciences.

Boston Life Sciences: $1 mil. private placement of convertible
debentures with institutional investors is complete. The company also
announces that it commenced a private placement this fall to raise
$12 mil. BLS is developing Therafectin (amiprilose) for treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis....



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
HEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

INDUSTRY NEWS: Quantum.

Quantum: Company realignment will result in a 10% reduction in
full-time employees for the Indianapolis-based alternate-site health
care company. Reductions will be primarily in corporate and field
management and marketing. The company projects annual savings of
around $5.7 mil. in salaries and benefits. President and Chief
Operating Officer John DeStefanis has resigned, effective Dec. 31.
The position of president will be consolidated with that of CEO and
will be filled by current chairman and CEO Douglas Stickney....



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
HEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

INDUSTRY NEWS: Quantum/Glaxo Wellcome.

Quantum/Glaxo Wellcome: Quantum announces an agreement with Glaxo
Wellcome to distribute Flolan (epoprostenol sodium) injection to
patients with severe primary pulmonary hypertension....



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
HEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

INDUSTRY NEWS: Sepracor.

Sepracor: U.S. patent for an improved chemical entity is granted
to Marlborough, Massachusetts-based Sepracor for purified
(2R,4S)-itraconazole for the treatment of local and systemic fungal
and yeast infections. Janssen's Sporonox (itraconazole) had 1994
worldwide sales of $276 mil. and its composition of matter patent is
effective through June 1998. Sepracor's (2R,4S)-itraconazole, a
purified version of parent drug Sporonox, has antifungal activity
with reduced risk of drug-drug interaction, according to the
company....



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
HEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

INDUSTRY NEWS: Fountain Pharmaceuticals.

Fountain Pharmaceuticals: Court order confirming the company's
plan of reorganization is final. The Clearwater, Florida-based
company specializes in the application of encapsulated delivery
systems....



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-8</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B039-271</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh29.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015508 text/html 29503
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:53:14 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:44 GMT
Content-length: 29316
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh29.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
HEALTH PROFESSIONS REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
February 17, 1992<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>NEW PUBLIC HEALTH RESIDENCY LAUNCHED IN ST. LOUIS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(461 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN MEDICAL&nbsp;COLLEGES, MEDICAL SCHOOLS PROVIDING STUDENTS&nbsp;WITH DISABILITY COVERAGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(323 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>DEMAND FOR OPTOMETRISTS GROWS BUT NUMBER OF&nbsp;APPLICANTS AT A VIRTUAL STANDSTILL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(794 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* LEGISLATIVE OUTLOOK *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>BUSH PRESENTS BUDGET, CALLS TO END&nbsp;FUNDING TO "UNTARGETED" PROGRAMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(499 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>CALL FOR PAPERS:&nbsp;NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS&nbsp;20th ANNIVERSARY CONFERENCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(532 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* GRANTS AVAILABILITY UPDATE *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>CENTERS OF EXCELLENCE GRANTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(585 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>EXTRAMURAL ASSOCIATES PROGRAM FOR&nbsp;MINORITIES AND WOMEN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(300 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* RESEARCH NOTES *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>LOYOLA SURGEONS PIONEER USE OF&nbsp;LAPAROSCOPY FOR TRAUMA DIAGNOSIS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(377 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HEALTH PROFESSIONS REPORT via NewsNet
February 17, 1992

NEW PUBLIC HEALTH RESIDENCY LAUNCHED IN ST. LOUIS

The department of community medicine at St. Louis University School
of Medicine will soon be offering a new residency program in preventive
medicine/public health.  The two-year program, to begin operation in
July, will be open to individuals who hold a medical or equivalent
degree and who have completed one year of postgraduate clinical
training in an accredited residency program.

Establishing this residency will be SLU's way of helping to increase the
number of public health physicians who are in demand across the
country.  Rodney M. Coe, Ph.D., professor and chairman of the
department of community medicine, told Health Professions Report
that communities and government organizations at the city, county and
federal levels lack the needed public health manpower.  This gap is
especially apparent in rural areas, many of which have no physician at
all.

The program has already proven to be unique in several ways.  First, it
is the only preventive medicine/public health residency in Missouri.
Second, but perhaps more significant, is the program schedule.  Unlike
other programs where a year of classroom study is followed by up to
two years of practicums, this program will integrate the two phases.
Residents will do their practicums in coordination with subjects taught
in the classroom over a two-year period, rather than the usual three
years.

In addition to the public health residency, SLU has opened a residency
in occupational/environmental medicine.  Coe told Health Professions
Report that the two programs will be in close collaboration, sharing
many of the same SLU faculty.  The lecture portions of both programs
will be conducted at SLU's School of Public Health.  James R. Kimmey,
M.D., M.P.H., dean of the school, will serve as program director of the
new public health residency.

The practicum segment of the public health program will  be  provided
primarily  by   the Missouri  Department  of Health.  Corporate entities
such as the Monsanto chemical company will collaborate with SLU to
provide practicums for the occupational medicine residents.

At the beginning, each of the new residencies will have two openings in
each of the two years.  Dr. Coe told Health Professions Report that
SLU has already received inquiries from interested applicants from
other states, as well as local physicians who wish to pursue new careers
in public health.  The school is hoping that the new residency program
will really "catch on."

Residents who complete the public health program will be eligible to be
board certified in preventive medicine/public health.  The majority will
most likely be employed by government public health departments, at
the local, state or federal level, depending upon the extent of their
education.

Applications to both residencies are now being accepted.  For more
information, contact Kath Engelhardt, department of community
medicine, phone (314) 577-8527.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HEALTH PROFESSIONS REPORT via NewsNet
February 17, 1992

ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN MEDICAL
COLLEGES, MEDICAL SCHOOLS PROVIDING STUDENTS
WITH DISABILITY COVERAGE

The Association of American Medical Colleges has reported success in
its efforts to help medical schools provide disability insurance to
students.  The impetus for the Association of American Medical
Colleges' initiative was the desire to protect students from the financial
devastation of HIV infection.  And although the Association points out
that the risk of a student acquiring HIV during clinical training is quite
low, students still need access to the basic benefits they don't currently
have, such as workman's compensation.

The Association's staff negotiated with insurance companies to create
disability plans that include the best features of group and individual
policies.  One of the attractive aspects of the plans is their guarantee
that students can both continue coverage after graduation and  purchase
increased  coverage,  without  medical  underwriting.

Robert F. Jones, Ph.D., assistant vice president for institutional studies
at the Association of American Medical Colleges, spearheaded the
organization's move to create these insurance plans.  "Our intention was
not to get into the insurance business but to prod the industry," Jones
explained.  "These companies deserve credit for coming through with
these programs when many dismissed the idea."

Although the threat of HIV transmission prompted the development of
these insurance plans, the broad-based policies will provide coverage for
any disabling condition, however acquired.  Residency and fellowship
programs are eligible to participate in the insurance plans as well.

Two insurance programs are now being marketed independently of the
Association.  One, offered through CM Financial Group of Chicago, is
underwritten by Connecticut Mutual and GroupAmerica.  The second,
marketed by the University Physicians Trust in Boston, has UNUM and
the United States Life company of New York as carriers.

Among the first institutions implementing the insurance are the medical
schools at New York University, Washington University at St. Louis,
Harvard University and Jefferson Medical College and the Medical
College of Wisconsin.

For more information, contact Dick Green at Association of American
Medical Colleges, phone (202) 828-0418.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HEALTH PROFESSIONS REPORT via NewsNet
February 17, 1992

DEMAND FOR OPTOMETRISTS GROWS BUT NUMBER OF
APPLICANTS AT A VIRTUAL STANDSTILL

The American Optometric Association has reported that despite growth
in the number of minority and women optometrists over the last few
years, the total number of students now studying optometry will not be
enough  to  fulfill  the  country's  future  eye  care needs.

According to Association, the expanding demand for optometrists is
expected to continue, because people of all ages require eye care.
However, there are particular segments of the population that will
contribute disproportionately to that demand.

The population of school age children are expected to multiply from
49.1 million in 1990 to 52.6 million by 2000. One out of five children has
a vision-related learning problem.

The group that includes adults ages 26-44 will remain relatively stable,
changing from 77.7 million in 1990 to only 77.6 million in 2000.
However, as the "baby-boomer" generation ages, the 45-64 age group
will increase from 46.8 million in 1990 to 61.7 million by 2000.  The
nation's workforce is comprised of both groups, 46 million of whom use
video display terminals, placing greater stress on their eyes.  The 40 and
older group will experience the onset of presbyopia, an age-related
condition which makes reading and up-close work difficult.

The segment of adults 65 years and older will grow from 31.6 million to
34.9 million during that same time period. Virtually everyone in this
group develops presbyopia. Older people in this group may also suffer
from cataracts (15.5%), glaucoma (two to three percent), and other
vision impairments.

Who will be caring for the eyes of all these people? According to
Association, fewer students are applying to schools of optometry than
six years ago. In 1986, there were 1.67 applicants for every available seat
in U.S. schools and colleges of optometry. That number declined to 1.49
applicants in 1989, and dropped even further in 1990, to a low of an
estimated 1.42 applicants. By 1991, the number of applicants competing
for each optometry seat had risen, if only slightly, to an estimated 1.52
per seat.

In addition to the slump in overall applications, minorities remain
underrepresented in optometry compared to their populations in
society, despite percentage gains over the last few years.  About one
percent of practicing optometrists are black, less than one percent are
Hispanic, about 0.2 percent are Native American and three to four
percent are Asian.

Fortunately, the diversity of the optometric student body has seen some
recent improvements. From 1979 to 1989, Asian students increased
from fewer than 4 percent of the student population to ten percent. The
number of Hispanic students grew from 1.5 percent to 3.3 percent. The
black student population doubled, from 1.4 percent to 2.8 percent. The
Native American presence in optometry schools tripled from 0.2 percent
to 0.6 percent.

While optometry still has a distance to go in recruiting and training
minority practitioners, the field is about to experience a boost in the
number of women eye care professionals. Of the 26,400 optometrists
currently practicing in the U.S., 4,200 or about 16% of them are women.
Of the current crop of optometric students, over 45% are women. By
2000, the number of practicing optometrists is expected to grow to
30,600, with women numbering 8,000, or 26% of that total.

The positive attributes of a career in optometry that are attracting more
women to the field are a selling point for any interested student. For
example:

* the average annual net income for optometrists is $70,000, while some
practitioners earn up to six-figure incomes;

* recent graduates earn an average of $40,000 in their first year in
practice;

optometrists average 40-hour work weeks, leaving time for family and
leisure;

* career opportunities other than private practices include teaching,
research, public health, the military, multidisciplinary practices, industry
consulting;

* optometrists may specialize in contact lenses, vision therapy, pediatric
optometry, geriatrics, low vision care for the visually impaired and
sports-related eye care;

the growing demand for optometry services creates a larger measure of
job security.

In 1990-91,  the  tuition  for  first-year  optometry  students  ranged
from  $4,342  for  in-state  residents  at public  schools  to  $12,763  for
out-of-state  residents  at private  schools.  These  figures  remain  about
the  same  for  the  succeeding  three  years  of  optometry  school.

The loan programs most commonly used by optometry students include
Perkins and Stafford loans; Health Professions Student Loans; Health
Education Assistance Loans; Supplemental Loans for Students, and
loans made directly from schools. During the 1990-91 academic year,
the Stafford loan program was most widely used by optometry students.

For more information about a career in optometry, contact the
American Optometric Association, 243 N. Lindbergh Blvd., St. Louis,
MO  63141, phone (314) 991-4100, or the Association of Schools and
Colleges of Optometry, phone (301) 231-5944.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HEALTH PROFESSIONS REPORT via NewsNet
February 17, 1992

BUSH PRESENTS BUDGET, CALLS TO END
FUNDING TO "UNTARGETED" PROGRAMS

The FY 93 budget proposal recently presented by the Bush
Administration includes $585 billion for the department of Health and
Human Services, which represents an increase of $41 billion (7.5%)
over FY 92. With the President calling for the termination of health
professions assistance grants in FY 93, and the elimination of over 200
domestic discretionary programs, it is no surprise that the "new blood"
in the Health and Human Services budget is not targeted toward health
professions education.

On the contrary, the budget document noted that "after two decades of
federal support, the aggregate shortage of health professionals
perceived in the 1960s when these subsidies were initiated, has abated."
The budget goes on to call for the elimination of federal funding to
"untargeted" health professions curriculum assistance programs.  So
what exactly will health professions be getting?

* Medicare/IME: Neither the budget itself nor the Health and Human
Services budget summary contain wording that would reduce Medicare
payments for graduate medical education.  In particular, there are no
provisions reducing the Medicare indirect medical education (IME)
adjustment or the Medicare direct graduate medical education
payments.

* National Health Service Corps: is slated to receive a $20 million
increase (19%), to a total of $120 million.  Of this amount, $65 million
would be available for scholarships and loan repayment.

* Health Career Opportunity Program: would receive an increase of $6
million, as part of a $96 million provision for programs specifically
targeted to health professions education for minorities.

* HIV/AIDS: The Public Health Service has been scheduled to receive
$2.069 billion for research, prevention and other related activities having
to do with these diseases. This funding level is $101 million more than
was apportioned in FY 92. A breakdown of some of the Public Health
Service components receiving HIV/AIDS funding includes the Food
and Drug Administration, $75 million; Health Resources and Services
Administration, $349 million; Indian Health Service, $3 million; Centers
for Disease Control, $505 million; National Institutes of Health, $873
million.

* National Institutes of Health: has been slated for $9.396 billion, an
increase of $443 million (4.9%) over FY 92. The budget proposes $5.277
billion for research project grants in FY 93, a $350 million (7.1%)
increase. This amount would provide funding for 5,800 new and
competing renewal research project grants and 22,132 total research
project grants. These figures show a decrease from the number of
projects funded in FY 92: 6,000 and 21,671 respectively. The budget
provided no funding increases for research centers, research training,
Research Centers in Minority Institutions, Minority Biomedical
Research Support grants or the Minority Access to Research Careers
programs.

* Community and Migrant Health Centers: received a 15% increase in
funding.

* Nursing: education programs failed to be funded again this year, but
the National Center for Nursing Research received $48.5 million.

* Veterans Administration: has been designated to receive $34.3 billion
for FY 93, an increase of $1 billion for the third consecutive year.  Of
that amount, $58.6 million will be used to hire additional health care
professionals.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HEALTH PROFESSIONS REPORT via NewsNet
February 17, 1992

CALL FOR PAPERS:
NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS
20th ANNIVERSARY CONFERENCE

The National Health Service Corps, in conjunction with the Alliance for
Primary Care, will present "Serving America's Communities," a
conference to acknowledge the 20th anniversary of the National Health
Service Corps. The meeting will be held June 25-26, 1992 in Arlington,
Va.

The conference program will consist of a formal program of scholarly
presentations, papers and poster sessions, discussion and round table
sessions, plenary sessions, keynote presentations by community health
leaders, and recognition activities and awards honoring service to the
National Health Service Corps. A special event will be focus groups of
clinicians designing a national practice-based research agenda for
primary care issues facing underserved populations.

The target audience for the national meeting is National Health Service
Corps active and alumni personnel, individuals involved or interested in
community and public health, and clinicians desiring to help develop a
national primary care research agenda.

The National Health Service Corps has called for paper proposals to be
presented at the meeting. Papers should address substantive issues,
successes, and models regarding the role of health professionals and
impacts upon the health of underserved populations. Individuals being
encouraged to submit proposals include clinical practitioners, Corps
clinicians and alumni, practitioner and academician collaborators, and
interdisciplinary groups.

The Corps has offered these ideas for possible paper topics:

(1) the community impact of successful National Health Service Corps
placements;

(2) models and strategies for increasing the number of primary care
providers serving the underserved;

(3) clinical issues: National Health Service Corps placements leading to
improved patient outcomes

* sensitivity of National Health Service Corps providers in the delivery
of quality primary care services

* successes and paradigms for retention and recruitment of primary
care providers for underserved populations

* strategies for improving access to oral health care

* increasing the role of clinical nurse midwives, nurse practitioners and
physician assistants in the delivery of primary health care

* topics and issues relating to clinical training programs

* community health issues

* community involvement in health care decisions.

Proposals for papers must include a completed application form;
updated curriculum vitae of author(s); a short (maximum two pages)
description of the paper, including what the audience will learn, and a
150-word abstract.

Submitted papers will be blind-reviewed by a panel, and those authors
whose papers are accepted will be invited to prepare a paper of
five-page maximum length to be included in the proceedings to be
distributed at the program.

Application for continuing education credit for various professions will
be made for this program.  Persons submitting proposals for
paper/presentations must be present at the conference or send a
representative to present the paper.

For more information or an application form, contact Dr. Barbara F.
LeGrand, National Health Service Corps 20th National Anniversary
Meeting, Continuing Education, 465 East High Street, Suite 204,
Lexington, KY  40507-1935.

Proposals should be submitted to Dr. LeGrand at the same address, or
faxed to (606) 258-2437. Deadline for submissions is March 2, 1992.
Notices of acceptance or rejection will be mailed March 30, 1992.
Those individuals whose papers are accepted must have a camera-ready
paper of a maximum of five pages submitted no later than June 1, 1992
for inclusion in the meeting proceedings.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HEALTH PROFESSIONS REPORT via NewsNet
February 17, 1992

CENTERS OF EXCELLENCE GRANTS

The Health Resources and Services Administration is accepting
applications for grants for Centers of Excellence in Minority Health
Professions Education.  The FY 92 appropriation for the Center Of
Excellence program is $24.1 million.

Total continuation support previously recommended is $14,544,957, to
be distributed as follows: Historically Black Colleges and Universities,
$12,092,527; Hispanic COEs, $1,456,107; Native American COEs,
$996,324.  Approximately $9.6 million will be available to support about
45 competing awards averaging $210,000.  Payments under grants for
COEs may not exceed three years.

Grants awarded under this program may be used to establish,
strengthen or expand programs to enhance the academic performance
of minority students attending the school; establish, strengthen or
expand programs to increase the number and quality of minority
applicants to the school; to improve the capacity of such schools to train,
recruit and retain minority faculty; to carry out activities to improve the
information resources and curricula of the school and clinical education
at the school with respect to minority health issues, and to facilitate
faculty and student research on health issues particularly affecting
minority groups.

In addition, grants for eligible Historically Black Colleges and
Universities may also be used to develop a plan to achieve institutional
improvements, including financial independence, and to improve library
access. Applicants must address at least three of these five legislative
purposes.

To qualify as a Center Of Excellence, a school is required to have a
significant number of minority individuals enrolled in the school,
including individuals accepted for enrollment in the school; demonstrate
that it has been effective in assisting minority students of the school to
complete the program of education and receive the degree involved;
show that it has been effective in recruiting minority individuals to
attend the school, including providing scholarships and other financial
assistance to such individuals, and encouraging minority students of
secondary educational institutions to attend the health professions
school, and demonstrate that it has made significant recruitment efforts
to increase the number of minority individuals serving in faculty or
administrative positions at the school.  For the purposes of this
program, "health professions schools" are defined as schools of
medicine, dentistry and pharmacy.  Applicants will be expected to
incorporate the principles of Healthy People 2000 in their proposals.

Funding preference will be given to applications scoring in the upper
40th percentile or better, submitted by schools located in states which
do not currently have a Center Of Excellence in that discipline.  The
proposed funding preference does not preclude funding of other eligible
approved applications.

Interested persons are invited to comment on the proposed funding
preferences. Written comments should be addressed to Clay E.
Simpson, Jr., Ph.D., Director, Division of Disadvantaged Assistance,
Bureau of Health Professions, Health Resources and Services
Administration, 5600 Fishers Lane, Room 8A-09, Rockville, MD  20857.
Deadline for comments is February 26, 1992.

Requests for grant application materials and questions regarding grants
policy and business management aspects should be directed to Ms.
Diane Murray, Grants Management Specialist (D34), Bureau of Health
Professions, Health Resources and Services Administration, 5600
Fishers Lane, Room 8C-26, Rockville, MD  20857, phone (301)
443-6857. Completed applications should be returned to the Grants
Management Specialist at the above address.

To obtain specific information regarding programmatic aspects of this
grant program, direct inquiries to Ms. Cynthia Amis, Acting Chief,
Program Coordination Branch, Division of Disadvantaged Assistance,
Bureau of Health Professions, Health Resources and Services
Administration, 5600 Fishers Lane, Room 8A-09, Rockville, MD  20857,
phone (301) 443-4493.  Deadline for applications is March 13, 1992.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HEALTH PROFESSIONS REPORT via NewsNet
February 17, 1992

EXTRAMURAL ASSOCIATES PROGRAM FOR
MINORITIES AND WOMEN

The National Institutes of Health has called for applications to its
Extramural Associates Program for Minorities and Women.  This
program is designed to bring more underrepresented minorities into
biomedical and behavioral research.

Associates spend two months (the summer program) or five months at
the National Institutes of Health, and the federal government
reimburses faculty members' institution for salary, travel and related
expenses. For more information, contact Dr. Percy Thomas at the
National Institutes of Health, phone (301) 496-9728. Deadline for
applications to the two- and three-month programs is June 15, 1992.

The Department of Veterans Affairs has announced the availability of
scholarships to nursing, nurse anesthesia and occupational or physical
therapy students for the 1992-93 school year.  The Health Professional
Scholarship Program and the Reserve Member Stipend Program
provide financial support to associate degree nursing students in their
last year of study, and third- and fourth-year students in baccalaureate
or entry-level master's degree programs in nursing, occupational
therapy and physical therapy.  In the Reserve Member Stipend
Program, reservists must be members of the Selected Ready Reserves
and eligible for the Montgomery Reserve GI Bill.

Department of Veterans Affairs Health Professional Scholarship
recipients receive tuition, educational expenses and a monthly stipend of
$621. Reserve Stipend recipients receive $400 monthly while enrolled in
full-time course work. In exchange, participants in both programs agree
to serve as a full-time registered nurse, occupational or physical
therapist in a Department of Veterans Affairs medical center for a
period of one year for each year of support. The maximum length of an
award is two years.

Requests for applications may be made to the Health Professionals
Educational Assistance Programs (143B), 810 Vermont Ave. N.W.,
Washington, DC 20420, phone (202) 535-7528.  Deadline for
applications is May 26, 1992.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
HEALTH PROFESSIONS REPORT via NewsNet
February 17, 1992

LOYOLA SURGEONS PIONEER USE OF
LAPAROSCOPY FOR TRAUMA DIAGNOSIS

Surgeons at the Loyola University Medical Center and Hines Veterans
Administration Hospital are pioneering the diagnostic use of the
laparoscope in emergency medicine, and expanding its use to include
kidney removal and other surgeries.  These innovations are evolving
along with the development of the Medical Center's Laparoscopic
Surgery Center.

The goals of the new center are to train specialists and students in
laparoscopic techniques, research and develop new applications of the
laparoscope and provide a liaison between surgeons and manufacturers
to assist in the development of new surgical devices.  A key component
of the center will be an education and research facility which will allow
faculty to integrate laparoscopy principles and techniques into the
education of surgical residents and students, as well as providing
advances courses for surgeons.

Laparoscopy is currently being used for appendix removal,
cholecystectomy, bile duct exploration and lymph node biopsy.  Other
procedures to which the laparoscope will soon be applied include kidney
removal, colon resection, vagotomy, Nissen fundoplication and hernia
repair.

One of the major breakthroughs in laparoscopy, the diagnosis of
internal injury in trauma patients, has been advanced by Dr. Wendy J.
Marshall, trauma director, and Dr. Christopher K. Salvino.  The
surgeons have shown in an ongoing, randomized study that the
laparoscope is highly effective in evaluating abdominal injuries resulting
from trauma such as stab wounds, auto accidents and assault.

Salvino explained that before the laparoscope, internal bleeding was
detected by a diagnostic lavage -- or needle inserted into the abdomen.
The lavage is not accurate enough to pinpoint the location of the
bleeding, and needs to be confirmed by using a CAT scan.  These two
procedures can consume precious time, and may necessitate moving an
unstable patient.

Laparoscopy combines the best of both procedures, indicating the
source of the bleeding and often enabling surgery to be performed
immediately. The Loyola study has indicated that laparoscopy may
sometimes even eliminate unnecessary surgery, because about 20% of
patients who test positive for bleeding by the lavage method actually
stop bleeding prior to surgery.

Other new uses for the laparoscope still being tested in the lab include
using the method to insert feeding tubes into stomachs of patients
unable to eat; internally stapling stab wounds to stop bleeding, and
injecting fibrin glue to control hemorrhaging.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-9</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B039-288</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh25.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015523 text/html 18202
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:53:31 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:44 GMT
Content-length: 18015
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh25.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
HEALTH RECORD via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Regulatory Activity</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(110 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>NOTICES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(752 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>AGENCY MEETINGS & HEARINGS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(316 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Legislative Activity</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(536 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>SENATE BILLS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(107 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>HOUSE BILLS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(267 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Calendar</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(243 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HEALTH RECORD via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Regulatory Activity


PROPOSED RULES

HHS/FDA - CORRECTION

Federal Register 12-21-95, p. 66227.

Correction to certain statements in the preamble to a proposed rule regarding
classification, reclassification, and codification of pedicle screw spinal
systems (orthopedic devices) published in the October 4, 1995 Federal
Register.  The document is being corrected to reflect an accurate description
of the formation, membership, and activities of the Spinal Implant
Manufacturers Group and the Scientific Committee, two separate entities
established by the spinal implant manufacturers and medical professional
societies to collect and submit to the FDA all available valid scientific data
on the performance of pedicle screw spinal devices.  Information:  Mark
Melkerson, 301/594-2036.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HEALTH RECORD via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

NOTICES


HHS - REPORT SUBMITTED TO OMB FOR REVIEW

Federal Register 12-20-95, p.  65659.

HHS/HRSA, National Practitioner Data Bank for Adverse Information on
Physicians and Other Health Care Practitioners:  Regulations and Forms:
0915-0126 (Extension, no change).  Information:  Reports Clearance Office,
301/443-1129.

Federal Register 12-22-95, p.  66552.

HHS/ACF, National Study of Outcomes for Children Placed in Foster Care with
Relatives (New).  Information:  Reports Clearance Office, 202/690-7275.

HHS/ACF - DEADLINE EXTENSION

Federal Register 12-18-95, p.  65064.

Notice amending the public notice published in the September 7 Federal
Register by extending the deadline for accepting new child welfare waiver
demonstration proposals and the second round of proposals.  A notice will be
published in January 1996 providing a new deadline.  Information:  Michael
Ambrose, 202/205-8618.

HHS/ACF - EARLY HEAD START

Federal Register 12-21-95, p.  66276.

Notice of the availability of funds and a request for applications to conduct
research in Early Head Start programs.  The deadline for submission is
February 20, 1996.  Information:  ACYF Operations Center, 800/351-2293.

HHS/FDA - APPLICATION APPROVAL

Federal Register 12-19-95, p.  65347.

Notice of the approval of the premarket approval application by Progressive
Angioplasty Systems, Inc., of Menlo Park CA, for the PAS LaCrosse PTCA
Catheter.  Petitions for administrative review must be submitted by January
18.  Information:  Veronica Price, 301/443-8243.

HHS/FDA - PREMARKET APPROVAL

Federal Register 12-19-95, p.  65347.

Notice of the application approval of Westbrook ME's Bioetica, Inc.'s
HEMOSTAGENE Absorbable Collagen Hemostatic Sponge.  Petitions for
administrative review must be submitted by January 18.  Information:  Frances
Curtis, 301/594-3090.

HHS/FDA - NEW INDICATION APPROVAL

Federal Register 12-19-95, p.  65348.

Notice of the supplemental application approval by Cochlear Corp.  of
Englewood CO, for premarket approval of a new indication for use for the
Nucleus 22-Channel Cochlear Implant.  Administrative appeals petitions must be
submitted by January 18.  Information:  Marilyn Flack, 301/594-2080.

HHS/FDA - INTRAOCULAR LENS

Federal Register 12-19-95, p.  65349.

Notice of the approval of the application by Pharmacia, Inc.  of Dublin OH,
for premarket approval of Model WS-100 Pliolens ultraviolet-absorbing silicone
posterior chamber intraocular lens.  Administrative appeals petitions are due
January 18.  Information:  Ashley Boulware, 301/594-2053.

HHS/FDA - CORRECTION

Federal Register 12-19-95, p.  65349.

Correction of a notice published in the August 11, 1995 Federal Register.  The
notice, entitled "Nicotine In Cigarettes and Smokeless Tobacco Products Is A
Drug And These Products Are Nicotine Delivery Devices Under The Federal Food,
Drug, And Cosmetic Act," announced the availability of appendices to it.  This
notice corrects some proofreading errors in the references in that document.
Information:  Phillip Chao, 301/827-3380.

HHS/FDA - DRUG EXPORT

Federal Register 12-20-95, p.  65658.

Notice that Ortho Diagnostic Systems, Inc., has filed an application
requesting approval for the export to Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada,
Denmark, The Federal Republic of Germany, Finland, France, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, The Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom of the human biological
product SELECTOGEN 0.8%, Reagent Red Blood Cells.  Information:  Cathy Conn,
301/594-2006.

HHS/FDA - HUMAN DRUG EXPORT

Federal Register 12-22-95, p.  66553.

Notice that Ortho Diagnostic Systems, Inc.  has filed an application
requesting approval for the export of the human biological product SURGISCREEN
0.8 percent, Reagent Red Blood Cells, to 20 countries.  Information:  Cathy
Conn, 301/594-2006.

HHS/NIH - LICENSING OPPORTUNITY

Federal Register 12-20-95, p.  65660.

Notice that the National Institutes of Health seek licensees to commercialize
a method to manipulate non-templated nucleotide addition to ensure that all
amplified DNA products of polymerase chain reaction are either specifically
modified or unmodified.  Information:  Ronald King, 301/496-7735.

HHS/NIH - GOVERNMENT INVENTIONS

Federal Register 12-20-95, p.  65660.

Notice of the list of government-owned inventions available for licensing in
the U.S.  Foreign patent applications are filed on selected inventions to
extend market coverage for U.S.  companies and may also be available for
licensing.  Information:  Robert Benson, 301/496-7056.

HHS/OS - SCIENTIFIC MISCONDUCT

Federal Register 12-21-95, p.  66276.

Notice that the Office of Research Integrity has made final findings of
scientific misconduct in the cases of Ruth Lupu, of Georgetown University
Medical Center, who was found to have submitted a false letter of
collaboration in an unfunded application to the Public Health Service; and
Victoria Santa Cruz, of the University of Arizona, who fabricated interview
data on a questionnaire intended for use in two studies funded by Public
Health Service grants.  Information:  Lyle Bivens, 301/443-5330.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HEALTH RECORD via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

AGENCY MEETINGS & HEARINGS


HHS/AHCPR - POLICY, RESEARCH, EVALUATION

Federal Register 12-19-95, p.  65346.

Meeting of the National Advisory Council for Health Care Policy, Research, and
Evaluation, January 26, Madison Hotel, Washington DC.  Information:  Deborah
Queenan, 301/594-1459.

HHS/CDC - HEALTH EFFECTS

Federal Register 12-22-95, p.  65662.

Meeting of the Citizens Advisory Committee on Public Health Service Activities
and Research at DOE Sites:  Savannah River Site Health Effects Subcommittee,
January 11-12, Hilton - The De Soto, Savannah GA.  Information:  Paul Renard,
770/488-7040.

HHS/HRSA - GME COUNCIL

Federal Register 12-19-95, p.  65351.

Meeting of the Council on Graduate Medical Education, January 9-10, Governor's
House Hotel, Washington DC.  Information:  Lawrence Clare, 301/443-6326.

HHS/NIH - AIDS RESEARCH

Federal Register 12-20-95, p.  65661.

Meeting of the National Institute of Allergy & Infectious Diseases' AIDS
Research Advisory Committee, January 30, NIH, Building 45, Natcher Conference
Center, Executive Board Conference Room D, Bethesda MD.  Information:  Anne
Claysmith, 301/402-0755.

HHS/NIH - LITERATURE SELECTION

Federal Register 12-20-95, p.  65661.

Meeting of the National Library of Medicine's Literature Selection Technical
Review Committee, February 8-9, National Library of Medicine, Building 38,
Bethesda MD.  Information:  Lois Ann Colaianni, 301/496-6921.

HHS/NIH - EYE COUNCIL

Federal Register 12-20-95, p.  65661.

Meeting of the National Advisory Eye Council, January 25, Executive Plaza
North, Conference Room G, Bethesda MD.  Information:  Lois DeNinno,
301/496-9110.

HHS/NIH - COMMUNICATIONS DISORDERS

Federal Register 12-20-95, p.  65662.

Meeting of the National Deafness and Other Communication Disorders Advisory
Council and its Planning Subcommittee, Teleconference, January 25-26, NIH,
Building 31, Conference Room 7, Bethesda MD.  Information:  Earleen Elkins,
301/496-8693.

HHS/NIH - MENTAL HEALTH

Federal Register 12-20-95, p.  65662.

Closed meeting of the National Institute of Mental Health Special Emphasis
Panel to review and evaluate grant applications, January 8-9, Hyatt Regency
Bethesda, Bethesda MD.  Information:  William Radcliffe, 301/443-1000.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HEALTH RECORD via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Legislative Activity


HEALTH PERFORMANCE PARTNERSHIPS

Senate reported the measure S.1180, to amend Title XIX of the Public Health
Service Act to provide for health performance partnerships, with an amendment
in the nature of a substitute, on December 19.  Information:  Clerk,
202/224-2120.

TEEN DRUG USE

Senate Judiciary Committee concluded hearings December 19 to examine recent
trends in drug use among American youth, focusing on prevention and treatment
programs.  Information:  Committee Office, 202/224-5225.

BALANCED BUDGET

By a unanimous voice vote of 94, the Senate passed H.J.  Res.132, affirming
that budget negotiations shall be based on the most recent technical and
economic assumptions of the Congressional Budget Office and shall achieve a
balanced budget by FY2002 based on those assumptions, after agreeing to the
following amendment:

* Daschle Amendment No.  3108, to ensure Medicare solvency, reform welfare,
and provide adequate funding for Medicaid, education, agriculture, national
defense, veterans, and the environment.  Information:  Daschle's Office,
202/224-2321.

LABOR/HHS APPROPRIATIONS

Senate reached a unanimous-consent agreement December 20 providing for the
cloture vote on a motion to proceed to the consideration on December 22 of
H.R.2127, making appropriations for the Departments of Labor, Health & Human
Services, and Education, and related agencies, for the fiscal year ending
September 30, 1996.  On December 22, a unanimous consent agreement was reached
to provide for the scheduled cloture vote to proceed to the consideration of
H.R.2127 to occur at a time to be determined, but not before January 3.
Information:  Committee Office, 202/224-4594.

WELFARE REFORM

House agreed to the conference report on H.R.4 on December 21, to restore the
American family, reduce illegitimacy, control welfare spending, and reduce
welfare dependence - clearing the measure for Senate action.  The following
measure was rejected by a recorded vote of 192-231:

* Rose motion to recommit the conference report to the committee of conference
with instructions to the managers on the part of the House to recede from
certain House provisions and agree to certain Senate amendments relating to
child abuse prevention and treatment, child care and development block grants,
state maintenance of social security efforts, SSI disabled children, family-
and school-based nutrition block grants, child nutrition programs, and
continued application of current standards under the Medicaid program.
Information:  Rose's Office, 202/225-2731.

VA MEDICAL FACILITIES

House Committee on Veterans' Affairs ordered reported H.R.2814 on December 21,
to authorize major medical facility projects and leases for the Department of
Veterans' Affairs for FY96.  On December 22, the House filed H.R.2814.
Information:  Committee Office, 202/225-3527.

DAYTON AREA HEALTH CARE PLAN

Senate Finance Committee was discharged December 22 from further consideration
of H.R.1878, to extend for two years the period of applicability of enrollment
mix requirement to certain health maintenance organizations providing services
under the Dayton Area Health Care Plan.  The bill was then passed, clearing
the measure for the President.  Information:  Committee Office, 202/224-4515.

WELFARE REPORT

Senate agreed to the welfare reform conference report, H.R.4, by a vote of 52
to 47 on December 22, to enhance support and work opportunities for families
with children, reduce welfare dependence, and control welfare spending.  The
measure is now cleared for the President.  Information:  Clerk, 202/225-2120.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HEALTH RECORD via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

SENATE BILLS


DOD MEDICARE REIMBURSEMENT

S.1487.  To establish a demonstration project to provide that the Department
of Defense may receive Medicare reimbursement for health care services
provided to certain Medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries.
(McCain) Finance.

ERISA

S.1490.  To amend Title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
1974 to improve enforcement of such title and benefit security for
participants by adding certain provisions with respect to the auditing of
employee benefit plans, and for other purposes.  (Simon) Labor & Human
Resources.

NSAIDS

S.1496.  To grant certain patent rights for certain non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs for a two-year period.  (Simon) Judiciary.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HEALTH RECORD via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

HOUSE BILLS


PREMIUM REDUCTION

H.R.2805.  To amend Title XVIII of the Social Security Act to reduce the
amount of the premium charged for enrollment in Part A of the Medicare program
for individuals 80 years of age or older.  (Stark) Ways & Means.

VETERAN COMPENSATION

H.R.2813.  To ensure that payments during fiscal year 1996 of compensation for
veterans with service-connected disabilities, of dependency and indemnity
compensation for survivors of such veterans, and of other veterans' benefits,
and payments to Department of Veterans' Affairs contractors providing services
directly related to patient health and safety, are made regardless of
Government financial shortfalls.  (Hutchinson) Appropriations.

VA MEDICAL FACILITIES

H.R.2814.  To authorize major medical facility projects and major medical
facility leases for the Department of Veterans' Affairs for fiscal year 1996,
and for other purposes.  (Stump) Veterans' Affairs.

VA AMBULATORY CARE

H.R.2831.  To authorize establishment of a Department of Veterans' Affairs
ambulatory care facility in Brookhaven NY.  (Forbes) Veterans' Affairs.

HEALTH CARE BENEFITS

H.R.2836.  To provide increased access to health care benefits, to provide
increased portability of health care benefits, to provide increased security
of health care benefits, to increase the purchasing power of individuals and
small employers, and for other purposes.  (Roukema) Commerce.

MEDICARE PHARMACEUTICALS

H.R.2839.  To amend Title XVIII of the Social Security Act to establish a
medication evaluation and dispensing system for Medicare beneficiaries, to
improve the quality of pharmaceutical services received by our nation's
elderly and disabled, and to reduce instances of adverse reactions to
prescription drugs experienced by Medicare beneficiaries.  (Stark) Ways &
Means.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HEALTH RECORD via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Calendar


AACC 1996 MEETINGS

The American Association for Clinical Chemistry, Inc.  will hold the following
meetings in 1996:

* February 4-5, Arnold O.  Beckman Conference, "Drugs and Toxins in Clinical
Laboratory Practice," Wyndham Emerald Plaza, San Diego CA; * March 5, "Taking
Charge of Point-of-Care Testing," McLean Hilton, Washington DC; * April 10-12,
Oak Ridge Conference, Tomorrow's Technology Today, "New and Advanced
Technology for the Clinical Laboratory," Fairmont Hotel, San Jose CA; * April
17, "Taking Charge of Point-of-Care Testing," Holiday Inn - O'Hare
International, Chicago IL; * May 8, "Taking Charge of Point-of-Care Testing,"
Sheraton Newport Beach, Newport Beach CA; * May 14-15, Laboratory 2000
Conference, Sheraton Gateway Suites Hotel, Chicago IL; * July 28-August 1,
48th AACC Annual Meeting & Clinical Laboratory Exposition, McCormack Place,
Chicago IL; * October 1996, Video/audio conference, "Strategies for Survival:
How Laboratorians Must Reengineer To Cope with New Laboratory Needs; *
November 1996, Clinical Chemistry Forum; and * November 21-23, San Diego
Conference on Nucleic Acids, San Diego CA.  Information:  Peggy Abbott,
800/892-1400.


To order individual copies of the "Federal Register," send $4.50 to:
Superindendent of Documents, GPO, Washington, DC 20402; 202/512-0132.

For a free copy of a House bill or report, send a self-addressed mailing label
to House Document Room, B-18, Ford Building, Washington, DC 20515.  For a free
copy of a Senate bill or report, send a self-addressed mailing label to Senate
Document Room SHB04, Washington, DC 20510.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-10</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B040-10</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh42.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015559 text/html 26470
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:53:44 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:43 GMT
Content-length: 26283
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh42.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
HEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
January 11, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>APA STUDY ENCOURAGES PSYCHOLOGICAL STRATEGIES FOR COST CONTROL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(202 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>MEDICARE MARKETERS FEEL HCFA'S CRACKDOWN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(609 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ADVERTISING</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>ONLINE HEALTH SERVICES OFFER TARGET MARKETING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(902 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CASE STUDY NO. 78:  MARKETING</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>MARKETERS USE LEGACY OF OLYMPIC STAR IN CAMPAIGN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(422 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>HEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS BRIEFS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>HHS RELEASES PSA ON AIDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(142 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>GHHA CAMPAIGN COUNTERS CRITICISM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(56 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>U.S. HEALTHCARE SATURATES CHARLOTTE MARKET </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(205 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>UPCOMING EVENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(45 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>TOOL BOX</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>KIOSKS EFFECTIVE TOOL FOR HEALTHCARE MARKETERS </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(516 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MARKETING</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>DIRECT MAIL WORKS WITH SENIOR MEDICARE MARKET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(218 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

APA STUDY ENCOURAGES PSYCHOLOGICAL STRATEGIES FOR COST CONTROL

     A new study by the American Psychological Association (APA) shows
communications specialists can affect their hospital's bottom line by
encouraging physicians and other medical staff to use self-help
tactics in their demand management programs. 
     "There is growing evidence that addressing the multiple
psychosocial reasons that prompt patients to visit physicians can be
both health- and cost- effective," said Doug Fizel, public affairs
specialist for the APA. 
     "For example, there are patient-specific and disease-specific
communication intervention strategies that can be integrated into
clinical care with the same degree of scientific credibility as
pharmaceutical or surgical interventions." 
     An overall psychological and behavioral management communications
strategy can be used effectively in concert with increased sensitivity
to psychiatric disorders to achieve cost savings, he said. 
     The underlying reasons patients visit physicians are multi-
faceted and often influenced strongly by psychological factors and
behavioral variables, said the study. 
     Acknowledging the success of self-help can have a significant
impact on the type of care given, the efficacy of that care and,
importantly, the bottom line cost of that care, it notes. 
     Improving medical care and reducing medical costs, assert the
authors of the study, can best be accomplished by integrating
psychiatric, psychological, behavioral, and biomedical evaluations and
interventions.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

MEDICARE MARKETERS FEEL HCFA'S CRACKDOWN

     HMOs targeting the Medicare population must conform to a battery
of new federal requirements, including submitting their marketing
plans to the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) at least 45
days before materials are distributed.
      In the agency's new crackdown on Medicare risk contracts, con-
tractors also will have to provide clear, written descriptions of
their plans for Medicare beneficiaries; notify the public about
enrollment periods; and inform prospective enrollees that contracts
with HCFA may be terminated compliance with the requirements is not
found.
    HCFA, which only recently released its requirements, will supply a
marketing model to contractors upon request and has stipulated that
minor deviations can derail or delay a marketing plan.  
     Medicare-risk contractors would be wise to pay particular
attention to HCFA's "report cards" on, or assessments of, a
contractor's marketing materials, cautioned Lynn Shapiro Snyder, an
attorney with the Washington, D.C., firm of Epstein Becker & Green.

Required and Prohibited Marketing Activities 

     Prohibited marketing activities under HCFA's regulations include
discrimination based on health status; intentionally confusing
beneficiaries; dispensing gifts or payments of above $10 to encourage
enrollment, door-to-door solicitations, and distribution of marketing
materials not approved by HCFA. 
     Violations range from $25,000 to $100,000 per abuse.  A
contractor also can be prohibited from continuing to accept enrollment
applications and payments for enrolled beneficiaries, and may be asked
to cease marketing activities. 
     Medicare-risk contractors must use care in selecting marketing
agents for their plans and should avoid using physicians.  Physicians,
Snyder noted, often are unaware of membership plans' benefits and
costs.
     In addition, a physician's "inside knowledge" of the patient's
health increases the potential for discrimination in favor of
healthier beneficiaries when acting as a marketing agent--a prohibited
marketing activity, Snyder said.
     The best way to avoid such problems:  "Tell your doctors not to
talk about 
Medicare risk contracts," Snyder said.  "Let the marketing department
do that." 
     Taking care with their marketing practices will help contractors
avoid problems that potentially could reflect badly on their status,
said Geraldine Dallek, executive director of the Los Angeles based
Center for Health Care Rights (CHCR).
     "The experiences of CHCR's Health Insurance Counseling and
Advocacy Program (HICAP) and other HICAP programs throughout
California are reflective of very serious problems in the
risk-contracting program that must be addressed," said Dallek whose
group in 1993 published a study on marketing, quality of care and due
process protections in Medicare risk-contract HMOs.
     
Some of the problems the study cited were:
     *  Poorly trained marketing agents; 
     *  Inappropriate financial incentives inherent in the
commission-based compensation of marketing agents; 
     *  Marketing fraud/abuse resulting from these problems; 
     *  Lack of marketing materials in an enrollee's primary language;
and,
     *  HMO delays in disenrolling Medicare members. 

     In a number of documented instances, HMO employees have lied to
prospective Medicare enrollees about the benefits of HMO enrollment,
pressured them to join, enrolled individuals who were unable to make
an informed enrollment decision, and obtained enrollment signatures
under false pretenses, Dallek said. 
     Generally, these problems are prevalent in geographic areas where
beneficiaries have little experience with Medicare HMOs, in areas of
fierce competition for Medicare enrollees, and with HMOs inexperienced
in marketing to this population. 
     Many HMOs pay their marketing agents a commission for each new
Medicare enrollee.  Without proper training and oversight, this
compensation system is a recipe for disaster. 
     For example, in the late 1980s and early 1990s, Los Angeles
County Medicare beneficiaries were subjected to massive marketing
fraud by one HMO, she said.
      "Although HCFA was slow to react to this problem, once the
agency took strong action, the HMO changed its agent compensation
system and significantly increased agent training and oversight," said
Dallek.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

ONLINE HEALTH SERVICES OFFER TARGET MARKETING

     Providers of healthcare services and pharmaceutical may now be
able to promote their wares by tapping into the interactive healthcare
communications service "Better Health & Medical Forum" on America
Online. 
        Health ResponseAbility Systems Inc. (HRS), a pioneer in
developing online and interactive healthcare communications, started
the Better Health Medical Forum on America Online (keyword: Better
Health), one of the fastest growing areas (with almost 1.4 million
visits per month).
     Under an agreement with Hill and Knowlton Public Relations in New
York City, the company will seek to increase awareness of the forum
and open opportunities for corporate sponsors to underwrite expansion
of the services.
     Corporate sponsors will be able to link advertising and marketing
materials to appropriate areas and to sponsor chat rooms or
informational sites.
     The forum is an easy-to-use, searchable health and medical
information database and service that facilitates "real-time"
communication and information exchange with hundreds of thousands of
individuals across the nation.      
     "Some of the benefits of sponsoring a site is having a captive,
alive audience that is interested in your information.  It is target
marketing," said Allen Douma, creator of HRS.
     For example, Douma said, a pharmaceutical company that spends
thousands of dollars in television advertising for a certain
medication may do better on-line by targeting a select group of
patients that would be interested in it. 
     "We have a very strong community of people who are seeking health
information," said Douma. 
     Although Better Health is one of the most popular sites at AOL,
Douma expects to see a four-fold increase in the number of visits next
year.  
     The forum embraces an integrated, synergistic approach to
informing, motivating and supporting individuals in making more
informed choices about factors that influence health and well-being,
from personal decisions such as lifestyle and self-care, to national
decisions such as health reform, said Elin Silveous, co-founder of the
service.  Silveous started the forum when she discovered she had
multiple sclerosis but could not find an online support group.     
     The forum also offers full-text documents and downloadable
software files spanning the continuum of health topics, from lifestyle
and prevention, to rehabilitation and long-term care.
       
     Following are some of the features the Better Health & Medical
Forum includes:

--  More than 50 Message Boards (See complete list below.  Each
message board can contain up to 50 folders.  Each folder can contain
up to 500 messages.);

--  Thirty five Community Health Forums as part of the Personal
Empowerment Network; 

--  MEDLINE, the world's leading bibliographic database complied by
the National Library of Medicine;

--  Shopping Services (for health educational and related items);

--  Forums for Voluntary Health and Disability Related Organizations,
including: the American Cancer Society, American Diabetes Association
and American Lung Association;

--  Four chat rooms in which more than 250 "LIVE" mutual support and
self-help group meetings or health professional networking meetings
are held each month; and, 

--  Numerous Software Libraries 

    Within the Better Health & Medical Forum, HRS has embedded a
number of additional information and support sources, such as the
Personal Empowerment Network (PEN) and MEDLINE.
     PEN is a community in which members reach out and help one
another in dealing with life's challenges and with the personal--and
sometimes difficult decisions--that influence health and quality of
life.
     PEN offers more than 30 areas of medical special interest,
linking AOL members with information and access to the web.  MEDLINE
provides members with easy-to-use, low-cost access to the database of
the National Library of Medicine.  To obtain free software and free
trial time to peruse the Better Health & Medical Forum, members can
call 1-800-531-2626.


(EDITOR'S NOTE: This week's Ask Your Colleague explores easy ways to
develop a communications plan during a merger or acquisition.
HCPRMN asked Paula Lovell, president of Lovell Communications in
Nashville, Tenn., for her tips.)

What are the first steps in developing an overall communications plan?

     "The most important step to remember is to be in the information
pipe line.  Being part of the management group that is dealing with
the merger first hand will help in getting a handle on the
information. 
     You should get the information first in order to assimilate it
into a communications plan.  By being a member of the "project team"
assigned with working on the merger--you can be in the loop because if
you don't, the information could potentially be leaked.
      The second step is to identify target audiences--Board of
Trustees, stakeholders, stockholders, volunteers, fundraisers, media,
patients and families, physicians and managed-care organizations.
     Then develop a core message and a rationale for merger for each
group. 
     Also, identify the single best ways to communicate your message
with memos, personal phone calls, press releases, advertising,
hospital meetings and advertising.
     Also develop your own communications team--a different team from
the "project team" with your own worker bees. 
     The CEO and the CFO of the hospital would be part of the team. 
He needs to be aware of his role and be provided with press releases
as well as be advised about potential confusion, morale issues, public
empathy for disgruntled employees. 
     He also needs to be prepared for competitors in managed care and
what it means to the business."

When is the best time for an announcement?
     
     "Ideally if you are an organization in the private sector, at the
time the letter of intent is signed, an announcement should be made." 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

MARKETERS USE LEGACY OF OLYMPIC STAR IN CAMPAIGN

    Capitalizing on the legacy of Olympic athlete and Oklahoma native,
Jim Thorpe, Integris Health's Southwest Medical Center in Oklahoma
City has retained a 95 percent occupancy and attracted younger and
more affluent patients at its new rehabilitation center.
     Not long after the campaign was launched, the referral rate goals
for the Jim Thorpe Rehabilitation Hospital of six to seven new names a
month were surpassed by 30 percent and three months ahead of schedule.
     "A center of excellence was established as evidenced by patients
asking their physicians to refer them to Jim Thorpe," said Sam
Armstrong-Lopez, marketing director for Integris Health.
     The campaign promoted a consistent and unified message of triumph
over adversity in all of its components. 
     Words like "drive, determination, success, legacy and desire,"
which symbolize the Jim Thorpe legacy, were threaded through all
pieces of the campaign."
     "The positive image garnished from the Jim Thorpe Rehabilitation
Hospital campaign will serve as the base for other marketing efforts,"
said Lopez. 
"We will make strides in image enhancements and generate revenue in
other areas for a "halo effect" from the successful launch of the
hospital."
     The $280,000 campaign, which focused on Thorpe's life, used a
multi-phased approach to market assessment and strategy. 
     Phase I, which occurred in the summer of 1994, was a six-step
process that focused on strategic, creative and action-plan
development. 
     Phase II, entailed the print and television production process. 
Some of the photography took place in Denver, including footage
recreating Thorpe as a young athlete. 
     The hospital even went to great effort to find antique athletic
gear and period props for the scenes. 
     Photographs of Thorpe were borrowed from the family and the
Thorpe estate.
     To reach an audience most apt to use or contribute to the
hospital, the campaign--launched two weeks before the rehabilitation
center's grand opening--included print ads touting an open house and
testimonials, an outpatient brochure, physician direct mail series,
patient and volunteer medals and television spots.
     "A pieces approach with an ad here and a brochure there would
have done little to properly position a new rehabilitation hospital. 
Through a comprehensive effort, we were able to leverage the
individual components into a whole that was stronger than the sum of
the parts," said Lopez.   
     "The Jim Thorpe legacy and message of hope, triumph and
overcoming obstacles was versatile enough to reach all of our
audiences as exhibited by the applicability of the creative to the
direct-mail series, brochures and video, community and donor-directed
print ads, patient directed medals and the T.V. spots," Lopez added.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

HHS RELEASES PSA ON AIDS

     Amid troubling new evidence of the toll AIDS continues to take on
America's young adults, the Department of Health and Human Services
released a new series of public service announcements urging young
Americans to take personal responsibility for protecting themselves
from HIV.
     The new PSAs entitled "Respect Yourself, Protect Yourself," were
produced by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).  It
shows young adults talking candidly about their sex lives. Young
adults who are HIV educators and service providers, as well as members
of the target audience, worked closely with CDC and its partners to
create the PSAs.
     HHS Secretary Donna Shalala cited data that identify both the
increase in HIV-related deaths among young adults and the ongoing risk
of new HIV infections.  In 1994, AIDS became the leading cause of
death among 25- to 44-year-olds, increasing from 37,000 to 42,000.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

GHHA CAMPAIGN COUNTERS CRITICISM

     The Group Health Association of America (GHHA), a Washington-
based managed-care trade group, is planning a campaign to
counteroffense media criticism.  The GHAA is expected to release
details about the effort this month.
     Popular TV series like "ER" have mentioned HMOs negatively, while
surveys have shown that HMO enrollees are satisfied with their quality
of healthcare.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

U.S. HEALTHCARE SATURATES CHARLOTTE MARKET 

     Two months after receiving the go-ahead to operate in Charlotte,
N.C., U.S. Healthcare Inc. is living up to its reputation as an
aggressive marketer. 
     The $2.8-billion health maintenance organization has 
saturated the Charlotte market, even the sides of buses.
     "It's pretty typical of what we do," says Vaughan Delk, general
manager for U.S. Healthcare of the Carolinas Inc. 
        "Part of what we're doing is name recognition.  We're not a
household name yet in the Charlotte market, but we certainly plan on
being one."  
      To do so, the Blue Bell, Pa.-based HMO -- which counts more than
2 million members -- took out two-page ads in The Business Journal and
The Charlotte Observer announcing its arrival.  "The Whole Town's
Jumpin' As Charlotte Welcomes
U.S. Healthcare," its first ad read, only days after receiving
approval from state regulators. 
      One media reporting service estimates the HMO spent $155,000 on
TV spots in Charlotte in October alone.  In Atlanta, the HMO devoted
nearly $1.2 million to its marketing efforts in a quarter, according
to a statement filed with the Georgia Insurance Department. That total
includes salaries for a staff of about 20.  By comparison, Kaiser
Permanente, Georgia's largest HMO, reports spending $5.4 million on
marketing in all of 1994.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

UPCOMING EVENTS

Feb. 11-14: Society for Healthcare Planning & Marketing's "National
Managed Care Forum," San Diego, Calif. (708-698-4137)
Feb. 20-30: Healthcare Strategies Institute's "Integrated Delivery
Systems: Building Successful Payer-Provider Relationships,"
Scottsdale, Ariz.
March 3-6: Alliance for Healthcare Strategy and Marketing's "1996
Annual Conference," New Orleans, La. (602-990-7839)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

KIOSKS EFFECTIVE TOOL FOR HEALTHCARE MARKETERS 

     The newest tool in healthcare marketing is the use of interactive
kiosks or "ATMs" for marketing programs.
         Market research firm Intelco Corp., based in Norwalk, Conn.,
predicts that the number of installed multi-media kiosks will grow 69
percent this year from 125,000 units last year to a total of 211,000
units.
        Blue Cross Blue Shield in Massachusetts (BCBSMA), for example,
has a group of kiosks called "Health Navigator" which allow a
company's employees to view information about various health insurance
plans, select a plan and even select a preferred doctor.
     "It is a virtual-reality customer service center in a kiosk which
uses attractive graphics, high-quality digital video, sound and
animation to communicate with the consumer," said Ethel Shepard,
BCBSMA spokesperson.
     The Health Navigator kiosk is transportable and provides a
variety of essential healthcare information, ranging from primary care
physician directories, prescription and over-the-counter drug
information, wellness surveys and health and wellness articles.
     In addition, members can easily obtain a print-out of their
member profile and can even change their primary care physician by
selecting the "Members Only" function and swiping a member ID card.
     "Health Navigator reflects our growing confidence in technology
to meet the needs of our customers," said William Van Fassen, BCBSMA
president.  "We are entering a new era for health care and healthcare
technology.  This system will lower our administrative costs and
provide critical health information for our customers when and where
they need it." 
     An interactive video host guides the user through the available
options; the user requests information via a touch-screen monitor.  
     The kiosk provides laser quality print-outs as well as a phone
handset for using a touch screen monitor.  It also provides laser
quality print-outs for direct access to BCBSMA customer service
representatives.
     Greg Swistak, president of Factura Inc., a kiosk maker based in
Rochester, N.Y., believes his company's kiosk sales will grow 50
percent.  The company has installed 30 percent of the 100,000 kiosks
now in operation in the United States.  Swistak created the BCBSMA
kiosk.
     Health Navigator leverages the health information highway
technologies that are already in place--connecting health care
providers and the business communities and BCBSMA's mainframes, said
Shepard. 
     Kiosks may be expensive depending on their capabilities.  The
minimum cost is $750, and a touchscreen monitor is between $700 and
$1,000. 
     A personal computer which sits inside the kiosk may cost about
$1,500 and a printing device could add another $1,000.  Depending on
the choice of hardware, an individual kiosk may cost between $4,000
and $20,000.  And then there is also the cost of designing the
software to interact with a kiosk user which depends 
on a company's computer expertise.  

     Some of the information available on the Healthcare Navigator
kiosk includes:

     *  Descriptions of available health plans;
     *  Information about such special programs as safety helmet
discounts, health fitness network, Caring Program for Children,
preventive time lines for adults and children, fitness and eyewear
networks, Living Healthy Books and Living Healthy Magazine.
     *  Primary Care Physicians Directories, which provide users with
an up-to-date list of available and appropriate PCP's located near
their homes or work.   



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

DIRECT MAIL WORKS WITH SENIOR MEDICARE MARKET

     When selling Medicare risk products to the senior and baby boomer
market, traditional marketing techniques such as seminars may not lead
to success.
         "Medicare risk products present a very new challenge. 
Marketers must learn to target their senior market one by one,
recognizing the needs of the individual, not a group," said John
Harrison, president of DiMark Inc., a database marketing outsource
company, in Langhorne, Pa.
     "It is in this venue that a database marketing strategy, and the
use of direct marketing techniques, will make the difference between
success and failure in Medicare risk marketing."
     A database marketing strategy allows Medicare risk marketers to
collect marketing data on an individual prospect or customer basis, to
respond to the needs of their customers.
     Direct marketing provides the tools to implement a database
marketing strategy.
     "Insurance marketers have traditionally relied on a two-tiered
approach, utilizing personal sales and seminars to attract and sell
prospects.  When a marketer, however, adds direct marketing to the
mix, a dual purpose is served," said Harrison. "These techniques
provide a means of targeting the senior market and, in some cases,
successfully enrolling these individuals through a one-step sales
process.
     For the balance of the market, which relies on the personal touch
of seminars and sales representatives, direct-response techniques
offer a cost-effective means of generating leads.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-11</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B040-29</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh11.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015615 text/html 31329
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:54:21 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:47 GMT
Content-length: 31142
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh11.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
January 5, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>DOJ GIVES SEAL OF APPROVAL TO THREE PROVIDER NETWORKS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(517 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>BUSINESS BRIEFS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>HOSPITAL SATISFACTION WITH JCAHCO IMPROVING, ACCORDING TO&nbsp;AHA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(150 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>BAXTER INTERNATIONAL TO CREATE TWO $5-BILLION FIRMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(97 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>MERGER OF MARYMOUNT, CLEVELAND CLINIC RECEIVES NEEDED&nbsp;APPROVALS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(126 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>ST. JUDE MEDICAL INKS PREFERRED PROVIDER PACT&nbsp;WITH COLUMBIA/HCA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(89 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>FTC DECIDES TO DROP CHALLENGE OF MISSOURI HOSPITAL MERGER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(135 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>TENET FORMS EQUIPMENT-MANAGEMENT PROGRAM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(100 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>MEDICAL RESOURCE NETWORK, ANTHEM COMPLETE PARTNERSHIP&nbsp;AGREEMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(56 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>JOHNS HOPKINS, HUMANA TEAM TO BUILD MD. MCO NETWORK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(382 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>MD.'S MATERNITY LOS LAW ISN'T BOOSTING HOSPITAL STAYS, SOME&nbsp;SAY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(420 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>EXPECT MORE COMPETITION, CAPITATION, CONSOLIDATION IN 1996,&nbsp;EXPERT SAYS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1733 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>HOSPITAL'S ELECTRONIC NURSING STATION GIVES DOCS OFF-SITE&nbsp;VIEW OF PATIENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(256 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

DOJ GIVES SEAL OF APPROVAL TO THREE PROVIDER NETWORKS

Federal antitrust authorities have given the okay to three
provider networks, including one that would represent nearly
50% of the dermatologists in its market.

South Carolina dermatologists will be allowed to form a
network to contract with managed care organizations to
provide skin services currently being provided by
internists, general and family practitioners and other
specialists.  In two other decisions, DOJ okayed a plan by
Florida dermatologists, plastic surgeons and
dermatopathologists to form a network and agreed to allow a
Georgia foot care network to act as an intermediary for
soliciting and managing managed care contracts between its
members and third-party payers.

DOJ says the non-exclusive South Carolina dermatology
network will allow 85 board-certified dermatologists to
contract with managed care plans at competitive rates for
dermatologic services commonly provided by other types of
doctors.

Based on the assumption that the number of network
dermatologists in any local market will not exceed 30% of
all doctors available to provide the same kinds of services,
the Justice Department's antitrust division says it is
unlikely that network members would attain market power or
cause anticompetitive effects.

Even with 44% of market, network earns DOJ okay

In another ruling, the antitrust division last month decided
to allow a group of south Florida dermatologists, plastic
surgeons and dermatopathologists to form a joint network to
provide comprehensive services to third-party payers.

Dermnet Inc. will provide services in Dade, Broward and Palm
Beach counties.  "By offering more choices and greater
efficiency, Dermnet might inject a healthy dose of
competition in these markets," said Anne Bingaman, assistant
attorney general for antitrust.

Bingaman's letter said that Dermnet's operations, while
representing around 44% of board-certified dermatologists in
the area, are not likely to result in anticompetitive
effects.  The network presents sufficient safeguards, she
writes, to prevent threats to competition for dermatology
services in the market.

Dermnet's members will share substantial financial risk
through capitation, and the network will be non-exclusive,
Bingaman says.  In addition, large healthcare payers in the
area expressed no competitive concerns about the proposal,
instead viewing it as a possible way to enhance efficiency,
she says.

A Georgia foot care network will be allowed to act as an
intermediary for soliciting and managing managed care
contracts between its members and third-party payers under a
third proposal granted approval by DOJ.

The proposed non-exclusive network will be open to any
member of the Georgia Podiatric Medical Association.  The
network, which will be called Georgia Preferred Podiatric
Medical Network, represents 92 of the state's 212
podiatrists.

The department said the proposed activities are not likely
to be anticompetitive because the network will function as a
facilitator of managed care contracting between its members
and payers.  The network will not negotiate fees on behalf
of its members, and members will be prohibited from
discussing contract terms among themselves.

In addition, the department said the discussions that payers
may request with the network's agent concerning non-price
issues may be efficiency-enhancing, because they may assist
health plans in developing effective standards of care and
cost controls.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

HOSPITAL SATISFACTION WITH JCAHCO IMPROVING, ACCORDING TO
AHA

Overall hospital satisfaction is increasing with the on-site
survey process of the Joint Commission on Accreditation of
Healthcare Organization, according to the second in a series
of national opinion polls conducted for the American
Hospital Association.  Satisfaction with the pre-survey
process increased as well.  But hospitals reported
increasing dissatisfaction with the time needed to get
written accreditation reports after their on-site surveys.
The poll, conducted by the National Research Corp. of
Lincoln, Neb., was mailed in November to 660 hospitals that
had been evaluated by the Joint Commission from May 20 to
Sept. 30, 1995.  Three hundred and thirty-four responded.
Data for the first poll in the series was gathered in
August.  The polls seek to identify the reasons why
hospitals want Joint Commission accreditation; to assess
hospitals' level of support for the accreditation process
and to learn which areas of that process need improvement.
Contact AHA at (202)638-1100.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

BAXTER INTERNATIONAL TO CREATE TWO $5-BILLION FIRMS

Baxter International's board of directors has approved a
plan to create two $5-billion entities, a global medical-
technology company and a healthcare cost management company.
The medical technology firm will continue to be known as
Baxter International Inc.  It will consist of the company's
high-growth medical technology and international businesses,
which include biotechnology, renal therapy, cardiovascular
medicine, international hospital and intravenous systems.
The healthcare cost management company will consist of
Baxter's cost management, U.S. distribution and surgical
products operations and will provide an array of products
and cost-saving services to healthcare providers.  Contact
Baxter at (708)948-2875.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

MERGER OF MARYMOUNT, CLEVELAND CLINIC RECEIVES NEEDED
APPROVALS

An agreement initiated last year to merge Marymount Hospital
and the Cleveland Clinic Foundation has received all needed
approvals and was signed.  Working together, the two
organizations will have a collaborative approach to sharing
clinical and educational information, research, technology
and managed care responsibilities.  They will function as a
single economic entity with a common bottom line.  Marymount
will remain a Catholic hospital, and its mission, philosophy
and

values will be preserved.  Marymount, founded by the Sisters
of St. Joseph of the Third Order of St. Francis in 1949,
will continue to be sponsored by the Sisters, who will
participate in its governance.  For more information,
contact Mary Parsons of Marymount Hospital at (216)587-8213
or Holli Birrer of the Cleveland Clinic Foundation at
(216)44-0141.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

ST. JUDE MEDICAL INKS PREFERRED PROVIDER PACT
WITH COLUMBIA/HCA

St. Jude Medical Inc., St. Paul. Minn., has signed a supply
agreement with Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp.  Under the
agreement, St. Jude Medical's heart valve division and
Pacesetter, its cardiac rhythm management business, have
additional access to all Columbia/HCA accounts.  The
agreement is in force from October 1995 to the end of 1996,
with a renewal option for 1997.  Pacesetter has been under
contract with Columbia/HCA since 1994.  The company says it
expects continued growth with the new contract.  For
details, contact Paul Vetter, St. Jude Medical,  at
(612)481-7791.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

FTC DECIDES TO DROP CHALLENGE OF MISSOURI HOSPITAL MERGER

The Federal Trade Commission unanimously decided to drop its
case challenging the merger of two Missouri hospitals on
antitrust grounds.  "The decision not to pursue the Freeman
and Oak Hill hospitals case marks the first time that the
FTC has used the new rule it adopted to review and dismiss a
pending case after reconsidering it," says Thomas Campbell,
a hospital antitrust attorney representing the Joplin
hospitals.  The five FTC commissioners unanimously announced
the dismissal of the case after being denied a preliminary
injunction Nov. 1 by the 8th Circuit Court of Appeals in St.
Louis.  Previously, U.S. District Judge Dean Whipple in
Kansas City issued an opinion and, after holding an
evidentiary hearing in Joplin, concluded that the FTC's
evidence did not meet the requirements for a preliminary
injunction.  Contact Campbell at (312)245-8425.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

TENET FORMS EQUIPMENT-MANAGEMENT PROGRAM

Tenet Healthcare Corp., Santa Monica, Calif., has formed a
comprehensive equipment-management program projected to save
the company more than $13 million over the next three years.
The program, which oversees all equipment-maintenance
contracts -- will be implemented in the company's 75 acute
care hospitals.  The program will employ three major
strategies to reduce costs:  development of a centralized
database for all existing major maintenance contracts;
moving away from long-term, noncancelable agreements and
development of uniform terms and conditions for all
maintenance contracts; and assignment of selective equipment
maintenance to one of two independent service organizations.
Call Tenet at (310)998-4000.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

MEDICAL RESOURCE NETWORK, ANTHEM COMPLETE PARTNERSHIP
AGREEMENT

Medical Resource Network and Anthem Health Plans have
completed formation of a partnership that they say will
offer Georgians "cost-effective access to quality
healthcare."  The partnership will do business as Anthem
Health Plan of Georgia.  MRN is an 18-member Georgia health
system consisting of physicians and healthcare systems
located in every major community in Georgia.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

JOHNS HOPKINS, HUMANA TEAM TO BUILD MD. MCO NETWORK

Baltimore-based Johns Hopkins HealthCare will team with HMO
giant Humana Inc., Louisville, Ky., to capture more managed
care business in Maryland and build the foundation for a
five-state health plan.

The alliance gives Johns Hopkins' network building efforts a
big boost, and should mean more managed care tertiary care
business for the system's flagship, Johns Hopkins Hospital.

For Humana, the deal could jump-start its entry into the
wider Maryland market, where its business now is limited to
metropolitan Washington, D.C.

Humana's subsidiary Humana Group Health Plan Inc.,
Washington, will soon move into the Baltimore market.  The
HMO plans to follow that growth with a push into Delaware,
Virginia, West Virginia and Pennsylvania.

Deal means more tertiary care business for Johns Hopkins

Johns Hopkins has much to gain, too, says Michele Deverich,
vice president of product and network development for Johns
Hopkins HealthCare, notably increased business in tertiary
care.

Humana will use and expand physician networks Johns Hopkins
has established, such as pediatrics and cardiology, and will
work with the health system to form other provider and
ancillary networks.

"Every bit of market share Humana garners will flow through
our network, and all tertiary care is pointed in the
direction of Hopkins," Deverich says.  With the network that
Humana and Hopkins will develop, the HMO will never need to
send a patient out of that system, she predicts.

Partnership boosts Humana's metro D.C. efforts

The two partners could prove to be a good match.  Two years
ago, Humana took over the Washington-based Group Health
Association, one of the oldest HMOs in the country.  With
the rechristened Humana Group Health's enrollment stalled at
around 120,000 members since the purchase, Humana is ready
to boost its fortunes through expansion outside the
Washington market.  And Hopkins sees an opportunity to grab
more primary care business for the provider networks it's
building.

"We realized we needed a strong presence in the primary care
market," says Deverich.  But "this is not an effort to get
bread-and-butter care into Johns Hopkins.  Our goal is no to
drive every appendectomy and normal [baby] delivery to Johns
Hopkins."  Primary care will be channeled to a nine-hospital
Maryland network, Atlantic Health Alliance.

Call Ron Sauder, of Johns Hopkins, at (410)955-5384.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

MD.'S MATERNITY LOS LAW ISN'T BOOSTING HOSPITAL STAYS, SOME
SAY

Maryland's pioneering mandatory maternity length of stay law
is having little effect on hospital stays because of a
loophole, state providers say.

In the legislation, insurers are given the option of
allowing an extra day in the hospital beyond the now-
standard 24 hours or paying for a home visit by a nurse.
The much-cheaper home visits are winning by a landslide.

"If it's $1,000 for an extra day in the hospital and $100 to
send a nurse, in every instance the insurer has a choice of
spending $100 or $1,000, and they're going to choose the
lesser amount," says Mark Seigel, an obstetrician who is
president of the Montgomery County Medical Society in
suburban Washington.

"If I don't send a patient home after one day, the patient's
going to get a bill for that extra day," Seigel says.

Maryland was the first state to approve maternity stay
legislation, and was followed closely by New Jersey and
North Carolina.  The Maryland law took effect Oct. 1.

The legislation requires insurers to cover maternity stays
in accordance with the medical criteria outlined in
"Guidelines for Perinatal Care," published jointly by the
American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists.

The guidelines recommend a 48-hour hospital stay following
normal vaginal delivery, but allow for shorter stays if
criteria for medical stability are met.  In cases where the
mother and her physician agree to discharge prior to 48
hours, the Maryland law requires an initial home visit that
includes metabolic screening for the infant.

The Maryland Hospital Association says it does not yet have
statewide information on the length of hospital stays for
childbirth during October, when the law took effect.

But Seigel and other physicians say that insurers are not
giving them the option of choosing the extra day in the
hospital over the home visit.

Insurers have not lengthened hospital stays -- despite the
new law -- because they need to save money somewhere,
according to Robert Sheff, president of HMOs for Blue Cross
Blue Shield of Maryland.  If insurers allow new mothers to
stay in the hospital longer, they will have to take benefits
from someone else, he says.

Maryland physician organizations will press for amending the
law during the next session to close the loophole, Seigel
says, adding, "The details can be worked out.  It's just a
question of coming up with the right language."

Contact Seigel at (301)921-4300 and Sheff at (410)581-3000.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

EXPECT MORE COMPETITION, CAPITATION, CONSOLIDATION IN 1996,
EXPERT SAYS

The healthcare market will begin changing dramatically in
1996 as payers demand and get lower prices, predicts Russell
C. Coile, Jr., president of the Health Forecasting Group,
Santa Clarita, Calif.

Competition, capitation and consolidation are in the
forefront of the forces that will drive health trends in the
post-reconciliation era beginning in 1996.  It's all part of
the re-engineering of the American healthcare market,
propelled by payers -- employers, business coalitions, and
government -- who are demanding and getting lower prices and
reduced expenditures from the healthcare sector.

The year ahead will be a war over the premium.  Price wars
between HMOs and insurers are expanding on a national basis.
The decline in HMO/insurance premiums is triggering a wave
of health industry consolidations and deeply slashed
provider payments.  Angered by the cuts, physicians and
hospitals are organizing their own provider-sponsored
networks and fighting back.  The year ahead will be a battle
between providers and payers to control more of the
shrinking premium.

Purchasers will win, providers will lose

Purchasers and government health programs are "winners,"
delighted that national health inflation is coming down.
Corporate health benefit costs rose only 2% from 1994 to
1995, due to widespread switching by employers to managed
care.  Employer-sponsored health costs were one-third below
the level of consumer inflation, according to the
Philadelphia-based Hay Group.

Health plans and providers will be "losers," as price
competition starts a downward spiral for HMO profits and
provider payments.  For the first time in a decade, medical
care prices slipped down to the level of overall consumer
inflation, rising only 0.3% in October 1995, the Wall Street
Journal says.

Managed care and employer-driven price competition are
slashing health costs.  As recently as 1988, the nation's
healthcare prices were soaring at an annual rate of 14%.
Government payment cuts and private-sector competition are
looming for 1996.  Impacts of those trends will ripple
across America's $1 trillion health system, affecting every
hospital, physician, health plan and consumer.

Premium warfare coming

Economic competition between providers and payers --
HMOs/insurers -- over control of the premium could turn ugly
in 1996.  All buyers -- employers, business coalitions and
government programs -- are driving cost competition among
HMOs and insurers.  In 1995, HMO prices fell by 1.2%.  The
down cycle is not over.  Early signals for HMO prices
indicate that health plan premiums will range from no
increases to 2% to 3% rollbacks from 1995 price levels.

In Northern California, which is an emerging "Stage Five"
market including many metropolitan areas with more than 40%
HMO enrollment, the average health plan premium has shrunk
50% in a 10-year period, from $2,460 per enrollee for a
managed care plan in 1986 to $1,260 for HMO coverage in
1995, according to Steve McDermott, CEO of PriMed Inc. and
executive director of the Hill Medical Group, in San Ramon,
Calif.  PriMed manages more than 250,000 capitated lives
through a network of 2,160 physicians.  In 1986, hospitals
got 41% of the premium, and physician services accounted for
33%.  Doctors increased their share of premium to 37% in
1995, while the hospital component shrank to 30%.  The big
winner was the payer, whose administrative costs and profits
grew from 14% in 1986 to 21% today, according to McDermott.

A new "health czar" in town?

Move over Hillary.  Newt Gingrich is the next "health reform
czar" for the 1990s. The Republican-driven federal budget
reconciliation act of 1996 would end the Great Society
commitment to healthcare for the poor and elderly, according
to the Wall Street Journal.  House Speaker Newt Gingrich's
(R-Ga.) deficit-reduction proposal is the most sweeping
health reform legislation since 1983, when Congress
converted Medicare to a pre-paid health plan.  Wrenching
cuts in Medicare and Medicaid spending may total some $440
billion in the next seven years.  Doctors could see their
federal payments reduced by almost $30 billion, while
hospitals could lose $120 billion or more.

That strategy leans more toward Margaret Thatcher than
Hillary Rodham Clinton. Medicare and Medicaid would be
privatized, with incentives for conversion to HMOs.  The
result would be a multi-tiered health system in which
beneficiaries choose health plans with different coverages,
depending on their ability to pay extra for wider provider
choice or scope of benefits.

Extended wrangling between the White House and GOP
Congressional majority could delay -- but probably not stop
-- GOP-led health reform initiatives.  If Republicans cannot
overcome Clinton vetoes, the GOP may take an "unbundled"
approach to health reform, inserting pieces of their health
reform strategy into other legislation.  Key objectives for
Republican health reformers include:

*  Placing spending limits on entitlement programs such as
Medicare and Medicaid.

*  Reducing Medicare and Medicaid spending and holding down
federal expenditures to 4% to 7% annual increases for the

next five to seven years.

*  Conversion of Medicaid to a block-grant program managed
by the states.

*  Conversion of Medicare to a managed care program that
puts HMOs and provider-sponsored networks -- not government
-- at risk for managing health costs.

*  Caps on Medicare hospital and physician payments.

*  Provider-sponsored networks to allow physicians and
hospitals to enroll Medicare beneficiaries without an HMO
license.

*  Small-business insurance reforms to eliminate waiting
periods, prior existing conditions and experience ratings

*  Malpractice reform that limits "pain-and-suffering" non-
medical damages to $250,000 per case.

*  Medical IRAs and medical savings accounts.

*  Reducing subsidies for teaching hospitals and
"disproportionate share" facilities.

*  Protecting rural hospitals.

Provider-sponsored networks are "silver lining"

The "silver lining" in the massive budget reconciliation
bill is congressional support for provider-sponsored
networks.  Here is a compelling rationale for the 3,000
physician-hospital organizations and integrated networks.
PSNs would give physicians and hospitals a new managed care
vehicle to compete for control of the premium.  The PSN
concept may help level the playing field between providers
and payers.

There could be thousands of PSNs competing for certification
by the Health Care Financing Administration to enroll
directly 37 million Medicare beneficiaries.  New competitors
would  potentially include an estimated 3,000 physician-
hospital organizations, hundreds of large physician groups
and dozens of regional integrated delivery systems.

Becoming a PSN could be risky business. PSNs may need more
experienced partners, such as HMOs and insurers, to control
costs and manage the network.  Managing risk will be the
make-or-break challenge of provider-sponsored networks and,
outside of California, most providers have little or no
experience in capitation.  Providers may turn to HMOs and
insurers for cost management, quality control and
information systems, under a variety of PSN-HMO
arrangements, including those in which providers:

*  "Rent" the HMO/insurer to manage the network, a technique
called administrative services only, in which managed care
plans often contract with self-funded employer health plans.

*  Utilize an independent third-party administrator to link
the provider network contractually, manage contracting and
control utilization and quality.

*   Form strategic business relationships with the
HMO/insurer for management services on a profit-sharing
basis

(but no equity-sharing).

*  Joint venture with shared HMO/insurer equity in the PSN,
where providers develop the healthcare delivery network and
the HMO/insurer supplies the fiscal and management services.

Phase Four:  "War of the networks"

On a national basis, a number of metropolitan areas are
moving into "Stage Four," with more than 25% HMO
penetration, according to InterStudy.  And not just in
California -- the trend is national.  Markets like
Baltimore, Boston, Denver, Honolulu, Louisville, Nashville,
Philadelphia, and Salt Lake City are headed into a "Bermuda
Triangle" of competition, caught in price wars between Blue
Cross Blue Shield-sponsored managed care plans, national
commercial carriers including Aetna and Prudential, and
independent HMOs such as U.S. Healthcare and United
HealthCare, according to InterStudy.

Network-level warfare is heating up, and the stakes are huge
-- control of hundreds of thousands of covered lives and
strategic relationships with leading HMOs, insurers and
employers.  The new playing field is regional or statewide,
and the players are multi-hospital networks with thousands
of physicians.  In recent months, announcements of network
affiliations and acquisitions are arriving non-stop:

*  In Northern California, Sacramento-based Sutter Health
System is creating a new $2.1 billion network with 700,000
covered lives by merging its 17 hospitals, seven medical
groups, ambulatory care sites and HMOs with California
Health System, which operates four hospitals in the Bay
Area.

*  In New Orleans, Santa Monica-based Tenet Healthcare

 Corp. has established an eight-hospital regional IDN that
will include more than 2,400 affiliated physicians, three
speciality facilities and outpatient centers in a three-
parish market.  Tenet will compete head-to-head with
Columbia/HCA, which is negotiating to acquire Woman's
Hospital in Baton Rouge.

Hospital budget strains comes with Medicare cuts

Falling HMO payments and Medicare budget cuts will put
America's hospitals and physicians on a tight budget.
Providers must continue aggressive cost reductions if they
are to maintain a positive bottom line.  Hospitals are
barely coping with lower Medicare payments, managed care
discounts and utilization declines. There is some good news
-- hospital closings fell in 1994.  Only 40 acute care
hospitals closed their doors, down from 62 in 1993,
according to the American Hospital Association.  That was
the fewest number of closed facilities since 1983.

Futurist Jeff Goldsmith, president of Health Futures,
Bannockburn, Ill., describes hospitals as "out of position"
to manage the shifting of managed care risk.  They are
vulnerable to payers who control enrollees "upstream" on the
dollar flow, according to Goldsmith.  The challenge for
hospital profitability is

to keep operating margins in "plus territory" despite
managed care pressures and declining government payments.

According to a recent study by the Center for Healthcare
Industry Performance Studies, hospitals' total profit
margins in 1994 averaged 3.9%, the same as in 1993.  Good
news from hospitals in high-penetration HMO markets --
margins improved to 3.7%, from 2.8% in 1993.  CHIPS co-
founder William O. Cleverly gives credit to cost cutting,
reduced labor costs and better strategic positioning to
those hospitals in heavy managed care markets.  But they
will have to keep it up.  The lessons from the West Coast
are very clear -- the more HMO penetration, the lower the
hospital use rate.  For providers, the winds of change in
1996 will be blowing from the West.

Contact Coile at (805)286-1085.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

HOSPITAL'S ELECTRONIC NURSING STATION GIVES DOCS OFF-SITE
VIEW OF PATIENTS

The Medical-Oriented Operating Network, an electronic
patient monitoring system, is letting Helen Ellis Memorial
Hospital, Tarpon Springs, Fla., keep a watchful eye on
outpatients and the hospital's performance.

MOON, developed by Unitron Medical Communications,
Clearwater, Fla., allows caregivers to collect patient data
and send them directly to an electronic nursing station
located in the hospital, where physicians have instant
access to information about their patients' status.
Patients can also access the system to update information
such as blood sugar levels or temperature, says Carol
Auhlman, R.N., Unitron's director of network clinical
operations.

MOON functions as a medical on-line system that links all
patient information beyond the hospital.  Patient files in
the system include clinical information, and cost and
quality data are recorded in the database.  Records can only
be accessed by qualified caregivers involved in a patient's
treatment.

The nursing station, called an "E-station," is located
directly inside the physicians' entrance at the hospital, so
doctors can "look in" on their patients' progress as soon as
they arrive.  The can also access the database from their
offices or homes.

The network sends out an immediate alarm if it detects a
critical variance in the patient's condition, and "quicker
intervention means less deterioration," says Linda Chic,
R.N. who works in the E-station.

Unitron also has access to the database, and uses the data
for a variety of studies to inform administrators at Helen
Ellis about the hospital's performance.

For more details, call Unitron at (813)524-7800 or Helen
Ellis Memorial at (813)942-5000.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-12</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B040-57</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh17.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015644 text/html 91919
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:54:37 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:46 GMT
Content-length: 91732
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh17.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>AMERINET REJECTS OWENS & MINOR'S 1% PRICE&nbsp;INCREASE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1256 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>"THE JUICE ISN'T WORTH THE SQUEEZE;" SYRINGE AND&nbsp;NEEDLE PRICES HOLD STEADY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1133 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>WHEN DOES BIG BECOME TOO BIG?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(624 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>=============</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>INDIANA UNIVERSITY MEDICAL CENTER GOES&nbsp;STOCKLESS--AGAIN, THIS TIME WITH BAXTER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(558 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>WEST JERSEY HEALTH SYSTEM GETS $1.4 MILLION ESI&nbsp;SOFTWARE PACKAGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(69 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>DIAGNOSTIC EQUIPMENT PURCHASES DOWN IN 1995 FOR&nbsp;THE SECOND YEAR IN A ROW</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(325 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>CATHOLIC HEALTH CARE POWERHOUSE FORMED;&nbsp;MATERIALS MANAGEMENT IMPACT UNKNOWN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(446 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>LONG ISLAND COLLEGE HOSPITAL RETROFITS AND&nbsp;UPGRADES WILL SAVE $4.4 MILLION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(235 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>GENE BURTON & ASSOCIATES OPENS OFFICE IN&nbsp;PLACERVILLE, CALIF.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(76 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>CHILDREN'S HOSPITALS JOIN TO STUDY WAYS TO DRIVE&nbsp;COSTS FROM THEIR SYSTEMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(161 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>EGG CRATES ARE OUT, SAVINGS ARE IN AT THE&nbsp;UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA MED. CENTER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(460 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>SACRED HEART MEDICAL CENTER PUTS A NEW TWIST&nbsp;ON CUTTING SUPPLY AND EQUIPMENT COST</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(659 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>HOAG HOPES NEW COMPUTED RADIOGRAPHY SYSTEM&nbsp;DEVELOPS SIGNIFICANT SAVINGS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(219 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>ST. ALEXIUS WINS BAR CODING AWARD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(122 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>AS IF THERE ISN'T ANYTHING ELSE TO WORRY ABOUT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(200 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>VHA SIGNS NEW PURCHASING CONTRACTS ON WIDE&nbsp;RANGE OF MED-SURG PRODUCTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(809 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><LI>VA GETS $10 MILLION SETTLEMENT FROM U.S.&nbsp;SURGICAL ON DISCOUNT ISSUE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(89 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><LI>DEPT. OF DEFENSE AWARDS TWO PRIME VENDOR DEALS&nbsp;TO OWENS & MINOR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(221 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><A HREF = "#19"><LI>SHARED SERVICES INKS CONTRACT FOR IOLS, PHACO&nbsp;EQUIPMENT WITH CHIRON/IOLAB</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(391 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><A HREF = "#20"><LI>AMERINET TO BUY CONSULTING FIRM KOWALSKI-&nbsp;DICKOW ASSOCIATES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(174 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><A HREF = "#21"><A HREF = "#21"><LI>AMERINET ANNUAL REPORT SHOWS SIGNIFICANT&nbsp;GAINS FOR GPO, IN SPITE OF LOSS OF MEMBERS FOR&nbsp;VECTOR HEALTHSYSTEMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(672 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><A HREF = "#22"><A HREF = "#22"><LI>PROVIDER CRITICISM OF MEDICAL-SURGICAL SUPPLY&nbsp;DISTRIBUTORS IS BASED ON INCORRECT PERCEPTIONS&nbsp;AND EXPECTATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(821 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>IMS DRUG INDEXES CONTINUE SEVEN-QUARTER SLIDE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(142 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><A HREF = "#24"><A HREF = "#24"><LI>UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS MEDICAL BRANCH PARES&nbsp;$500,000 FROM ITS OPERATING ROOM MATERIALS AND&nbsp;SUPPLIES BUDGET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(870 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><A HREF = "#25"><A HREF = "#25"><LI>MANUFACTURING ACTIVITY CONTRACTS FOR FOURTH&nbsp;STRAIGHT MONTH; PURCHASING MANAGERS'&nbsp;NOVEMBER INDEX DRIFTS DOWN TO 46.5%</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(172 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><A HREF = "#26"><LI>PRODUCER PRICE INDEX RISES 0.1% IN NOVEMBER;&nbsp;MEDICAL CARE COMMODITIES INCREASE BY 0.3%</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(73 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><A HREF = "#27"><A HREF = "#27"><LI>LARGE HOSPITALS AND INTEGRATED SYSTEMS ARE&nbsp;ASKING: ARE GROUP PURCHASING ORGANIZATIONS&nbsp;REALLY NECESSARY?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(698 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>OWENS SHOULD OWN UP TO ITS PROBLEMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(149 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>Hospital Materials Management. Have over 17 years successful</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(101 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>Sharon Belletynee was appointed director of materials management</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(27 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>Bruce Haywood has joined McFaul & Lyons Inc., Trenton, N.J., in</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(33 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>David W. Hitchens was named purchasing manager at Rush</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(29 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>John A. Moreno was appointed director of materials management</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(29 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#34"><LI>Rick Schlosser has been appointed vice president of materials</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(48 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#35"><LI>HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY:</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(39 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#36"><LI>PROFILES IN HEALTHCARE MARKETING:</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(35 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#37"><LI>HEALTH CARE STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT:</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(61 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

AMERINET REJECTS OWENS & MINOR'S 1% PRICE
INCREASE

By Richard Haugh
Owens & Minor Inc.'s attempt to pass on a 1% across-the-board
price increase didn't work--at least not with AmeriNet Inc., St.
Louis. "We chose not to take prices [to our members] up 1%," said
Greg Mosley, vice president of AmeriNet's ValuNet division.

Owens' Sept. 15, 1995, announcement of the price increase
("Hospitals frustrated by Owens' spotty distribution performance,"
HMM, October 1995, p. 1) didn't sit well with AmeriNet, and
Mosley said the group suggested to Owens that the two sit down
and look at alternatives. With $2.76 billion of contracted purchases
in 1995--$1.1 billion of which was in medical-surgical supplies--
AmeriNet was in a position to make such a call, and Owens listened.

Mosley said AmeriNet and Owens "arrived at an understanding"
with the Richmond, Va.-based distributor that allows Owens to
assess fees for various services it provides to AmeriNet's 4,500-
plus member facilities, while retaining a modified cost-plus
structure.

Tom Sherry, Owens' vice president of sales and marketing, said the
new contract, while an immediate reaction to AmeriNet's displeasure
with the 1% price increase, is more an interim step on the road from
traditional cost-plus pricing to a full risk-sharing arrangement. "The
problem is that a lot of hospitals are not ready for full activity-based
costing, and this interim contract is an attempt to address that
concern," he said.

The New Activity Fees

In a Dec. 1, 1995, memo to purchasing and materials management
directors, Mosley outlined the changes it is making to its contract
with Owens, effective Dec. 1, 1995. While the new contract makes
changes in the cost-plus tier structure, more notably the new contract
calls for the addition of these eight activity-based fees:

+ 0.25% addition to distribution fees for each delivery in excess of
two per week.

+ $1.25 per mile charge to a facility for any delivery in excess of
100 miles from the distribution center.

+ 1% added charge for electronic order entry if the order is less than
50% of items ordered.

+ 0.5% added charge for electronic order entry if the order is less
than 90% of items ordered.

+ 3.5% service fee for "non-traditional" vendor products.

+ $0.10 per label charge for patient charge labeling.

+ 2% PAL service charge.

+ $0.85 per line item surcharge during any month in which the
average line order is less than $150 per line.

Sword Cuts Both Ways

In putting together the new agreement, Mosley said AmeriNet felt
that if Owens wanted to charge its member facilities activity fees,
"then the sword cuts both ways." The result was provisions for
AmeriNet facilities to charge Owens with penalty fees for not
meeting specific service levels:

+ A required 96% fill rate on committed items (mutually agreed
upon between Owens and the facility and ordered at least twice a
month). If the fill rate drops below 96% for any two consecutive
months, Owens must pay the facility $200.

+ Owens must pay a facility $200 if, "after proper notification to
Owens," it is proved that Owens charged the facility incorrect
pricing for two consecutive months and no response or adjustment
is made. In an apparent bow to Owens' efforts to get its balky
computer system operating smoothly, this penalty doesn't go into
effect until April 1.

Too Early To Judge Reaction

Two weeks after distribution of the memo, it was still too early to
gauge member reaction, Mosley said, with responses predictably
negative from hospitals to be most heavily affected. Size doesn't
appear to be a factor; instead, the level of efficiency of operations
has more bearing--the more efficient, the less impact the fees will
have. In fact, Mosley said, those hospitals willing to modify their
operations to be more efficient may actually see little impact from the
agreement. Conversely, those facilities that don't could wind up
paying close to the equivalent of Owens' originally requested 1%
price increase.

The agreement is not cast in stone. "We certainly hope as time goes
by this will work out for all the parties concerned," Mosley said.
But if it doesn't, AmeriNet and Owens are ready to discuss
modifications.

AmeriNet's systemwide Dec. 1 move was apparently the first by a
major GPO to change from the traditional cost-plus only
arrangement to introducing service fees. Mosley said he thinks there
are limited programs in place with similar arrangements--in fact,
Owens has a name for a program it has been marketing for some
time: Cost Track--but he doesn't think they are being used to any
great extent. With the development of more sophisticated data
collection processes, though, that is likely to change. (At press time
HMM learned that VHA Inc., Irving, Texas, has modified its
Authorized Distribution Agreement with Owens to also allow for
activity based fees, and Owens is working on an activity-based fee
agreement with Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp., Nashville, Tenn.)

"I don't think we'll be unique in the industry as time goes by,"
Mosley said. "The days of distributors giving its services away for
free just because a customer asks for them are gone."

Sherry said he is unaware if Owens competitors, like Baxter
Hospital Supply Corp., McGaw Park, Ill., and General Medical
Corp., Richmond, Va., have similar contracts, but that they likely
will in the future. Indeed, a major topic of discussion at the October
meeting of the Health Industry Distributors Assn. was activity-based
fee programs.

Industry Sentiment Changing?

Industry sentiment against activity fees may be dissolving as players
realize distributors can be squeezed only so far (see related story on
page 11). Margins are razor-thin now, leaving little room for error,
as Owens itself proved when it ran into problems digesting its 1994
acquisition of the former Stuart Medical Inc. When service levels fell
while trying to assimilate Stuart's operational system into the Owens
way of operating, the company quickly fell into financial purgatory,
which triggered its attempt at a price increase.

While that attempt is generally not succeeding (GPOs contacted by
HMM either flatly stated that they wouldn't accept the increases, or
hedged their answers, saying they are exploring various options;
and industry sources have told HMM that Owens is backing off the
increases in one form or another for its major customers), few
dispute the fact that distributors need to boost their margins. Pete
DeBusk, president of DeRoyal Industries Inc., Powell, Tenn.,
summed it up: "The industry must sit up and take notice that there
will be further price increases, especially for distribution, and it's to
our benefit to support distributors. We shouldn't take a hostile
approach to the needs of the distribution business."

Health industry consultant William McFaul, of McFaul & Lyons
Inc., Trenton, N.J., said much of the resistance to activity fees is
coming from the materials management community, and he thinks
that resistance may be misplaced. He said materials managers need
to concentrate on partnerships with their distributors. "This is a
good thing," he said. "Materials managers need to do a cost
accounting analysis. If it's only going to cost me a few thousand
dollars to get the services I need or want, it's pocket change. For a
distributor, though, that goes directly to the bottom line."

While Owens takes the point on the charge into new pricing
territory--and the heat that goes with it--Sherry thinks eventually
customers will see "that this is not an Owens problem, but an
industry problem, and needs to be addressed."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

"THE JUICE ISN'T WORTH THE SQUEEZE;" SYRINGE AND
NEEDLE PRICES HOLD STEADY

Increases in the prices hospitals and group purchasing organizations
pay for needles and syringes have slowed to a virtual standstill, with
average prices for syringes rising only 0.9% and average prices for
needles rising only 0.7%. Putting the brakes on price increases
reverses the trend of rapid price increases seen in last year's HMM
price survey of this high-volume, low-price commodity item, when
prices increased an average of 6.6% from the previous year.

This year's study again included products manufactured by the two
market leaders, Becton Dickinson & Co., Franklin Lakes, N.J., and
St. Louis-based Sherwood Medical Co. Sherwood is the maker of
the popular Monoject line of needle and syringe products. Prices for
Terumo Corp., Somerset, N.J., were requested, but only one price
was supplied by hospitals or group purchasing executives.

Last year's prediction by purchasing executives of stable prices in
1995 proved true. And not one of the executives responding this
year expects prices to rise any time soon. In fact, one executive
thinks prices may drop slightly. "We are in a very competitive
market, and the major players want to hold on to their share of the
market," this director of materials management of an 800-plus bed
hospital on the East Coast said.

Interestingly, while competition is cited as the reason costs are being
held in check, one purchasing executive thinks most hospitals
remain loyal to their current supplier. "Changing needle and syringe
brands is a hassle and the savings are insignificant. The juice is not
worth the squeeze," this exec said.

While competition is the most significant factor keeping the lid on
prices, two respondents--both group purchasing organizations--cited
the rising cost of raw materials as exerting upward pressure on
costs.

Use Probably Won't Rise Next Year

Most hospitals and groups expect usage of these products to stay the
same or decrease in the next year, with about half of all respondents
saying they don't expect their volumes to change. Those looking for
decreases cite the rising popularity of needleless systems as the
reason, saying safety considerations and a reduction in the number
of needle sticks are playing an increasingly important role. One
director echoed prevailing industry trends, saying the number of
hospitals represented by his group is falling.

The respondents who think their use of needles and syringes will
increase tracks with their historical use; if use has been going up, it
probably will continue to rise, while if use has been flat, use will
stay flat or fall.

In a market dominated by commodity items, on which apparently
pricing has been driven to rock bottom, incentives offered by
manufacturers are apparently not a major factor. While most
responding to the HMM survey said price discounts are available
based on volume and compliance, few other goodies are being
dangled. One group purchasing organization has a conversion
allowance available to offer to member hospitals if they convert to
90% use of Sherwood products, and one Midwestern hospital
receives a 3% rebate twice a year based on purchase volume.

Syringe Prices Up 0.9%

Prices for syringes included in the survey rose somewhat higher
than needle prices, and compared to HMM's survey of syringes and
needles in January 1995 the direction of prices reversed and started
to climb. The current average price for all syringes, regardless of
manufacturer, was just shy of 13 cents at $0.1299 in 1995. That
compares with 1994's average prices for all syringes of $0.1287,
for a 0.9% increase compared to last year's survey, which showed
prices of syringes dropping 0.46% from 1993 levels.

Of the 18 syringe models included in the survey, 14 increased in
price. The two syringes registering the largest price increase were
Becton Dickinson model 309540 1cc 25 x 5/8" needle, up 6.0% to
an average price of $0.0721; and Monoject model 512936 12cc no-
needle Luer lock, up 3.1% to an average price of $0.726.

Of the 18 syringes in the survey, only three dropped in price.
Becton Dickinson model 309570 3cc 25 x 5/8" needle fell 1.6% to
an average price of $0.0491. And the Monoject model 516937 6cc
syringe no-needle Luer lock fell 1.2% to an average price of
$0.0682.

The last of the 18 syringes--Monoject model 535713 35cc syringes
no needle luer lock--did not change in average price from last year.

Needle Prices Up 0.7%

Prices for needles included in the survey rose slightly less than
syringe prices, and compared to HMM's survey of syringes and
needles in January 1995, the rate of increase was slower than 1994.
The current average price for all needles, regardless of
manufacturer, was just shy of 3 cents, at $0.284. That compares
with 1994's average prices for all needles of $0.0282, for a 0.7%
increase compared to last year's survey, which showed prices of
needles rising from 1993 levels by 3.8%.

Of the 10 needle models included in the survey, six increased in
price, all but one of them Monoject models. The one Becton
Dickinson needle, model 305145 23 x 1" needle, rose a whopping
29.1%, climbing to $0.0373 each from 1994 levels of $0.0289
each. Five Monoject models showed a uniform increase of 1.1%
across all five numbers, rising to an average price last year of
$0.0277.

Of the 10 needles in the survey, four dropped in price, all Becton
Dickinson models. Two showed price decreases of 6.9%: B-D
model 305195 18 x 1" needle, and model 305196 18 x 1.5" needle.
Two others showed price decreases of 5.2%: B-D model 305175 20
x 1", and model 305176 20 x 1.5" needle.

Overall prices for Becton Dickinson syringes increased by 1.6%,
while Monoject syringes increased by 0.8%. Overall B-D needle
prices increased by 1.0%, while overall Monoject needles increased
by 1.1%. Becton Dickinson's syringe and needle product lines
increased an overall average of 1.5%, while for Monoject the
syringe and needle product lines increased an overall average of
0.9%.

Survey Analysis

HMM received responses from five major group purchasing
organizations representing 1,278 hospitals and more than 280,000
beds. Four stand-alone hospitals representing more than 2,800 beds
also were included in the responses.

Most survey respondents reported that they are using sole-source
contracts for needles and syringes. Sole-source contracts provide
better pricing, local distribution and a guaranteed safety stock. In
recent years, locking into a sole- source contract has brought with it
rebates ranging from 2% to 3%.

HMM's survey was conducted in early December 1995.

In all, U.S. hospitals and other health care facilities spent an
estimated $450 million in 1994 on disposable needles and syringes,
according to figures furnished by the consulting firm of Frost &
Sullivan, Mountain View, Calif.

(Table omitted for online service. See print edition.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

WHEN DOES BIG BECOME TOO BIG?

Hospitals and integrated systems will be the winners in the latest
round of mergers, which saw SunHealth Alliance Inc., Charlotte,
N.C., join the ranks of American Healthcare Systems (AmHS), San
Diego, and Premier Health Alliance Inc., Westchester, Ill.--
themselves so recently merged they still don't have a name.

The move created the largest health care network in the country. It
includes 240 owned systems operating 650 hospitals with one-third
of the country's beds (about 315,000), as well as another 1,000
affiliate members in all 50 states. SunHealth adds more than 300
not-for-profit hospitals and health care organizations stretched
across the southeastern United States. Annual purchasing volume
adds up to more than $10 billion, and vaults the group past the
Nashville, Tenn.-based for-profit chain Columbia/HCA Healthcare
Corp.

While the new supergroup has not decided how purchasing and
contracting operations between the three former individual GPOs
will be consolidated, one thing is predicted: Members that stay in the
organization will likely benefit from an estimated $400 million to
$500 million in additional price concessions the new group is
expected to wring from suppliers.

Premier and AmHS have committed to developing long-term, sole-
source agreements with vendors and will demand high compliance
from members to guarantee the purchasing volume vendors will
expect in exchange for low pricing. The addition of SunHealth's
hospitals and $1.8 billion of purchasing certainly will help that goal
along.

But voices in the purchasing wilderness are questioning just how
many more concessions suppliers can grant. In talking with GPOs,
hospitals and consultants, HMM heard a similar sentiment: Prices
may be as low as they'll go, and there isn't much room left for
dickering. Suppliers and distributors can't get into the position of
"losing a little bit of money on each transaction, but making it up in
volume," as one exec said.

Without the lure of ever-lower prices, observers wonder, are there
other benefits to being big that will make it worthwhile to stay a
member of the new megagroup?

A senior executive of one group purchasing organization thinks
hospitals and integrated systems are becoming concerned that being
too big, too national, could wind up hurting them. Adding
competing hospitals to an already competitive marketplace could
drive members to bail out of the new AmHS-Premier-SunHealth.
Premier and AmHS executives downplay that, saying competitive
conflicts among members would be rare. (Before SunHealth joined
the fray, AmHS and Premier hospitals competed head-to-head in 10
major markets and a handful of smaller ones. SunHealth now adds
eight more markets with conflicts.) They have given members in
competing markets one year to work out their differences, or face
having one of the members booted out.

And, as integrated health providers evolve, many think these
providers will increasingly shift their emphasis to receiving more
customized service on a regional level, service a huge national
organization may have trouble delivering.

Smaller GPOs around the country are gloating over that possibility.
They think the confusion and possible member shakeout will let
them reap benefits. "There are a lot of unhappy (member) campers
out there," one GPO executive vice president said. Another
predicted groups will waste no time whispering in the ears of those
discontented campers, extolling the virtues of their own smaller
organizations.

This is not lost on VHA Inc., Irving, Texas, stung by the apparent
defection of SunHealth when it thought it was well along the path to
its own merger with the group. In a statement released in response
to the merger, VHA said it will be ready. "As local markets
consolidate and managed care networks continue to develop, we
anticipate that many current members of other alliances will align
with our members and ultimately join VHA," the statement said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

INDIANA UNIVERSITY MEDICAL CENTER GOES
STOCKLESS--AGAIN, THIS TIME WITH BAXTER

If at first you don't succeed...

After signing a just-in-time agreement in November 1993 with the
old Stuart Medical Inc., the 610-bed two-hospital Indiana University
Medical Center (IUMC), Indianapolis, saw Stuart purchased by
Owens & Minor Inc., Richmond, Va. The hospital system then
attempted a less-than-successful move to stockless with Owens in
August 1994. In April 1995 IUMC signed on with the ValueLink
program of Baxter Healthcare Corp., McGaw Park, Ill. The third
time seems to be the charm, said IUMC's director of pharmacy and
material services, Carol Birk.

The switch to Baxter has allowed IUMC to close its 85,000-sq. ft.
warehouse and convert it to record keeping support and forms
storage. At its Indianapolis warehouse, Baxter affixes patient charge
bar codes as items are picked, and then ships in lowest unit of
measure at least once a day to the hospital.

IUMC and Baxter are working on plans to consolidate into the
available hospital warehouse space a number of functions, including
transport, linen handling and purchasing. Baxter is also working on
100% freight consolidation at its warehouse, where it now handles
1,500 parcels each week. Birk said since going stockless with
Baxter, the distributor has lost only one package, worth about $300.

The distributor supports a core list of 2,900 line items at its
warehouse and maintains an inventory of $2.8 million to $3 million
for IUMC. The hospital's material services unit purchases about
$19.4 million annually, about $18 million of that through Baxter.
Going stockless and eliminating central distribution operations at the
hospital allowed IUMC to cut its central distribution inventory levels
to current levels of about $20,000 from $400,000 to $500,000.

Under the new program, Baxter also took over several other
distribution operations. As a springboard to distribution within the
hospital, Baxter employees now operate the receiving dock and log
in each shipment. Supplies are then distributed to 856 ship-to
locations at IUMC. At any one time the two hospitals have a total of
$129,000 of material on site, about $55,000 of which is on case
carts, divided among 300 to 400 line items, kept as backup stock in
satellite areas at each of the two hospitals. In addition, Baxter
handles distribution of linens, which Birk said results in significant
savings by eliminating double handling and removing the "train"
operation of moving linens.

By transferring operations to Baxter, IUMC was able to reduce staff
by 150 employees, 13 of whom Baxter hired for its operation. The
hospital has transferred supply stocking duties at the ship-to
locations to pharmacy technicians. "We now have total integration,"
Birk said. "Pharmacy managers are responsible for all materials
functions."

To facilitate the stockless program, IUMC is starting to implement
handheld devices to maintain par levels. While the technology was
available to make the jump directly to the handhelds and EDI when
Baxter took over, because of the reduction in staff and requisite
training of new people, IUMC is making the transition using a paper
system.

IUMC's savings with the stockless program have been significant.
Reducing excess inventories created a one-time savings of $2
million, while reducing FTEs produced on-going savings of $2.2
million, even after paying the cost of additional Baxter employees.
IUMC next plans to look to Baxter's Procedure Based Delivery
System to reduce costs in the hospital system's operating rooms.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

WEST JERSEY HEALTH SYSTEM GETS $1.4 MILLION ESI
SOFTWARE PACKAGE

West Jersey Health System, a 740-bed multi-hospital integrated
system in Camden, N.J., contracted to purchase $1.4 million of
software from Enterprise Systems Inc. (ESI), Wheeling, Ill. West
Jersey's agreement includes four main components of ESI's
software: NOVA(TM), a materials management system;
ORBIT(TM), a surgical services systems; TITAN(TM), a financial
management system; and TouchScan(TM), a resource management
point-of-use system. West Jersey expects the software to be phased
in by mid-1996.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

DIAGNOSTIC EQUIPMENT PURCHASES DOWN IN 1995 FOR
THE SECOND YEAR IN A ROW

Consolidation and uncertainty continue to put the brakes on hospital
purchases of big-ticket diagnostic imaging equipment. For the
second year in a row, hospitals have used the time they spend on
consolidation efforts to take a breather and reassessed their asset
management programs--without spending much money.

In its fifth annual study on purchasing trends for diagnostic imaging
equipment, Comdisco Inc., Rosemont, Ill., reported all types of
imaging equipment are showing an increase in average age,
indicating sluggish purchasing activity. Comdisco Medical
Equipment Group's president, Kenneth Halverson, isn't surprised.
"As hospitals come together in a network, they have critical
technology asset management problems to address," he said. "They
need to assess what equipment they have, where it's located and
how it fits strategically in the new organization. There are almost
certainly going to be redundancies."

Conclusions of the report:

+ MRI systems were hardest hit. Average age of installed MRIs is
5.5 years, up from 3.1 in 1992. Seventy percent of MRIs are more
than three years old, compared with 35% in 1992.

+ Radiography/fluoroscopy is the oldest technology, with an
average age of 10.1 years, up from 7.9 years in 1992. Almost 66%
of these systems are more than seven years old, and 20% are more
than 15 years old.

+ Seventy-five percent of CT scanners are more than three years
old, up from 64% in 1994.

+ Cardiac catheterization labs are installed in 31% of hospitals, up
from 20% in 1993.

+ Eighty-four percent of nuclear medicine devices are more than
three years old.

Comdisco predicted the drought in purchasing could be ending,
though. It said the company is entering 1996 with a record backlog
of orders.

The Comdisco report analyzed information on the penetration,
distribution and age of diagnostic equipment at more than 3,600
U.S. hospitals. The hospitals were surveyed about ultrasound,
MRI, computed tomography, cardiac catheterization, angiography
suites, radiography- fluoroscopy and nuclear medicine.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

CATHOLIC HEALTH CARE POWERHOUSE FORMED;
MATERIALS MANAGEMENT IMPACT UNKNOWN

While the merger of three Catholic health care systems into a new
umbrella system called Catholic Health Initiatives (CHI), to be
headquartered in Denver, will make it the country's largest Catholic
system, the effect on materials management and purchasing won't
be known until early 1996.

The new system's formation, first reported in HMM in September
1995 ("Colorado Catholic hospitals under new regional umbrella,"
HMM, September 1995, p. 19), will combine 11 religious
congregations in 21 states and bring together 63 acute care hospitals
representing 10,400 beds, as well as more than 50 alternate site
facilities. CHI will have projected annual revenues in excess of $4
billion. That pulls CHI well ahead of what was formerly the
country's largest Catholic system, St. Louis-based Daughters of
Charity, which had 1995 revenues of $3.2 billion.

CHI results from the merger of Sisters of Charity Health Care
Systems, Cincinnati; Catholic Health Corp., Omaha, Neb.; and
Franciscan Health System, Aston, Pa. CHI will be divided into five
operating regions, with headquarters in Denver. CHI's Rocky
Mountain Region office also will be in Denver.

An office headed by John DiCola, currently vice president of
strategic development for Sisters of Charity Health Care Systems,
will provide for the nationwide system centralized services like
purchasing and materials management functions, as well as benefits,
insurance educational programs, financial services and consulting.
Other services could be added in the future. The division will be
called CHI Service Organization and be located in Cincinnati.

It is not certain how the materials management functions of the three
systems will be integrated. Franciscan Health System's materials
management operations are headed by George Hersch, while Sisters
of Charity's vice president of materials management is Paul De
Salvo. Catholic Health Corp. does not have centralized materials
management, but handles the function at each hospital.

Consolidation of materials functions is almost certain, but CHI
spokespersons said it is not yet clear what the new structure will be.
No one would speculate officially on the future of materials
management staffers, other than to say there is more than enough
work in the new system to go around for everyone involved--and
then some.

It's unlikely the merger will affect purchasing and contracting, since
national contracts are negotiated through the Catholic Materials
Management Alliance, St. Louis. As one executive of the new
system said, even with the size of CHI, systems (including
Daughters of Charity) need the leverage of CMMA to cut the best
deals. What could be affected, though, is the myriad of regional
deals the three players will have--such as services contracts, back
office functions, sterilization services, natural gas and products that
are proprietary to a region.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

LONG ISLAND COLLEGE HOSPITAL RETROFITS AND
UPGRADES WILL SAVE $4.4 MILLION

Fresh from a seven-year contract that saved it $923,000 in its first
year and $6.8 million over the life of the contract, the Long Island
College Hospital in Brooklyn, N.Y., is entering a second seven-
year agreement with Honeywell Inc., Minneapolis, that is
guaranteed to save an additional $4.4 million.

The 601-bed facility launched the second phase of the agreement in
fall 1995. It calls for Honeywell to retrofit lighting in the hospital
and install energy-efficient motors on air-handling units, as well as
install a fire alarm system, a 300-ton chiller plant, an HVAC system
in laboratory buildings, and a boiler plant retrofit. Also included in
the contract is a new building automation system that will integrate
the operating room, blood bank data, materials management and
billing systems. Long Island expects the new system will reduce
inventory costs and result in faster, more accurate billing
information.

Over the seven-year life of the contract, Honeywell guarantees Long
Island operational savings of $4.4 million, which the hospital will
use to pay Honeywell for the equipment and work. If actual savings
don't meet that level, Honeywell will pay the hospital the difference.
At the end of the contract Long Island will own all of the equipment,
and savings that had been repaying Honeywell will be the hospital's
to keep.

The first phase, completed in June 1994, involved updating
mechanical and control systems throughout the hospital.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

GENE BURTON & ASSOCIATES OPENS OFFICE IN
PLACERVILLE, CALIF.

In an effort to expand its West Coast market and be closer to
existing West Coast clients, Gene Burton & Associates (GB&A),
Nashville, Tenn., has opened an office in Placerville, Calif. The
office will be staffed by Pat Dulaney-Schuetz, a GB&A medical
equipment planning associate.

GB&A, founded in 1988, provides equipment planning and
consulting service to health care networks and standalone
operations. The firm also provides medical equipment and
communication consulting, budgeting and reporting services.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

CHILDREN'S HOSPITALS JOIN TO STUDY WAYS TO DRIVE
COSTS FROM THEIR SYSTEMS

A group of 18 children's hospitals, representing 4,003 beds, has
banded together to develop a database of information designed to
identify areas for cost reduction. The effort, dubbed Synergistic
Advantages, began last spring when the group proposed nearly 20
areas to examine in hospital operations. From those, four or five
areas will be selected to pursue in more detail in 1996.

The program draws participants from a number of areas at the 18
hospitals, including nursing, pharmacy and materials management.
The first phase of the study involves developing a database to
provide participants with benchmarking capabilities. Areas to be
examined include cath lab supply management, per diem and
procedure-based supply management, specialty bed utilization, linen
management, systems integration and electronic data interchange,
and outsourcing.

The hospitals are located around the country, and together account
for about $150 million in annual medical-surgical supply
purchasing. The group is hoping to identify areas from which to
generate savings of 5% to 10%.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

EGG CRATES ARE OUT, SAVINGS ARE IN AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA MED. CENTER

The University of Nebraska Medical Center (UNMC), Omaha,
Neb., replaced almost all of its conventional hospital mattresses
Nov. 1, 1995, with new pressure relief mattresses called DeCubes,
manufactured by Comfortex Inc., Winona, Minn. The purchase of
the 221 new mattresses for $78,600 will allow the 324-bed hospital
to virtually eliminate nearly $100,000 in annual purchases of foam
overlay ("egg crate") mattresses. In addition, the hospital will be
able to significantly cut back the $176,000 it spent last year on
specialty bed rentals.

The choice of the new mattresses was driven by simple economics,
said Mickey Bradshaw, manager of materials support services for
UNMC. Pressure ulcers contribute to more than 60,000 deaths each
year and cost the health care system more than $9 billion annually,
much of it not reimbursable by Medicare and other insurance
organizations. Industry estimates are that between 3% and 11% of
patients admitted to a hospital or nursing home develop pressure
ulcers. The cost of treating those sores ranges from $5,000 to
$40,000 per patient. To address pressure sores, UNMC had been
using the disposable egg crates and, in more serious cases, specialty
beds rented from KCI International Inc., San Antonio, Texas.

Last year UNMC spent $211,000 on specialty bed rentals, although
it received $35,000 back from KCI under an arrangement that
capped the hospital's expenditures at $176,000. Bradshaw said the
hospital developed new protocols for determining when a patient
needs a specialty bed and when the patient can be removed from the
bed, and what kinds of beds need to be used for specific cases. The
new protocols are expected to cut spending on bed rental by more
than half, to $60,000 to $80,000.

A second area of cost reduction was eliminating the use of egg crate
mattresses and geomats throughout the hospital, except for the labor
and delivery area. In 1995 the hospital spent $97,572 on the
disposable mattresses. The $78,600 it spent to buy the DeCube
mattresses will eliminate most of that annual expense, Bradshaw
said. "The tens of thousands of dollars we won't be spending on
egg crates easily justifies the DeCube purchase," he said.

The new mattresses have a high-density foam surface and a matrix
of removable sections that makes it possible to selectively treat
pressure ulcers. Besides the mattresses, the DeCube deal included
accessories like straps needed to hold the items on the bed.

UNMC considered putting out an RFP to a number of suppliers, but
decided to take advantage of a contract held by its group purchasing
organization, University HealthSystem Consortium, Oak Brook, Ill.
Bradshaw said clinicians and nurses who work with the mattresses
are enthusiastic about them, and UNMC didn't feel it was worth the
time or effort to solicit bids from numerous vendors.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

SACRED HEART MEDICAL CENTER PUTS A NEW TWIST
ON CUTTING SUPPLY AND EQUIPMENT COST

At Sacred Heart Medical Center, Eugene, Ore., it's sort of a
capitated agreement, but with a twist.

Steve Howard, director of materials management for the 432-bed
hospital, was part of an employee task force searching for cost
savings in the hospital's $27 million to $30 million annual
purchasing budget for capital equipment and medical-surgical
supplies. Sacred Heart is part of Bellevue, Wash.-based
PeaceHealth, a not-for-profit organization sponsored by the Sisters
of St. Joseph of Peace, which owns five hospitals and manages
another 15.

Howard said instead of soliciting the lowest pricing from vendors
and cutting a sole- or dual-source agreement for items like
pacemakers and orthopedic implants, the hospital took a different
tack.

Looking at orthopedic implants, the task force gathered data from
IMS America Inc., Plymouth Meeting, Pa., reviewed its own
pricing levels and floated a traditional RFP on the devices. Based on
that information, the group set a cap on what it would pay for
various components. The caveat was that if a vendor didn't agree to
sell for the capped price, the hospital wouldn't use that vendor.

For example, on one top-of-the-line implant, Sacred Heart capped
the price at $4,400. Any of the hospital's surgeons could specify
which manufacturer they wanted to supply the device, but if that
supplier wouldn't agree to that price, the surgeon would have to find
another supplier. The orthopedic implant program, launched in
August 1995, is expected to save the hospital $300,000, Howard
said.

Sacred Heart next turned to pacemakers and applied the same
concept. Howard said the hospital developed a list of five vendors to
use for the pacemaker program, and approached each about it. They
were not happy with the concept, he said, and two didn't want to
operate under the new program--at least, not until they were told that
the physicians would stop specifying their brand of implant. Seeing
potential sales and profits evaporate brought them around, Howard
said.

The same procedure brought similar results to the cath lab. While
just a couple of years ago the hospital was paying $600 to $650 for
a PTCA catheter, Howard said, now the price is $400, and he
predicted that by the end of January it will be $300.

"We're in a situation where competition, not commitment, is the true
driver of price," Howard said. Instead of trying to force surgeons to
standardize on one manufacturer, and then trying to drive price as
low as possible with one manufacturer with a carrot-and-stick
approach, making both parties unhappy in the process, Howard
said, the new system allows marketplace competition to work.

Getting the cooperation of the physicians was key to the success of
the program. From the beginning the task force insisted on
involving physicians and giving them all the information they
needed or requested. Even when docs agree to standardize on one
supplier, there can still be residual resentment, Howard said. Now,
the physicians are free to choose their supplier, and it is up to the
supplier to decide whether it wants to sell devices for the capped
price.

"I don't know anyone who's ever been successful telling doctors
what to do," he said, "so we had to take a different approach."

The task force so far has reduced costs by nearly $2 million,
including $1 million in capital expenditures and $950,000 in annual
supply costs. A new contract for pacemakers saved more than
$300,000 of that $2 million, while standardizing cardiac catheter
procedures and ancillary products netted $125,000 in savings. An
additional $125,000 was saved from changes in heart valves and
other related supplies. Some of the capital savings included
$600,000 for new computer systems and $300,000 by reviewing
the purchase of a specialized camera for one of the medical center's
departments.

"These are all bottom-line rather than soft savings," Howard said.
He projected additional savings this year of $700,000 in med-surg
supplies and $300,000 in capital equipment.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

HOAG HOPES NEW COMPUTED RADIOGRAPHY SYSTEM
DEVELOPS SIGNIFICANT SAVINGS

Hoag Memorial Hospital Presbyterian, Newport Beach, Calif., is
installing a $1.5 million computed radiography system that the
hospital expects will produce significant savings.

The 416-bed facility is installing an Ektascan Imagelink(TM) Model
400 system manufactured by Eastman Kodak Co., Rochester, N.Y.
The system is the first step in the hospital's plan to create a digital
imaging network to serve both inpatient and outpatient needs. The
gradual switch from film to digital imaging is part of Hoag's long-
term goal of storing all images and patient records digitally.

The first of three phases in the project calls for four completed
radiography systems to be operational by the spring of 1996. One
site will be at Hoag Health Center-Costa Mesa, about 10 miles from
the hospital. The other three sites will be in the hospital's intensive
care unit, critical care unit and emergency room.

Phases two and three call for more computed radiography systems
as well as the inclusion of CT and MRI images on the digital
network. The system will also interface with Hoag's radiology
information system, which stores patient information and exam
reports. When an image is retrieved for reference, the accompanying
report will appear on the screen as well.

No financial terms of the transaction were disclosed, and no
projections on savings were available.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

ST. ALEXIUS WINS BAR CODING AWARD

St. Alexius Medical Center, Bismarck, N.D., was named the winner
of the 1995 Don Percival Award for its work in developing and
implementing bar code technology in the 313-bed hospital. The
award was presented in November at the annual SCAN-TECH
Exhibition and Conference in Chicago, the trade show of the
automatic data collection and identification industry.

St. Alexius instituted its bar code system in 1987 and has lowered
its materials management operational costs, increased productivity
and reduced inventory levels ("St. Alexius (N.D.) cuts inventory,
costs, recovers lost charges with bar coding," HMM, March 1994,
p. 5). The medical center has expanded bar coding across its entire
health care system, and virtually every major department now uses
some form of bar coding.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

AS IF THERE ISN'T ANYTHING ELSE TO WORRY ABOUT

Materials management executives in Kaiser Permanente's Northern
California region are facing an uneasy working relationship with
their staffs. The employees, members of Local 250 of the Health
Care Workers Union, voted in mid-November 1995 to reject a
Kaiser Northern California contract offer and authorize their
bargaining committee to call strikes of up to one day. The
negotiations affected about 200 materials management workers, part
of the larger 13,500-member union local.

A union spokesman said the contract with Kaiser expired in
October, and the employees have been working without a contract
since then. The spokesman said union members have not resorted to
disruptive tactics like work slowdowns, which could impair hospital
operations, but instead have relied on candlelight vigils, marches
and passing out leaflets. Relationships are strained, though, he said.

The spokesman said materials management executives and Kaiser
physicians have generally been sympathetic to union concerns, but
the feeling is not echoed by Kaiser top management. He predicted
that, since union and management are not close to agreement on
issues, union members will be working for a long time without a
contract. He said registered nurses at Kaiser have been working
without a contract for more than six months.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

VHA SIGNS NEW PURCHASING CONTRACTS ON WIDE
RANGE OF MED-SURG PRODUCTS

In a flurry of year-end activity, VHA Inc., Irving, Texas, signed
purchasing contracts on a wide-ranging group of products. Sales
under the contracts have the potential of reaching nearly $160
million and saving member organizations as much as $21 million.
The contracts include:

+ Becton Dickinson Vascular Access (B-D), Sandy, Utah, for I.V.
start kits, catheters and safety products. VHA estimates the three-
year sole source contract, which took effect Nov. 1, 1995, will save
participating members between 6% and 8% annually on the
products. Discounts are on a sliding scale based on a member's
volume of purchases. Overall purchases by VHA members in 1995
are estimated to be $39.1 million, with $26 million of that on I.V.
catheters.

As part of the contract, B-D is offering a guaranteed savings plan for
members who convert their business to Vialon Insyte Catheters from
Teflon catheters. B-D cited its study showing Vialon Insyte
Catheters reduce I.V. restarts, reduce the incidence of phlebitis and
increase indwelling time. The company estimated that hospitals
using the Vialon products will reduce catheter use by nearly 5%.

To help hospitals defray conversion costs for switching, Becton
Dickinson agreed to rebate 3% of annual sales to an institution when
it converts to B-D's I.V. catheters.

The catheters, safety equipment and I.V. start kits will also be
marketed through VHA's private label program, VHA PLUS(R). B-
D will switch several versions of its I.V. start kits to the VHA
PLUS(R) program, offering savings of 5% to 10% on the products.
The agreement covers I.V. start kits with and without gloves,
bandages, transparent dressings and ointments. B-D estimated total
sales for those products to VHA members at $5.2 million in 1995.

+ Standard Textile, Cincinnati, for textiles and apparel. The contract
is a sole-source arrangement with Standard, a change from VHA's
previous dual-source contract that included Angelica Uniform
Group, St. Louis. VHA estimates the five-year contract, which
takes effect Jan. 1, will save participating members between $4
million and $9 million annually on purchases. Discounts are on a
sliding scale based on a member's volume of purchases. VHA
estimates overall purchases by members could total $50 million to
$70 million annually. The contract covers flat goods, reusable and
disposable apparel, surgical linens and incontinence products.

The contract includes direct discounts for each product segment and
discounts based on utilization levels, and adoption of Standard
Textile's linen management program.

Standard is one of seven manufacturers participating in VHA's
committed purchasing program. Members participating in the
committed program will receive additional discounts under the new
contract above those spelled out for other VHA members. VHA said
its surveys show that 79% of its members purchase products from
Standard Textile.

+ Bard Urological, Covington, Ga., adding urological specialty
items to the acute care products that have been covered under VHA's
contract with Bard since 1988. VHA estimates the five-year sole-
source contract, which took effect Jan. 1, will save participating
VHA members between $5.5 million and $9 million annually.
Discounts are on a sliding scale based on a member's volume of
purchases. VHA estimates overall purchases by members could total
$48 million annually.

The new contract includes a 19% discount from list price of the
acute care items and a 15% discount from list on the specialty items.
Members participating in the VHA committed program will receive
additional discounts under the new contract above those spelled out
for other VHA members.

Items covered under the contract include: acute care products--Foley
catheters, Foley catheter trays, drainage bags, urine meters, urethral
trays and midstreams; and specialty care products--stents, baskets,
balloons, urethrals, filiforms and urolase.

Bard controls 70% of the national market for acute care urological
products, and VHA said its surveys show that 81% of its members
purchase products from Bard. Bard is also one of VHA's seven
manufacturers participating in the group's committed purchasing
program.

+ In another move, VHA announced the signing of a dual-source
contract for the supply of electronic information related to
purchasing management. The move marks VHA's decision to stop
marketing its own software.

The contract is with Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, Ill., and
Choice Medical Inc., Louisville, Ky. Abbott's offering, called
QUIK LINK, and support services will be offered free to VHA
organizations. Choice Medical's software, called ECHO, is being
offered at a discount.

VHA's in-house EDI packages are called VHA-Net COM and VHA-
Net CAP, and are used by 250 VHA members. Abbott's and
Choice's packages will be marketed primarily to those members. A
few VHA members now use Abbott or Choice software.

VHA said the advantages both products have over VHA's systems
is that users can transmit orders to more suppliers, and users can
add suppliers to the software more easily. Both programs also
support transactions using electronic data interchange (EDI).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

VA GETS $10 MILLION SETTLEMENT FROM U.S.
SURGICAL ON DISCOUNT ISSUE

The U.S. Veterans Administration (VA) will receive $10 million
from U.S. Surgical Corp., Norwalk, Conn., to settle a dispute in
which the VA alleged the company didn't offer the same discounts
on its products to the government as it did to other customers. The
Wall Street Journal reported that the VA purchased about $56
million of surgical devices from U.S. Surgical from 1989 to 1993,
but paid higher prices than it should have. The settlement ends a
dispute that the VA and U.S. Surgical have been discussing since
1993.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

DEPT. OF DEFENSE AWARDS TWO PRIME VENDOR DEALS
TO OWENS & MINOR

The U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) has awarded two medical-
surgical supply prime vendor contracts to Owens & Minor Inc.,
Richmond, Va. The two are worth about $22 million in the first
year.

The first award is for one year, with four one-year option periods,
and covers 12 DoD facilities in Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama and
Florida. DoD estimates the value of the contract at $8 million the
first year and $76 million over five years. The contract takes effect
Jan. 15.

The second award is also for one year, with four one-year options.
It covers 22 facilities in Florida and Georgia. DoD estimates the
value of that contract at $14 million the first year and $91 million
over five years. The contract takes effect Jan. 8.

The DoD divides its $800 million of med-surg business into 21
regions. The two awards to Owens' means the distributor now
serves five of those 21 regions under a prime vendor arrangement.
The other three regions, with Owens' annual sales volume from
each, are: Lone Star region, covering Texas and Oklahoma--$27
million; National Capital region, covering the District of Columbia--
$21 million; and the Tidewater region, covering Virginia--$9.6
million.

Most of the supplies will be handled by traditional bulk distribution,
but a few facilities will operated under Owens' enhanced distribution
program.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

SHARED SERVICES INKS CONTRACT FOR IOLS, PHACO
EQUIPMENT WITH CHIRON/IOLAB

Shared Services Healthcare Inc., Atlanta, signed a sole-source
contract for California intraocular lens manufacturer Chiron/Iolab's
full line of regular and specialty lenses, as well as kits and packs,
that is expected to generate significant purchases and savings for
SSH's 532 member facilities.

Pricing for the regular and specialty lenses is a sliding scale based
on commitment, with increasingly discounted pricing for higher
volumes to a commitment level of 75%. Facilities willing to commit
more than 75% of their annual volume can negotiate even better
pricing. Kits and packs are negotiated by each facility and also are
based on committed volume.

The contract covers ancillary products in addition to the lenses,
including Amvisc syringes and fluids. But perhaps the most enticing
addition to the offering is a separate contract for phacoemulsification
equipment. The surgical equipment is offered to SSH members at
significant price discounts from list, and includes phaco accessories
like remote control, tips and tubing. The equipment also is based on
a tiered pricing structure, but because it is a separate contract, it can
be accessed without having to commit to purchases of IOLs.

Anita Fredericks, director of SSH's purchasing program, said the
group anticipates high usage of both contracts because of what she
termed aggressive pricing by Chiron/Iolab.

Chiron has been aggressively pursuing market share in a soft market
dominated by a handful of manufacturers. The company is the
product of the $95 million buyout in early 1995 of Iolab Corp.,
Claremont, Calif., by Chiron Ophthalmics Inc., Irvine, Calif.
Respondents to HMM's IOL price survey ("IOL prices continue
sliding in the face of competition, vendor consolidation," HMM,
December 1995, p.1) reported continuing price declines in the prices
hospitals and group purchasing organizations are paying for IOLs.
They noted that prices are soft and manufacturers are willing to
consider price reductions. Without exception, respondents cited
competition as the major factor influencing IOL prices.

The contract took effect Dec. 1, 1995, and runs for two years.

SSH also awarded several other contracts recently:

+ Chemistry analyzers to Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick,
N.J., and Olympus America Inc., Lake Success, N.Y.

+ Urinalysis systems and immunoassay systems to Miles Inc.
Diagnostic Division, Tarrytown, N.Y.

+ Pathology and cytology equipment to Shandon Lipshaw,
Pittsburgh.

+ Bone densitometers to Lunar Corp., based in Madison, Wis.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

AMERINET TO BUY CONSULTING FIRM KOWALSKI-
DICKOW ASSOCIATES

Group purchasing organization AmeriNet Inc., St. Louis, is buying
the Milwaukee-based health care consulting firm of Kowalski-
Dickow Associates.

Reliable sources told HMM the purchase was to close before the end
of December 1995, pending the outcome of due diligence
proceedings, although the sources said it is unlikely there will be
any hitches in the process.

No details on financial arrangements were available at press time,
and there were no indications of whether Kowalski-Dickow would
move its offices or staff to St. Louis.

Joseph Mulroy, president of AmeriNet, told HMM that the GPO and
Kowalski-Dickow have been discussing a deal, but that no decisions
have been made on the purchase. He said any further speculation
would be premature. Jamie Kowalski, president of Kowalski-
Dickow, was out of town and unavailable for comment.

Mulroy said the idea of adding a consulting service to AmeriNet's
operations is "just a new dimension for AmeriNet to assist members
to reduce supply costs and gain greater efficiencies in the use of their
products and staffing."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

AMERINET ANNUAL REPORT SHOWS SIGNIFICANT
GAINS FOR GPO, IN SPITE OF LOSS OF MEMBERS FOR
VECTOR HEALTHSYSTEMS

AmeriNet Inc., St. Louis, posted another record year in 1995,
showing a 23.2% increase in contracted purchasing volume over
1994. That gain came at a time when Vector Healthsystems,
Providence, R.I., one of AmeriNet's three shareholder
organizations, incurred a 14% drop in member facilities,
representing a 22% drop in beds. AmeriNet also returned more than
$8 million to its members, up from 1994's $6 million.

Contracted purchases in fiscal year 1995 (ending Sept. 30) totaled
$2.76 billion, up 23.2% from 1994's $2.24 billion. Since its first
full year of business in 1987, when the company had contract sales
of $258 million, growth has been an astounding 1,070%.

ValuCare Still Growing

AmeriNet's ValuCare division, a segment that doesn't negotiate its
own agreements, but instead draws its sales figures from the
group's five other divisions on behalf of ValuCare, had contract
participation in fiscal year 1995 of $361 million, 9.1% higher than
last year's $331 million. While off the torrid pace of growth of the
previous year (1994 contracted sales were 42% higher than 1993's),
AmeriNet officials are still pleased with the division's performance.
They cite the fact that ValuCare represented 13% of AmeriNet's total
supplier contract sales volume in 1995.

Vector Membership Down

All of AmeriNet's value divisions performed well, in spite of the
fact that AmeriNet's largest shareholder organization, Vector
Healthsystems, suffered a significant drop in membership.
(AmeriNet's other two shareholder organizations--Intermountain
Health Care, Salt Lake City, and Hospital Shared Services,
Warrendale, Pa.--showed membership increases of 18.7% and
43.4%, respectively.) The number of Vector member facilities fell
by 262 to 1,603, a 14% drop from 1994's level of 1,865. The
number of beds those member facilities represented dropped an even
more precipitous 22.3%, or 36,356 beds, to settle at 126,378, down
from 1994's 162,734. AmeriNet's vice president of finance, Noel
Knobloch, explained that when the SupportHealth group of
hospitals joined AmeriNet through the Vector system, the hospitals
were guaranteed membership in AmeriNet through the end of 1994,
with the option of dropping out of AmeriNet then if they wanted. At
that time a number of hospitals opted out, and Vector's membership
numbers reflect the exodus.

The defections didn't hurt Vector's performance, though. In fact,
Vector showed the greatest gain in sales, jumping $298 million to
$1.13 billion in contracted purchases in 1995 from 1994's level of
$832 million, a 35.8% increase. Following next was Hospital
Shared Services (HSS), with $830 million in sales, a 20.6%
increase, and Intermountain Health Care (IHC), with $800 million
in sales, an 11.1% increase.

All Value Divisions Do Well

Each of AmeriNet's purchasing divisions performed well in 1995.
ValuHealth, the medical-surgical supply contracting division that
accounted for 40.7% of AmeriNet's total sales, posted revenues of
$1.1 billion, a 17.6% increase over 1994's $935 million.
ValuPharm, the pharmaceutical division contributing 34.8% of total
sales, rose by 28.9% in 1995 to $940 million, up 28.9% from
1994's $729 million.

Contract sales through ValuLab, the laboratory arm, increased
26.8% to $260 million from the previous year's $205 million.
ValuFood contract purchases rose 15.7% to $155 million, up from
1994's level of $134 million. ValuQuip capital equipment purchases
increased 27.6% to $250 million, up from the previous year's $196
million.

Membership Numbers Up

Membership numbers are also heartening to AmeriNet executives.
Even after factoring in the losses sustained by Vector, overall
membership was up. The number of member facilities increased 417
to 4,537, a 10.1% increase. ValuCare facilities accounted for 390 of
those 417 additional facilities, a whopping 93.5% of member
growth.

The total number of beds represented by new members, reflecting
both the SupportHealth losses and the nature of the alternate care
market, declined to 306,334, down 3% from 1994's 315,704 beds.
The number of member hospitals also increased in 1995, up 26 to
1,695, a slight 1.6% increase over 1994's level of 1,669. The
number of beds represented by hospital members declined 5.6% to
238,628 from 1994's 252,782.

(Table omitted for online service. See print edition.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

PROVIDER CRITICISM OF MEDICAL-SURGICAL SUPPLY
DISTRIBUTORS IS BASED ON INCORRECT PERCEPTIONS
AND EXPECTATIONS

By Christopher M. Pancratz
Recently, articles in some trade journals have questioned the service
capabilities of medical-surgical distributors. While these articles
have focused on individual distributors, elements of the criticism
have industry overtones that are based on incorrect perceptions,
most particularly the perception that service levels can continue to
increase while the compensation for those services is reduced.

All service has a cost. When service expectations increase, costs
increase. To reduce cost in a service industry, unneeded and
unnecessary service levels must be identified and removed.

Service Expectations

The entire health care industry is focused on reducing cost and is
making great strides. Distributors of medical-surgical products to
hospitals have significantly reduced their operating expenses. To be
able to continue reducing costs while meeting needed levels of
service, providers and distributors together must set realistic
expectations that consider the volume of a product's usage and the
relative criticality of that product. It does not make sense to invest
scarce resources in attempting to have a fill rate of 98% or more and
six-hour delivery on infrequently used, noncritical products.

Manufacturers, too, need to be more involved in the service
equation. It is extremely difficult for distributors to provide the high
fill rates and short lead times included in today's contracts when
they must replenish from suppliers with 40% or 60% rates and
longer lead times. Additional cost reductions are being delayed
because the technology to drive them is dependent on the electronic
scanning of product information that has not yet been bar coded on
many manufacturers' packages.

One Size Still Doesn't Fit All

While many provider organizations and alliances are writing
multiregional and national contracts for distribution services,
individual local provider sites are asking for flexibility in services.
Proprietary organizations will, over time, be able to bring some
standardization to their systems. Today, however, most of these
facilities, along with those purchasing distribution services through
contracts negotiated by voluntary organizations, are asking
distributors to adapt contract specifications to local needs.
Distribution continues to be a predominantly local function, greatly
influenced by local demographics, transportation and attitudes.

Distribution capacity has shrunk. Recent industry consolidation has
reduced what many thought to be excess capacity from the system.
In a drive for system standardization, large consolidating provider
organizations have focused on a few national and multiregional
distributors, all of which are in the throes of their own
consolidations.

Local hospital materials managers may feel committed to the
agreement in place but know that these few distributors are not
always "the only game in town," as one recent article suggested.
Throughout the country, regional and local distributors are available
to provide backup or special services dictated by local needs. Many
of these distributors have the capabilities to provide all or most of
the services required by the local facility and the contracting
organization.

Value Of Distribution

Some large consolidated provider organizations, again focused on
standardized service, have discussed establishing their own
distribution capabilities. In such a consideration, it is important to
understand the basic functions performed by the distributor. Arthur
Andersen Consulting recently published The Value of Distribution in
the Medical Products Chain, which details these functions. Storage,
receiving, billing, credit and collection, customer service and
returns, transportation and information services are the basic
functions they list and detail. These are the functions that must be
performed by someone for product to be moved from where it is
manufactured to where it is used. Each of these functions involves
resources and costs.

It is important to determine who can perform these functions most
efficiently and economically.

Shared And Realistic Expectations

Service costs! If needed services are to be provided and costs
reduced, all supply chain partners must have shared and realistic
expectations of the service levels to be maintained. Manufacturers
need to continue to work to bring their service to a level that
supports the distributors' service levels to the provider. Providers
and distributors must insist that all products display an industry
standard bar code so investments in technology can bring the needed
return.

Provider groups and alliances need to permit and assist their local
member facilities to identify and utilize regional and local
distributors to supplement service requirements not covered in the
master agreement, or where additional capacity is required.

Providers need to identify their cost of performing basic distribution
functions without medical products distributors involved. Then
compare those costs with the distributors' cost to perform those
basic services.

Distributors have consistently been shown to be the most efficient
and economic source of these services. By working with these
distributors and their manufacturer partners to establish realistic
expectations of the service levels needed, providers ensure the level
of needed service at the best possible cost.

Christopher M. Pancratz is executive director of physician/alternate
care and hospital market groups for the Health Industry Distributors
Assn. in Alexandria, Va.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

IMS DRUG INDEXES CONTINUE SEVEN-QUARTER SLIDE

Hospital Materials Management's pharmaceutical price index
declined by 0.82% in this year's third quarter compared with the
overall index's second quarter 1995 showing. It was the seventh
consecutive quarterly overall pharmaceutical price decrease, but the
index is up 1.02% from the third quarter 1994 level. None of the
five indices registered a quarter-to-quarter price increase.

Psychotherapeutics led the falling prices, dropping 1.50% in the
third quarter. Like the overall index, it was the seventh straight price
decline for this category of medications. Following close behind
psychotherapeutics was the price decrease experienced by anti-
infective non-cephalosporins, which fell 1.38% in the third quarter
from the second quarter.

HMM obtains its indexes from IMS America Ltd., Plymouth
Meeting, Pa. This quarter's index is updated to a base period of the
third quarter 1994.

(Tables omitted for online service. See print edition.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS MEDICAL BRANCH PARES
$500,000 FROM ITS OPERATING ROOM MATERIALS AND
SUPPLIES BUDGET

The University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB), Galveston,
Texas, has taken a knife to costs in its operating rooms and expects
to excise nearly $500,000 each year from materials and supplies for
operating rooms.

In late 1994 UTMB administrators launched an initiative designed to
significantly reduce costs systemwide at the 1,200-bed state teaching
hospital. To that end a joint committee of hospital staffers and
doctors from a physicians' practice plan associated with the hospital
evaluated high-frequency, high-cost operating categories. Task
forces were formed to evaluate 14 different categories, and materials
management personnel sat on 10 of the 14 task forces. The groups
were given eight weeks to present savings plans to the hospitals top
executives.

One of those areas was the operating room. In three meetings over
six weeks in early 1995, a hospital team of clinicians, materials
management executives (headed by Joe Velasquez, the hospital's
director of materials management) and hospital administrators
examined operating room procedures and established baseline
information on utilization and costs. The team, co-chaired by a
general surgeon and the hospital's executive director of nursing,
identified nearly $500,000 in projected annual savings. The savings
dropped the operating room medical-surgical materials budget to
$10.5 million per year, about a 5% savings.

Variety Of Areas Examined

Some decisions were straightforward, such as favoring the use of
nondisposable supplies over reusables, while others tackled more
potentially controversial issues such as the use of brown gloves vs.
white gloves.

UTMB has been standardized on gloves and sutures for several
years with Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, N.J., and Ethicon
Inc., Somerville, N.J., a division of J&J, so UTMB couldn't save
by renegotiating purchase contracts on the items. While UTMB is a
corporate partner with J&J, the items studied by the task force are
supplied under a J&J contract UTMB has with SunHealth Alliance
Inc., Charlotte, N.C. (UTMB's also uses University HealthSystem
Consortium, Oak Brook, Ill., for various group purchasing
contracts.)

Ethicon and J&J assisted in the hospital's cost saving efforts by
analyzing inventory levels, studying product utilization, examining
cases of product duplication or instances where two product codes
could be served adequately by one, and by revamping draping
procedures. In some cases the companies took back unused
inventory.

Where The Savings Are

A number of areas were identified for savings:

+ Sutures. The most significant savings are likely to come from
changes in procedures after a thorough evaluation of operating room
lines of sutures. Velasquez thinks making all the changes, a few of
which have yet to be initiated, will save close to $185,000 and drop
operating room annual expenses on sutures to $980,000. A waste
suture and material study revealed $80,000 in savings, and deleting
suture codes that are used infrequently or not at all saved another
$18,000. Ordering slow-moving sutures less frequently should cut
another $18,000 from the operating room budget, and deleting
redundant codes--or codes that can be switched for other codes with
no change in efficacy--saved another $5,000 per year. Making
changes in the use of dyed and undyed Vicryl sutures bumped
$11,000 out of the expense column, and changing from PS needles
to FS needles could save nearly $12,000. An additional $40,000 in
savings could be realized as the hospital begins resterilizing opened
but unused suture packs.

+ Instruments. Switching to reusable lap chole instruments can
produce significant savings, estimated at almost $125,000 per year.
Reviewing the contents of custom packs could mean an additional
$30,000 in savings, and changing vendors for hemostatic chemical
products could add another $39,000 in savings.

+ Changing draping procedures should produce $70,000 in annual
savings.

+ Limiting the availability of specialty gloves totes up another
$20,000 in annual savings.

Per Case Cost Drops

Results of the cost-cutting initiative have been significant.
Administrators say the hospital's cost per case has decreased,
although analysis of exact figures hadn't been determined at press
time. Virginia Opipare, UTMB's Hospitals Administrator, said the
results are significant, though. The hospital's cost per case has
decreased through enhanced efficiency and an overall reduction in
costs, she said. The hospital monitors projected budgets and prior
performances, and UTMB is beating both of those targets, she said.

Physicians were closely involved in the cost savings efforts, and for
good reason: In considering procedural changes in areas of
physician preference, a team that included doctors stood a much
better chance of making changes work, since the surgeons on the
team are responsible for carrying the task force's decisions back to
their peers. Dana Fox Jenkins, UTMB's director of clinical
continuous process improvement, said a cultural change like that
doesn't happen overnight. While many hospitals have a difficult
time getting physicians involved, they are an integral part of
UTMB's initiatives. They are key to controlling costs of operations
because they order and use the resources within the hospital, she
said, and when they're part of the decision-making process that
arrives at the outcome, it simplifies implementation of new
procedures.

To make the effort attractive for the docs, the hospital offers a
"gains-sharing plan" under which the hospital and the physicians'
practice plan share in the cost savings. No details on the agreement
were disclosed.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

MANUFACTURING ACTIVITY CONTRACTS FOR FOURTH
STRAIGHT MONTH; PURCHASING MANAGERS'
NOVEMBER INDEX DRIFTS DOWN TO 46.5%

The nation's economy continued to be pulled in two directions in
November, with manufacturing contracting while the overall
economy grew weakly, said the nation's purchasing executives. The
Purchasing Managers' Index dropped in November to May 1995
levels, standing at 46.5%, down from October's 46.8%.

The latest figures supplied by the National Assn. of Purchasing
Management show indexes for Production and Employment down
in November from October levels, while New Orders, Backlogs of
Orders and Inventory indexes were up. Production fell in November
to 45.8% from October's 48.2%, while the Employment index
dipped to 44.1% from October's 45.2%. New Orders edged up to
50.1% from October's 48.1%, Order Backlogs rose to 41.5% from
October's 40.5% and Inventories jumped to 43.2% from 40.7% in
October.

The manufacturing sector showed overall weakness, with most
reporting categories declining. Only four of the 20 industries tracked
by NAPM reported improved performances in November over
October, compared to eight reporting an improvement in October
compared to September.

(Tables omitted for online service. See print edition.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

PRODUCER PRICE INDEX RISES 0.1% IN NOVEMBER;
MEDICAL CARE COMMODITIES INCREASE BY 0.3%

Analysis: Two selected unadjusted surgical and medical instruments
components of the Producer Price Index showed either no change or
a slight decrease in October, while two orthopedic appliance and
supply components increased.

The trend for the previous 12 months differed slightly, though, as
three of the four categories showed increases, while one--surgical
and medical instruments--increased for the year while slipping for
the month.

(Tables omitted for online service. See print edition.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

LARGE HOSPITALS AND INTEGRATED SYSTEMS ARE
ASKING: ARE GROUP PURCHASING ORGANIZATIONS
REALLY NECESSARY?

By William McFaul
With pressure mounting to reduce expenses, many larger hospitals
and recently formed integrated delivery networks (IDNs) have been
raising the question of whether or not participation in group
purchasing organizations offers real benefits. As cost pressures
continue to intensify and more IDNs form, the question will be
raised frequently: Can we do better on our own?

Frankly, in some instances high-volume purchasers can obtain better
pricing than most, if not all, GPOs, especially if they are able to
achieve a level of generic acceptability on physician preference items
like pacemakers, intraocular lenses and orthopedic implants. In
many instances they can match or beat most GPO contracts for I.V.
solutions, dressings, sutures and other items. Savings on
commodity items, however, are generally minimal and are usually
the result of the losing supplier attempting to undermine group
solidarity by shaving the group price.

Prices are tied to the profit levels of suppliers. Pricing in the health
care industry is related to volume and generic acceptability. One can
visualize pricing reduction as a balloon. If selected GPOs obtain the
very best prices they squeeze the balloon. Since suppliers must
maintain acceptable profit levels, the balloon expands at the other
end. Those GPOs that can deliver volume and commit to change will
fare much better in the long run than those that cannot.

When it comes to using a group purchasing organization, the real
issue should not be today's price on any given contract. If members
expect to realize substantial expense reductions beyond price alone,
the focus should be on the overall portfolio offered by the GPO, its
plans for the future, and the variety of truly beneficial services the
GPO provides.

Hospitals and IDNs would be well advised to ignore prompting
from consultants who have a vested interest in trying to develop
stand-alone volume purchasing processes. While these consultants
receive lucrative contracts and their clients realize short-term
savings, survival in managed care will depend on the hospital's or
IDN's ability to become high-quality, lowest-cost providers in their
areas. The most effective strategy to achieve long-term success in
pricing is to use volume purchasing by supporting a GPO and
finding one that offers long-term benefits.

Potentially, suppliers are another source of attempts to undermine
the GPO concept. While suppliers will not openly attempt to
undermine group purchasing for fear of reprisal from GPOs, we
cannot ignore the fact that group purchasing is to the supply industry
what unions are to management. Simply, suppliers stand to benefit
if group purchasing falters. Therefore, caution must be exercised
when suppliers attempt to break group cohesion or prevent
commitment.

High-volume hospitals and IDNs need to give the group purchasing
industry time to adjust to the rapid changes in health care.
Undoubtedly those facilities that "jump ship" will miss the rewards
when GPOs adjust their processes to obtain volume commitment,
create an environment for generic acceptability and devise a process
to reflect best pricing for their largest participants.

Price reductions are but one means of expense reduction. Today too
many hospitals and IDNs are focusing only on price and inventory
reductions. Far greater savings can be found by addressing
consumption, utilization, clinical path processes that cover all
aspects of expenses, consolidation of services and the development
of true shared services. The last two avenues for expense reduction,
consolidation of services and shared services, will yield enormous
benefits when GPOs evolve into facilitators for interfacing multiple
IDNs from contiguous service areas.

Real success in managing expenses will not come from short-term
gains in price reductions when far greater expense reductions are
available by redirecting energy into addressing the how, what,
where, when, why, who and how many of all expenses. The future
of price reductions depends on volume, commitment, and generic
acceptability. Support your GPO if you want to benefit from price
reductions. The major challenge for health care providers is the
development and implementation of a comprehensive plan to shift
away from merely managing materials and prices into the
management of all expenses.

William McFaul is the founder of and a principal in the Trenton,
N.J.,-based health care consulting firm of McFaul & Lyons Inc.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

OWENS SHOULD OWN UP TO ITS PROBLEMS

To the Editor:
I read with unsympathetic interest a letter from Tom Sherry, vice
president of sales and marketing for Owens & Minor, in your
December 1995 issue.

Mr. Sherry's insinuation that they have valid reasons for their
performance slip is unacceptable. As a purchasing director, I cannot
tell my customer, the patient and nursing staff, "Sorry, the supplies
didn't arrive!" To add insult to injury, Mr. Sherry suggests that
Owens needs to "educate its customers based on product velocity
and criticality of product." Thanks, but no thanks. Sounds like
setting yourself up, and more excuses for future failures. Education
comes from someone who has and continues to understand what
they do!

Simply put, Owens & Minor messed up! Admit it and carry on. I
deal with companies that admit to mistakes and improve themselves.

Dan Salmon, Director of Purchasing
Lewis County General Hospital
Lowville, N.Y.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

Hospital Materials Management. Have over 17 years successful

Hospital Materials Management. Have over 17 years successful
experience as Director of Materials Management and Purchasing in
acute care hospitals, including multi-hospital organizations.
Expertise includes procurement, distribution, value analysis,
systems development, standardization, process improvement, cost
management and inventory management. Technical abilities are
complemented by excellent management, communications and
interpersonal skills. Can be reached at 610-767-6455.

Vice president for materials management. MBA in hospital
administration with more than 10 years of progressive
responsibilities and proven track record. Seeks senior executive-
level position in materials management. Is also available for
consulting, specializing in non-salary expense reduction. Location
New York-New Jersey. Call 201-569-1266.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

Sharon Belletynee was appointed director of materials management

Sharon Belletynee was appointed director of materials management
at Norwegian American Hospital, Chicago. Previously she was
director of materials management at Glenoaks Medical Center,
Glendale Heights, Ill.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

Bruce Haywood has joined McFaul & Lyons Inc., Trenton, N.J., in

Bruce Haywood has joined McFaul & Lyons Inc., Trenton, N.J., in
a newly created position of regional manager, expense management
services. Previously he was director of materials management at
Detroit Medical Center, Detroit.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

David W. Hitchens was named purchasing manager at Rush

David W. Hitchens was named purchasing manager at Rush
Prudential Health Plans, Chicago. Before, he was materials manager
at the National Jewish Center for Immunology and Respiratory
Medicine, Denver.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

John A. Moreno was appointed director of materials management

John A. Moreno was appointed director of materials management
for Doctors Hospital of Hyde Park, Chicago. Previous to that he
was director of purchasing at University of Chicago Hospitals.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

Rick Schlosser has been appointed vice president of materials

Rick Schlosser has been appointed vice president of materials
management with Physician Sales & Service Inc., Jacksonville, Fla.
Previously he was vice president of material management for
American Medical International, Dallas, before its merger with
National Medical Enterprises, Santa Monica, Calif., to become
Tenet Healthcare Corp., Santa Monica.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY:

+ HIT beams into the market leaders in the $200 million-and-
growing surgical laser market in its January issue. The newsletter
also analyzes Baxter's big shakeup and provides a recap of
November's Radiological Society of North America annual meeting.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "36"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

PROFILES IN HEALTHCARE MARKETING:

+ January-February's Profiles features Langhorne, Pa.-based
Delaware Valley Medical Center and its establishment of a managed
geropsychiatric unit--the Behavioral Health Center for Older Adults.
This issue of Profiles also includes a cumulative index for 1995.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "37"></A>Copyright
HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

HEALTH CARE STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT:

+ HCSM's January cover story highlights outsourcing, identifies
the benefits and pitfalls, and looks at future trends. HCSM asserts
that although the majority of hospitals currently outsourcing have
flat price contracts, in the future that will be replaced by shared risk
and performance based practices.

For information on these and other publications, please call The
Business Word Inc. at 800-328-3211.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-13</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B040-93</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh60.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015734 text/html 34258
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:55:05 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:37 GMT
Content-length: 34071
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh60.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNet <BR>
February 15, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>FDA to Draft New Approval Guidance For Medical&nbsp;Software Regulation</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(434 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Hospital Overhauls Information System To Adopt&nbsp;Client-Server Environment</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(334 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Health Groups Collaborate To Prove Telemedicine's Worth</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(232 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Group Outlines Special License For MDs Doing Telemedicine</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(369 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Hospital Cuts Paper Chase Out of System Buy Process</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(282 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Clinic Tracks Utilization Through Electronic Record</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(457 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Automated Prepayment Screen Could Save Millions, GAO Says</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(290 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>DOWNLOAD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(616 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>PRODUCT DEVELOPMENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(604 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>MARKET SCANNER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(631 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>SURFING THE 'NET&nbsp;Telemedicine Web Site Offers Product Reviews</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(202 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNet
February 15, 1996

FDA to Draft New Approval Guidance For Medical
Software Regulation


To judge whether a software program needs premarket
notification or approval, the FDA may use criteria such as
seriousness of the disease to be diagnosed or treated; time frame
for use of the information; and concordance with accepted medical
practice.

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) will draft a new software
regulation policy, following controversy in the information systems
industry over the agency's efforts to clarify its 1989 draft policy
(IMS 9/7/95, p. 2).
Some industry representatives feel the FDA is on the right track.
If the revised  policy creates a category for those products that
need little or no regulation, it could mean an easier approval
process for vendors and more technology reaching the users quicker.
While some stand-alone software products such as hospital
information systems and picture archiving and communication systems
do not pose a threat to patients if they fail, they are medical
devices under the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act and should be
regulated as such, says Dr. Harvey Rudolph, acting deputy director
of the FDA Office of Science and Technology.
Although the FDA guidance aims to identify products that do not
require 510(k) premarket notification, the guidance created more
confusion than clarification, Rudolph admits.
FDA uses the concept of "competent human intervention" to determine
whether a product poses an immediate danger to patients if it
fails. As long as a qualified person, such as a physician, has
control over system output, there is competent human intervention.
The problem, Rudolph says, is manufacturers have interpreted
competent human intervention too broadly.
One system's experience: Base Ten Systems of Trenton, N.J.,
originally submitted a premarket notification for its prenatal
evaluation computer software program, Prenval. But the approval
process took several years because of FDA's inexperience at
regulating software, contends Walter Brandes, company vice
president.
After Base Ten had submitted the request for notification, FDA said
the company needed to go through the lengthier premarket approval
process. But FDA's peer reviewers, in looking over the company's
paperwork, downgraded the product to a 510(k), says Brandes.
The agency wants to develop three levels of device review based on
criteria that determine the impact of product failure on the
patient. 

The criteria include:

o         Seriousness of the disease to be
diagnosed or treated; 
o         Time frame for use of the
information; 
o         Concordance with accepted medical
practice; 
o         Format of data and their
presentation; 
o         Individualized vs. aggregate
patient care recommendations; and 
o         Clarity of the algorithm.

The agency hopes to publish in three to six months a new draft in
the Federal Register.
Contact Rudolph at (301) 443-2444.  




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNet
February 15, 1996

Hospital Overhauls Information System To Adopt
Client-Server Environment


Hermann Hospital of Houston is reworking its information system,
leaving its mainframe behind and moving to a client-server environment
that makes information more accessible to the end-user.

Tired of the lack of communication between the components of its
budding integrated delivery system, one Texas hospital decided to
rework its entire information system.
Hermann Hospital of Houston embarked on a three-year initiative to
phase in a system to create an electronic medical record accessible
from all parts of its network, says CIO David Tucker.
Phase one: pilot tests at five or six University of Texas clinics
associated with the hospital. After phase one is complete, the
hospital will focus on integrating other departments, such as
nursing, into the network.
The hospital operates in a mainframe environment, using the
Envision system developed by SMS of Malvern, Pa. Hermann is moving
to a client-server environment that makes information more
accessible to the end-user, Tucker says.
The paperless, client-server system will eliminate the need for
duplicate medical records scattered around the network.
For example, if a patient goes into a clinic in the morning, then
goes to the Hermann emergency room that night, physicians in the ER
have no way of knowing about the encounter that morning and will
draw up a new chart, Tucker says.
Hermann will implement the Health Network Architecture developed by
Cerner Corp. of Kansas City, Mo., to link its network. 
The computerized patient medical records will be stored using
Cerner's Open Clinical Foundation Data Repository. 
Hermann also will implement Cerner's CareNet Care Management System
and Open Management Foundation Data Repository.
When implemented, the system will link about 2,000 devices,
including workstations and printers, located at about 60 clinics in
the area. The system will run on a Digital Equipment Corp. (DEC)
platform and will use Oracle.
Hermann hopes to have the first pilot systems in place by
September.
Tucker foresees complications common to new systems: Hermann staff
has never used the DEC platform or Oracle.
Contact Tucker at (713) 704-3367.  




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNet
February 15, 1996

Health Groups Collaborate To Prove Telemedicine's Worth


A new telemedicine research center gives members access to
research databases - and the opportunity to participate in projects
to prove the benefits of telemedicine.

To help prove the clinical utility and cost- effectiveness of
telemedicine, an Oregon research  center launched a group to
cooperate on telemedicine projects nationwide.
The Telemedicine Research Center, a non-profit research corporation
based in Portland, Ore., organized the Clinical Telemedicine
Cooperative Group. The intent: advance telemedicine research
through a cooperative approach to clinical telemedicine trials,
says Mary McDermott, client services manager.
Health care facilities looking to launch their own telemedicine
programs but don't know where to start could benefit from the
research of others.
The group uses e-mail to communicate with members. Members also can
download evaluation tools and training materials based on other
ongoing telemedicine projects.
Members can access research, design and data management protocols,
and other telemedicine information. Members also can conceive,
develop and participate in telemedicine research studies.
Members include East Carolina University, Iowa Health System,
Midwest Rural Telemedicine Consortium, Oregon Health Sciences
University, and the U.S. Army Medical Research and Materials
Command's Medical Advanced Technology Management Office.
In addition to the cooperative group, the center maintains a World
Wide Web home page that links users to other telemedicine Web sites
(see Surfing the 'Net, p. 7).
Contact McDermott at (503) 221-1620, or the research center at
trc@telemed.org on the Internet.  




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNet
February 15, 1996

Group Outlines Special License For MDs Doing Telemedicine


The interstate practice of telemedicine may get easier if
a proposal by the Federation of State Medical Boards becomes law.

The Federation of State Medical Boards, based in Euless, Texas,
drafted a model act calling for the establishment of a special
license limited to the interstate practice of medicine, such as
telemedicine (IMS 11/2/95, p. 1).
The group has presented the draft document for recommendation to
state medical boards.
Findings: Physicians practicing medicine across state lines are
either unregulated or must be fully licensed in the state where the
patient is located.
However, some states still feel that a full and unrestricted
license is necessary for the interstate practice of medicine, says
Dr. James Winn, federation executive vice president.

Model Act Is a Step in the Right Direction

While states don't have to adopt the guidance, the proposal does
move toward breaking down the barriers to telemedicine, says Tim
Henderson, director of the Primary Care Resource Center at George
Washington University's Intergovernmental Health Policy Project in
Washington. There is a need for a joint effort to deal with the
fast growth of telemedicine, he says.
The creation of a nationwide licensure standard is so far off that
it is impossible to determine how the act  would affect legislative
efforts in the future, he notes. Henderson suggests seeing how the
effort works in a few states before trying broader implementation.
The proposed act would require physicians engaging in telemedicine
and any interstate practice of medicine to obtain a special license
issued by the state medical board. The license would not allow the
physician to enter the state to practice medicine.
The act would only require those physicians who regularly engage in
the practice of medicine across state lines to obtain a license,
and would exempt physicians in the case of an emergency.
The definitions of "regularly" and "emergency" would be determined
by the board in each state.
The committee further recommends that every consideration for
expedient issuance of the limited medical license be given to
physicians holding a valid, unrestricted license in one state.
The committee plans to meet again at the end of March to finalize
the document.
Contact the federation at (817) 868-4000.  




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNet
February 15, 1996

Hospital Cuts Paper Chase Out of System Buy Process


A New York hospital used a 13-member committee to evaluate
on-site demonstrations, interview counterparts at other user
hospitals and rate vendor documentation.

In its search for a new information system, a New York hospital
found an alternative to the usual paper-intensive process of
submitting a request for proposal (RFP) to vendors.
Brooks Memorial Hospital of Dunkirk, N.Y., first sent out a request
for information to 13 vendors and narrowed the choice to seven.
An RFP involves a great deal of paperwork on both sides and is not
filled with information that prospective buyers can really use,
says Vince Ciotti of HIS Professionals of Boonton, N.J., Brooks'
information systems consultant.
Hospital CFO Ralph Webdale chaired a 13-member committee that
included physicians and representa-tives from nursing, billing,
accounting and pharmacy departments. 
For one day a week, each of the seven vendors did on-site demos in
each department.
Committee members independently rated each vendor's software
package, then discussed the systems' strengths and weaknesses as a
group.
A vital element of the review process was the telephone reference,
Webdale says. Each committee member spoke to their counterparts at
hospitals that had installed the vendors' products, then rated and
discussed each product based on the conversations.
The final step was to rate the documentation of the top six vendors
based on criteria such as ease-of-use.
In the end, the committee came to a unanimous decision to buy a
Meditech system.
Tip: One of the criteria Ciotti uses to put together a list of
potential vendors is location. Some hospitals have spent up to
$100,000 flying vendors in for demos or for service, Ciotti says.
Contact Ciotti at (201) 263-4795, or Webdale at (716) 366-1111.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNet
February 15, 1996

Clinic Tracks Utilization Through Electronic Record


The system collects patient demographics data at
registration on an IBM AS/400  workstation linked to the central
database and automatically updates the patient record. Billing
information is sent in daily batches to the database. The system
runs on a Novell 4.0 network.

To track patient utilization and improve allocation of resources,
a multisite Iowa provider group decided to use a computerized
medical record system.
The Iowa Physicians Clinic Medical Foundation will install
computerized medical record systems in about 15 sites around the
state, according to Dr. Mark Purtle, director of internal medicine.
The group chose the MR 2000 computerized medical record program
developed by Healthcare Software Solutions, a subsidiary of Blue
Cross and Blue Shield of Iowa, based in Des Moines.
The group has patient record systems up and running, although only
in partial installation, in about half of its sites. 
While the MR 2000 includes modules for finance, health maintenance,
drug formularies and drug interactions, the group uses the system
primarily for demographics and patient encounter information.

Registration System Collects Demographics

Patient demographics data is collected at registration on an IBM
AS/400 workstation linked to the central database. The system
automatically updates the patient record. Billing information is
sent in daily batches to the database.
The system runs on a Novell 4.0 network.
Instead of entering encounter notes directly into the record,
physicians record notes, which are then transcribed and entered
into the record. 
The system also includes a ICD-9 and CPT-4 coding module, but
coding is still not widespread among physicians, Purtle notes.
All clinic sites can access records stored in the central database.
However, each site maintains a server with its own records.
Workstations are located at all physician offices, nurse stations
and registration desks. When the system is fully installed, there
will be workstations in every exam room.
Caveat: The electronic medical record has not yet eliminated the
need for a paper record. The group may use a scanner to create
electronic images of the paper records.
The group hopes to build a complete database of codes and
demographics that tracks encounters by provider and clinic site. 
Being able to track seasonal variations in utilization would enable
the group to better plan the number of physicians it needs during
certain periods of the year or the type of physician it would need
in a certain  community.
According to Purtle, the implementation process has been slow. The
hold-up is due in part to physicians getting used to computers. In
addition, the group is awaiting release of a Windows version of the
software before continuing implementation.
The group hopes to have the system fully implemented at all its
sites by the end of the year.
Contact Purtle at (515) 241-4000. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNet
February 15, 1996

Automated Prepayment Screen Could Save Millions, GAO Says


HCFA says half of Medicare Part B contractors have
installed the screening tools, but Congress hasn't appropriated the
money to support the program. But GAO contends the tool could save
HCFA $150 million a year.

HCFA could save millions of dollars by using automated prepayment
screens for Medicare claims, according to a report released earlier
this month by the General Accounting Office.
A simple safeguard, known as an auto-adjudicated prepayment screen,
could save millions of dollars in unnecessary Medicare payments,
GAO officials said at a Feb. 8 House Government Reform and
Oversight Human Resources and Intergovernmental Relations
Subcommittee hearing.
Rep. Christopher Shays (R-Conn.), subcommittee chairman, said there
is very little reason why HCFA should not require the screens to be
used whenever possible.
While half of Medicare contractors have installed the screens, they
don't use them because of the limited funds appropriated by
Congress for medical review, according to Gary Kavanagh, deputy
director of HCFA's Bureau of Program Operations. Another obstacle:
lack of a nationwide standard payment policy, he added.
HCFA has three model policies in place to examine whether the
screens work and is planning more by the summer, Kavanagh said.
However, he expressed doubt that the screens would save a "whole
lot of money."
The GAO based its findings on claims for six common medical
procedures submitted to the seven largest Medicare Part B
contractors, and determined HCFA could save about $150 million on
those procedures alone.
The six procedures, which account for almost $3 billion in Medicare
payments, are echocardiography, eye exams, chest X-rays,
colonoscopy, YAG laser surgery and duplex scan of extracranial
arteries.
To order a copy of the report, GAO/HEHS-96-49, call (202) 512-6000.
To place an order by fax, dial (301) 258-4066.  




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNet
February 15, 1996

DOWNLOAD


         The U.S. Department of Justice
indicted a group of Michigan medical suppliers for allegedly
defrauding Medicare of $25 million through an electronic billing
scheme. Through assorted companies, the suppliers allegedly
electronically billed Medicare's fiscal intermediary Blue Cross and
Blue Shield of Michigan for questionable supplies, including kits
for catheters, incontinence and gastronomy tubes. The suppliers
allegedly back-dated claims and billed Medicare separately for
components of kits as well as the kits themselves. When Blue Cross
got suspicious and subjected claims to prepayment review, the
suppliers allegedly switched to provider identification numbers
that seemed unrelated to their companies, and billed Medicare
carriers in Florida and Ohio.

         The wide variation in the
information systems capabilities of health plans affects how
completely plans can report measures for the Health Plan Employer
Data and Information Set, according to the Committee on Performance
Measurement of the National Committee for Quality Assurance. At a
recent meeting of the committee, members concluded that the best
strategy is to design measures for HEDIS 3.0, set for release this
summer, that many plans can produce with current information
systems, but that would provide users, over time, with information
they need for measurement. Contact NCQA at (202) 955-3500.

         HCFA on Feb.5 issued a call for
comments on its proposed automated National Provider System for
collecting health care information. The system will be used in
program operations and management to assign provider identification
numbers, such as billing numbers for claims processing and payment.
For a copy of the proposal, call (410) 786-1326. Send comments and
recommendations to OMB Human Resources and Housing Branch,
Attention: Allison Eydt, New Executive Office Building, Room 10235,
Washington, D.C. 20503.

         A draft HHS budget proposal may
expand rural telemedicine grants to rural primary care hospitals
and sole community hospitals.

         The National Health Council of
Washington and Chicago-based America's House Call Network entered
into a strategic alliance to disseminate health information to
consumers through the House Call network. The council will offer
members assistance in using the interactive services of the
network, including disease forums, chat rooms, health news and
interactive conferences. Contact the council at (202) 785-3910.

         The Uniform Code Council of Dayton,
Ohio, released a video and literature package that addresses the
product identification needs of the health care industry.
"Application Identifiers: At the Heart of Health Care Product
Identification" focuses on mapping data-structure requirements to
industry-defined business requirements. The video and accompanying
brochure describe product identification and bar-coding for
pharmaceutical and medical-surgical products. Contact the council
at (513) 435-3870.

         A coalition of state education,
military, health care and private sector groups has launched the
Texas Distance Learning Assn. to address, in part, the importance
of telemedicine. Contact the association at (512) 280-2500.

         A far greater percentage of rural
health care facilities than previously thought is using
telemedicine to access specialists at large urban health centers
for patient care, according to a study on telemedicine by Abt
Associates Inc. of Cambridge, Mass. The study was funded by the
Office of Rural Health Policy and tallied the responses of 2,365
facilities, or 95% of the nation's rural hospitals. According to
the study, 29% of facilities have adopted telemedicine programs,
ranging from teleradiology to interactive video, or plan to by the
end of the year; about 30% of telemedicine programs were created
within the last year and 30% between one and three years ago; of
the facilities with telemedicine programs, 66% seek out specialty
consultation, while 10% provide consultation services to others,
with the remainder serving in both capacities; and the average
rural hospital that seeks consultations from specialists using
telemedicine receives 15 teleconsultations each month. For more
information, contact Abt at (617) 492-7100.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNet
February 15, 1996

PRODUCT DEVELOPMENTS


        Cisco Systems Inc. of San Jose,
Calif., will use as its document management solution the NovaManage
system from Novasoft Systems Inc. of Burlington, Mass. NovaManage
will serve as the core technology within Cisco's enterprisewide
project data management application, integrating with additional
Cisco information systems. NovaManage is based on Novasoft's
Cellular Document Management architecture. Cisco also plans to
integrate Novasoft's NovaWeb, which allows users to remotely access
business-critical NovaManage documents from the system's Web
client. Novasoft's products are used in the pharmaceutical and
medical device industry. Contact Novasoft at (617) 221-0300.

        Allscrips Pharmaceuticals Inc. of
Vernon Hills, Ill., completed its merger with Chadds Ford,
Pa.-based Physician Dispensing Systems Inc., developer of an
on-line drug dispensing and information system. The merger will
link prescription dispensing with clinical, medication and
insurance data management in a single information system at the
point of care. Allscrips' proprietary software for doctor's offices
provides on-line information about clinical profiles, drug
interactions and other data to help guide physicians to the most
appropriate prescribing choices.  Allscrips will use Physician
Dispensing Systems' technology to link prescription information
to payer data and patients' personal medical information on-line.
Contact Allscrips at (708) 680-3515.

        Zenith Data Systems of Buffalo Grove,
Ill., introduced MultiCruise, a mobile system that provides
simultaneous, remote, real-time access to applications and data on
a central Microsoft Windows NT server. Users can access and update
patient information stored on the MultiCruise system from anywhere
in the medical facility using the CruisePAD, a wireless touchpad.
MultiCruise allows the CruisePAD to remotely control multiple
Windows-based sessions running on the MultiCruise server. The
system uses an organization's existing software and standard
MS-DOS, Window 3.X, Windows 95 and Window NT-based applications.
Contact Zenith at (708) 808-5000.

        Phoenix-based National Health
Enhancement Systems Inc., a developer of medical call centers,
partnered with Cognos, headquartered in both Ottawa, Canada, and
Burlington, Mass. National Health Enhancement will incorporate
Cognos' data access and reporting tool, PowerPlay, in its
Centramax.M software products. Centramax.M is a configurable
software program that manages clinical and non-clinical call center
functions, including customer communication, database management
and triage/advice systems. Contact Cognos at (617) 229-6600, or
National Health at (602) 230-7575.

        Interactive Buyers Network
International of Ventura, Calif., created a global on-line
marketplace using its SOURCE interactive software. Users, such as
Providence St. Joseph Medical Center, can access competitive
pricing from inside or outside their normal pool of vendors.
Contact Interactive Buyers Network International at (800) 949-7353.

        Aware Inc. of Bedford, Mass., and
Access Radiology Corp. of Waltham, Mass., will integrate Aware's
medical implementation of wavelet compression with Access's image
management product line, Framewave. Access Framewave is a family of
digital image acquisition and communication products using Aware's
wavelet-based image compression to manage diagnostic quality
medical images in wide-area applications. Framewave film digitizers
and frame-grab devices use Aware's compression technology to
eliminate the need for dedicated, broadband telecommunications in
wide-area applications. Contact Aware at (617) 276-4000.

        Informed Access Systems Inc. of
Boulder, Colo.,  received a U.S. patent for FirstHelp, a system
to manage consumer demand for medical services. FirstHelp is an
automated patient assessment and provider referral system that is
used by health plans and health care providers to help guide
patients to an appropriate level and type of medical care based
upon their needs. The system is made up of two components: the
patient assessment component, an automated set of proprietary
patient assessment algorithms; and the provider information
component, a proprietary relational database containing the
information necessary to differentiate the providers participating
in a network and to manage the patient flow into their practices.
Contact Informed Access at (303) 443-4600.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNet
February 15, 1996

MARKET SCANNER


         The Northwest Academic Computing
Consortium of Bellevue, Wash., spun off its Internet service arm to
form a for-profit company, NorthWestNet Inc. NorthWestNet provides
Internet service to health care companies, such as the Group Health
Cooperative of Puget Sound. The company is expanding its services
to include frame relay connections, World Wide Web site, hosting
and bulk Internet e-mail list services. Contact NorthWestNet at
(206) 649-7400.

         Hospital Cost Consultants Inc., a
subsidiary of CIS Technologies Inc. of Tulsa, Okla., signed three
agreements to implement various applications of its 3-D financials
product line, which allows providers to proactively address
revenue, cost and market share. The agreements are with Holy Cross
Hospital of Chicago, the University of Tennessee Medical Center at
Knoxville, and St. Mary-Corwin Regional Medical Center in Pueblo,
Colo. Holy Cross will purchase the AS/400-based cost-accounting
software application to provide cost management and strategic
planning. The University of Tennessee will implement the
Distinction, Dividend and Domain managed care systems. St.
Mary-Corwin will implement the most recent version of the
Distinction: Contract Management System and an IBM, RS/6000 C-10
Compact Server. Contact CIS at (918) 496-2451.

         National Data Corp. of Atlanta
acquired Cleveland-based Conceptual Systems Corp., a provider of
electronic claims processing services and practice management
systems for physicians, hospitals and other health care businesses.
Conceptual processed more than 10 million health care transactions
last year, including insurance and benefits eligibility
verification, co-insurance billing, payment verification and
electronic data interchange services. Contact National Data at
(404) 728-2000.

         CyData Inc., a physician and
hospital EDI services vendor based in Scottsdale, Ariz., received
national clearinghouse accreditation from the Electronic
Healthcare Network Accreditation Commission. Contact CyData at
(800) 336-4018.

         The Associated Group, an
Indianopolis-based insurance company, selected Unisys Corp. of Blue
Bell, Pa., to provide information systems management services. The
contract has an estimated value of more than $100 million over its
first five years and includes the purchase by Unisys of information
technology assets from the insurer. Unisys will operate and manage
the insurer's information systems data center facilities in
Indianapolis, Cincinnati, and Louisville, Ky. Contact the
Associated Group at (317) 488-6248.

         HCIA Inc. of Baltimore announced a
net income per share for the fourth quarter, excluding a
non-recurring charge, of $.18, an increase of 350% over 1994. For
the year, the company had a net income per share of $.60. Contact
HCIA at (410) 332-7515.

         The Health Insurance Plan of New
York will install the Managed Care System developed by CareWare
Systems of Tampa, Fla. The plan will use the software to perform
precertification of care, medical case management, utilization
review and medical bill re-pricing for HIP's newly certified
Workers' Compensation Managed Care Organization, HIP-COMP. The
PC-based software uses Windows technology and allows users to
control the selection, delivery and costs of services appropriate
to patient conditions. Contact CareWare at (800) 766-1736.

         OSF Health Plans Inc. of Peoria,
Ill., is installing the MEDSYTE decision support system developed
by O'PIN Systems Inc. of Bloomington, Minn. The health plan will
use the system to guide utilization management and continuous
quality improvement. The plan will also use O'PIN's HEDIS 2.5
Reporting system to evaluate and trend plan performance for
employer groups. Contact O'PIN at (612) 883-2888.

         DKD, a member of the Provider
Division of the MEDSTAT Group of Ann Arbor, Mich., signed eight new
contracts for the installation of the  ASCENT Managed Care
Information and Quality Management Systems: Loyola University
Medical Center of Maywood, Ill.; University of Michigan Medical
Center of Ann Arbor, Mich.; Parkland Memorial Hospital of Dallas;
St. Joseph's Hospital Health Center of Syracuse, N.Y.; Englewood
Hospital of Englewood, N.J.; Health Management Associates Inc. of
Naples, Fla.; Ingalls Health System of Harvey, Ill.; and Copley
Memorial Hospital of Aurora, Ill. Contact MEDSTAT at (313)
996-1180.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNet
February 15, 1996

SURFING THE 'NET
Telemedicine Web Site Offers Product Reviews


The Telemedicine Information Exchange World Wide Web site,
maintained by the Telemedicine Research Center of Portland, Ore.,
links users to a telemedicine products and services directory that
catalogs articles on equipment reviews, evaluations or technical
specs.
Once you choose a browser, you will have a selection of three
menus: (1) starters; (2) hot items; and (3) searchable databases.
From the starter menu, users can get the history and definition of
telemedicine, or read case studies on telemedicine in action and
the latest news, including legislative issues and success stories.
Users can also offer feedback on the site.
Under the hot items menu, users can explore the legal and ethical
issues surrounding telemedicine through the text of current state
legislation, peer-reviewed articles and hypertext links to other
Internet resources.
The searchable databases include information on funding for
telemedicine projects, active projects, and upcoming meetings and
conferences.
The site also offers information on the Telemedicine Research
Center's Clinical Telemedicine Cooperative Group that brings
together researchers nationwide (see story, p. 2).
The site's home page lets you choose a text-only or a graphic
browser, enabling users to sacrifice aesthetics for the sake of
speed.
The site is located at http://tie.telemed.org/ on the Web.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-14</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B040-122</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh67.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015827 text/html 118342
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:55:57 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:36 GMT
Content-length: 118154
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh67.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>HISTORIC US GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN ENDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(426 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>HOECHST MARION ROUSSEL RESTRUCTURES IN 1996</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(502 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>UK APPROVES FIRST PRIVATELY FUNDED HOSPITAL PROJECT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(425 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>SWISS INSURANCE COMPANIES TAKE AIM AT PRIVATE HOSPITAL TREATMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(395 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>FRENCH HEALTH INSURERS TO STUDY COST CONTAINMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(229 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>BURE ACQUIRES PREVIA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(234 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>FRENCH ACQUISITION OF AUSTRALIAN HOSPITAL COMPANY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(120 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>ARJO UNDER THE SPOTLIGHT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(205 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>CANADIAN RED CROSS UNVEILS SELF-SUFFICIENT BLOOD STRATEGY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(397 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>EU'S 4TH FRAMEWORK HEALTH TELEMATICS PROJECTS SET TO BEGIN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(347 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CONFERENCE REPORT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>HEALTH MINISTER OUTLINES POLICY ON IT IN HEALTHCARE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(374 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>DIABCARD TRIAL IN BARCELONA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(225 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>INFOMIX - A SUCCESS IN HUNGARIAN HEALTHCARE INFORMATICS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(488 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>ALBERTA TESTS SMART CARD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(253 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PUBLICATIONS REVIEW</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE MAKES PROFIT FROM PRIVATE PATIENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(280 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>UK ANNOUNCES SPENDING ON HEALTH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(287 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>STUDY SHOWS UK HOSPITAL INTENSIVE CARE NEEDS IMPROVEMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(370 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>IRELAND TO PROMOTE EXPORT SALES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(194 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>FRENCH HOSPITAL REFORM REMAINS TO BE DETERMINED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(545 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>FRANCE SUPPORTS AIDS CAMPAIGN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(315 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>FRANCE INCREASES PACE OF CHANGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(516 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CONFERENCE REPORT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>EUROPEAN HEALTH MINISTERS SIGNAL TOUGHER ACTION ON ALCOHOL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(323 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>GERMANY AHEAD OF SCHEDULE ON TRACKING DOCTORS' PRESCRIPTIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(469 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>TRANSPLANT LAW FOR GERMANY AT LAST?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(464 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>ITALY DRASTICALLY CUTS 1996 SPENDING FOR PHARMACEUTICALS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(360 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>ITALIANS CONSULT TRAVEL AGENTS FIRST WHEN TAKEN ILL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(279 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PUBLICATIONS REVIEW</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>AUSTRIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION OFFERS REFORM PROPOSALS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(226 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>WHO CASH CRISIS DEEPENS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(285 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>UNAIDS STARTS UP AMID DOUBTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(364 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>SPAIN FINDS 1996 FULL OF HEALTH SYSTEM PROBLEMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(380 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>NORWEGIAN DOCTORS FAVOUR PRIVATISATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(424 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>FDA FLOODED WITH RESPONSES TO PROPOSED CIGARETTE RULING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(588 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>MEDICAL MALPRACTICE AWARDS RISE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(78 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#34"><LI>ALBERTA WILL NOT CUT DOCTOR FEES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(155 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#35"><LI>MEXICO PLANS TO EXTEND HEALTHCARE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(162 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#36"><LI>JAPANESE GROUP TO FIGHT MALPRACTICE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(172 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#37"><LI>JAPAN PROPOSES TO REDUCE PHARMACEUTICAL SPENDING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(471 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#38"><LI>TAIWAN'S NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE IN JEOPARDY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(313 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#39"><LI>MEDICAL BENEFITS COMPENSATION LEGISLATION PROPOSED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(370 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#40"><LI>NEW ZEALAND AND AUSTRALIA AMEND MEDICAL PRACTITIONER LAWS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(340 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#41"><LI>NEW ZEALAND ADDS MONEY TO CUT WAITING LISTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(347 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#42"><LI>SOUTH AFRICA HEALTH REFORMS TO CURTAIL DRUG SALES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(224 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#43"><LI>HUNGARIAN DRUG COMPANIES HOLD STEADY IN SPITE OF COMPETITION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(498 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#44"><LI>BRACCO PURCHASES INTEREST IN ESAOTE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(72 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#45"><LI>BB MEDTECH FORMED TO INVEST IN MEDICAL AND HEALTHCARE COMPANIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(64 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#46"><LI>SUN LIFE AWARDED CANADA'S HEALTH INSURANCE BUSINESS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(74 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#47"><LI>SWEDISH MEDICAL LABORATORIES MERG</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(48 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#48"><LI>SYNECTICS MEDICAL BUYS ALL SHARES IN DANTEC MEDICAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(97 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#49"><LI>MEDSTAT GROUP CONTRACT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(47 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#50"><LI>FLORIDA HEALTH CENTRES SOLD TO HUMANA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(55 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#51"><LI>AARP TO END ARRANGEMENT WITH PRUDENTIAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(71 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#52"><LI>HEALTHSOUTH TO PURCHASE ADVANTAGE HEALTH CORP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(82 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#53"><LI>STERIS TO ACQUIRE AMSCO INTERNATIONAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(99 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#54"><LI>BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB TO ACQUIRE 77 PER CENT OF PHARMAVIT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(65 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#55"><LI>MEDICAL DEVICES SECTOR SHOWS STRONG GROWTH POTENTIAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(682 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

HISTORIC US GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN ENDS

WASHINGTON, DC - The 21 day partial US federal government shutdown
ended 5 January 1996, when president Bill Clinton signed legislation
that temporarily brings back to work one-quarter of a million people
furloughed during a budget impasse. A compromise was reached with the
Republican party-controlled Congress agreeing to back-pay the
furloughed federal employees, as well as the nearly half million who
were working without full pay since 16 December 1995. The president and
Congress had been at an impasse to agree on a seven year plan to
balance the budget by the year 2002 and which programmes and taxes
would be decreased to accomplish that goal.

This furlough followed a one-week shutdown in November and is only
resolved until the temporary legislation runs out on 26 January.
Federal employees will not be secure in their jobs or funding of the
programmes they run until departmental appropriation bills are passed
and signed by the president. Although Clinton has put forth a balanced
budget, with figures validated by the Congressional Budget Office, the
Democratic and Republican parties remain far apart in their views about
entitlement programmes and the role of the federal government vis-a-vis
the states.

While IHN predicted a collision course between the president and the
congress on Medicare and Medicaid (IHN 6, November, 1995, page 1), IHN
did not expect federal employees to be held hostage. These two
programmes, however, are major points of contention along with tax cuts
and welfare reform. The table illustrates the differences in savings
for the four programmes projected by the president and Congress at the
conclusion of talks on 7 January.

Programmes            Clinton savings       Republican savings

Medicare              $102 billion          $201 billion
Medicaid              $52 billion           $117 billion
Tax cuts              $87 billion           $241 billion
Welfare               $45 billion           $82 billion

Sources: Congressional Budget Office, White House

While the Department of Health and Human Services is still without an
approved budget, the 5 January agreement did provide funding through 30
September, the end of this fiscal year, for the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) and the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention and
several other health agencies. The Food and Drug Administration, by the
way, was unaffected because it was under the Department of
Agriculture's previously appropriated budget.

The shutdown has long-term rippling effects for the healthcare sector.
For example, researchers at nearly 1,700 hospitals and university
research centres are unable to begin or continue projects funded by NIH
grants. Wendy Baldwin, NIH grants supervisor said, "It is going to take
months to straighten out the backlog."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

HOECHST MARION ROUSSEL RESTRUCTURES IN 1996

FRANKFURT -- Hoechst Marion Roussel (HMR) recently announced its 1996
plans for worldwide restructuring. HMR plans to abolish 8,000 jobs this
year; about one-third of the losses will be in Europe (1,400 in
Germany), 20 per cent in North America, and 25 per cent in the Asian,
Pacific region. The company currently employs 43,000 people. About 40
per cent of the job cuts will be in manufacturing and about half will
be administrative and sales staff.

"Hoechst is no longer a German company with an international business,
but an international multi-cultural company with headquarters in
Germany", claims HMR spokesman, Joachim Pietzsch, when describing the
current state of the company's affairs.  "The traditional German
chemical company founded in 1863 in a village near Frankfurt is now
undergoing dramatic changes. In a few years drugs will be only
connected with Hoechst Marion Roussel instead of just Hoechst."

Since Jurgen Dormann took over as managing director in April 1994, the
company has concentrated on the three core areas of pharmaceuticals,
plant protection and industrial chemistry. Major acquisitions and
several co-operative arrangements have been made in these areas, while
cosmetic and chemical companies have been sold.

In July 1995, Hoechst acquired the American pharmaceutical company
Marion Merrel Dow for $7.1 billion. This was the largest acquisition
ever made by a German company. Several years ago, Hoechst purchased the
French company Roussel and the restructuring marks an overhaul and
integration of its drug division.

Increase profit margins by 30 per cent

The restructuring, estimated to cost about DM1.1 billion ($758.6
million), is expected to increase drug profit margins by 30 per cent
over three years. The plan calls for reducing the number of HMR's drug
production sites to 40, about half of the current number. There will be
four research centres: Frankfurt (Germany), Romainville (France),
Sommerville (US) and Kawagoe (Japan). These centres will focus on the
mechanisms and therapeutic options for cardiovascular, metabolic,
infectious and oncological diseases, as well as ailments of the bones
and central nervous and respiratory systems. A centre will be closed in
each of the following cities: Cincinatti (US), Strasbourg (France),
Swindon (UK) and Gerenzano, Italy.

Frankfurt will keep its dominant position, said director Karl-Gerhard
Seifert, who is responsible for HMR's pharmaceutical business. He will
work with a multi-cultural executive committee of 12 managers. A drug
development centre will be established in Sommerville, New Jersey and
the centre will be responsible for marketing, business development and
drug submissions.

The strategic aim is to register two new drugs per year. Drug
submissions will be expedited by continuous data transfer between the
centres of HMR.

"We have 15 top projects", said Pietzsch. Three of them are in the area
of gene technology: Hirudin, Factor XIII and human insulin. In the
past, Hoechst was not a major player in gene therapy, but with HMR
centres on the US east coast and several co-operative arrangements with
small, specialised biotechnology companies, HMR currently has a strong
involvement in genome research.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

UK APPROVES FIRST PRIVATELY FUNDED HOSPITAL PROJECT

LONDON - A privately financed #35 million ($39.7 million) scheme to
reconstruct hospitals in England's Buckinghamshire region has been
approved by the government. The scheme is the first in which a
substantial sum of private finance is to be used to design and rebuild
hospital facilities for the publicly-funded National Health Service
(NHS).

The Secretary of State for Health, Stephen Dorrell, said that the
project marked a turning point for the government's private finance
initiative (PFI) in the health service. He added that he was strongly
in favour of testing public and private sector solutions alongside each
other and adopting the approach which offered the best value.

                  NHS capital spending: England
                        (# million)

                    Revised              Provisional
Plan      Plan       Plans                          1995-1996 1995-1996
 1997-1998    1998-1999

Hospital and Comm-
unity Health Svcs

Government spending 1,806     1,543      1,495        1,430
% real growth           -     -16.9        5.4         -6.5
Receipts from land
 sales                250       310        300          290
% real growth                  20.7       -5.6         -5.5
PFI investment         47       165        200          300
% real growth                   142       18.3         46.7
Other NHS
Capital spending       17        20         17           17
% real growth                  17.8      -19.9         -2.2
Total               2,120     2,038      2,012        1,036
% real growth                  -6.5       -3.7         -1.0

The contract, which involves a substantial amount of rebuilding at two
of the South Buckinghamshire NHS Trust's hospitals has been awarded to
the Healthcare Group consortium, comprising builders Taylor Woodrow,
the motorway service station operator Granada and financiers, Nexus.
Work is expected to begin in April and take two years to complete. Mr
Dorrell said all clinical services would continue to be provided by the
NHS, but maintenance would be the responsibility of the private sector
partner.

The project is expected to be the first of many large-scale private
sector schemes in the NHS, with the government expecting private
investment to rise from #47 million this year to #165 million in the
1996-1997 year. Even with such a large increase in private investment,
however, the total amount of funding available for capital projects is
still expected to fall.

Mr Dorrell has announced that government expenditure on capital
projects for hospitals and community health services is to be cut by
almost 17 per cent next year, to #1.54 billion. This is expected to
result in a fall of 6.5 per cent in overall funding available for
capital development in real terms in the 1996-1997 year, and a drop of
3.7 per cent in the following year.

The NHS Executive has so far approved 44 PFI schemes, with a total
capital value of around #166 million.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SWISS INSURANCE COMPANIES TAKE AIM AT PRIVATE HOSPITAL TREATMENT

GENEVA - A group of leading Swiss insurance companies has declared war
on the high cost of health treatment in the country by introducing a
"carrot and stick" approach to get patients to switch to cheaper
private hospitals and clinics. The 13 companies belonging to COSAMA
(Conference suisse des assurers maladie et accidents) have fired the
first broadside in the Canton (state) of Vaud - where they control half
the health insurance market.

The insurance companies have drawn up a list of 11 hospitals and
clinics and told clients their premiums will be cut by 10 per cent if
they go to these places for treatment. If they choose other
establishments, there will be a surcharge of 40 per cent on their
premiums. Moreover, COSAMA has told the 11 hospitals and clinics to cut
their tariffs by 10 per cent, arguing they will gain from getting more
patients at their competitors' expense.

The move, however, has run into difficulties. All the establishments
belong to the GHRV (Groupement des hopitaux regionaux vaudois) and AVCP
(Association vaudoise des cliniques privees), which have urged its
members to stick together; otherwise some hospitals and clinics will be
forced to close. So far, however, only one of the clinics on the
approved list has agreed to COSAMA's proposal. While it remains to be
seen who will win this battle, COSAMA has said it plans to extend the
new policy to other cantons in Switzerland.

This action comes when the face of healthcare in Switzerland has been
transformed radically. From 1 January 1996, government subsidies to
insurance companies to hold down premiums were scrapped. One immediate
result has been a huge rise in insurance costs for most families.

The companies claim that cutting the subsidies has cost them SFr1.9
million ($1.54 million). In addition, they are now obliged to cover the
cost of treatment for a variety of illnesses in the public sector,
which they claim will cost another SFr1.7 billion. As a result,
premiums are increasing typically by 40, even 50 per cent.

Lower-income groups will receive subsidies towards their health
insurance costs, but the responsibility for deciding who is eligible
has been given to the cantons. There are, however, considerable
differences in the way the cantons are making their selection. This has
led to demands in parliament for a SFr500 million handout to families.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

FRENCH HEALTH INSURERS TO STUDY COST CONTAINMENT

PARIS - The state-owned life insurer, Caisse Nationale de Prevoyance,
is creating a unit to study cost containment. The unit will analyse
costs and treatments to provide the insurer with typical pictures of
various diseases and conditions. The intention is to identify which
treatments are useful and which are not, with a view to offering
clients cheaper but effective cover.

The unit will also seek to improve cost effectiveness by verifying the
efficacy of treatments and seeking the post-treatment opinion of
patients. The unit is expected to develop methods that will save more
money than they cost.

According to the insurer, the legal requirements for data protection
and medical secrecy are to be respected by the unit. The study may face
resistance from patients who are accustomed to spending for and seeking
healthcare as they like. Moreover, physicians may not be pleased to see
their income constrained.

The company's director of collective insurances, Patrick Warin, noted
that health insurers were interested in containing healthcare costs,
although those that provide supplementary insurance do not pay much
more than 10 per cent of the total healthcare bill. Because these
insurers pay the portion of the health bill not covered by the
government, they are often accused of encouraging overspending. He
added that insurers also need to contain costs, because government
decisions about reimbursement levels directly affect their business.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BURE ACQUIRES PREVIA

STOCKHOLM - The Scandinavian venture capital company Bure Ab has
cemented its position as Sweden's largest private healthcare services
provider in the aftermath of its $25 million acquisition of Previa, in
a deal finalised on 14 December. Bure will, following the take-over,
merge Previa with the group's other healthcare subsidiary Bygghalsan to
create a new company with annual revenues in excess of $94 million and
with a 20 per cent share of the rapidly expanding market for private
healthcare services in Sweden.

The new company, Previa Halsan Ab, will specialise in providing pre-
employment checks, routine and call-out medical services to companies
in the private and state sectors. Bure has drafted a five-year
development plan for Previa Halsan under which the company is expected
to increase revenues, through a process of mergers and acquisitions, to
$160 million within three years.

A similar growth pattern is planned for Bure's General Healthcare
Division, based in Stockholm, and forecast to double its annual
revenues to $806 million over the next three years.

In November, Bure acquired a 70 per cent stake in Malardiagnostik Ab, a
company engaged in the operation of private healthcare clinics. Shares
were acquired from the Svrmland District Council. As part of the deal,
Bure bought a minority 40 per cent holding in the Svrmland District
Council owned healthcare centre company Sormlandshalsan. The acquired
assets have annual revenues of $20 million.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

FRENCH ACQUISITION OF AUSTRALIAN HOSPITAL COMPANY

CANBERRA - The Australian Treasurer and the country's Foreign
Investment Review Board have approved the purchase by the French
conglomerate, Compagnie des Eaux, of a major Australian hospital group.
Australian Medical Enterprises owns nine hospitals in New South Wales
and Western Australia and 60 per cent of private pathology services in
the latter state.

Some disquiet has arisen among some Australian parliamentarians over
whether it is in the national interest that a foreign company, and
particularly a French company, should acquire such a large share of the
Australian health industry. The government was unmoved by these
arguments and rejected the suggestion that approval of the French
purchase had weakened its stand on the French nuclear tests in the
Pacific.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ARJO UNDER THE SPOTLIGHT

STOCKHOLM - Deliberate errors made in the accounts of the American
subsidiary of Swedish healthcare and medical equipment group Arjo, has
led to the firing of the US company's chief executive-officer, chief
financial officer and senior sales personnel. According to an audit
conducted by Arjo in November, the sales figures for Arjo Inc, based in
Morton Grove, Illinois, were "grossly inflated" by over $6 million,
approximating around 10 per cent of the company's total annual
revenues.

The audit found that incorrectly invoiced goods were in actuality
relocated to a leasing company owned by Arjo Inc. The discovery has
caused Arjo to revise its profit estimate for 1994. In August, the
company projected earnings for that year of around $32.5 million. Arjo
is estimating revenues of $240 million in 1995.

"The problems encountered with Arjo Inc will mean that we must invest
$30 million to restructure the company and get it working the way we
want. This cost will wipe out our profit result for 1995. What we are
doing is cleaning up in Arjo. Order and morality are badly needed in
the company," said Carl Bennet, chief executive officer of Gettinge Ab,
which acquired Arjo in a deal worth $130 million last November.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CANADIAN RED CROSS UNVEILS SELF-SUFFICIENT BLOOD STRATEGY

VANCOUVER - The Canadian Red Cross has unveiled a strategy to make
Canada self-sufficient in blood plasma in l996. A new state- of-the-art
blood collection facility in Thunder Bay Ontario will open as soon as
it receives approval from US Food and Drug Administration and the
Canadian Bureau of Biologics.

The facility is a plasmapheresis centre, where blood is collected from
donors and centrifuged at bedside into red corpuscle and plasma
components. The corpuscles are returned to the donor. The process takes
twice as long as the normal 30 minutes for whole blood donation, but
the donor can donate as often as once a week.

The Red Cross plans seven such centres across the country, each
enrolling 4,000 donors committed to donate 15 times a year. When the
system is operational, by the end of l998, it will produce over 400,000
litres of plasma annually, the total Canadian requirement.

Previously, the Red Cross did plasmapheresis as well as whole blood
collection at its l7 regional centres. But in July l995, the FDA
blocked shipments of "source" plasma collected via plasmapheresis
because of failure to meet US standards. Thus, the Red Cross had to
increase its use of recovered plasma, from whole blood, which is
shipped to the US to meet the terms of an agreement the Red Cross
signed with Bayer Corp 10 years ago.

The Canadian Red Cross is building, in partnership with Bayer, a C$300
million ($217.4 million) plasma fractionation plant at Bedford, Nova
Scotia, with Red Cross money and Bayer technology. The joint (non-
profit) venture is named the Canadian Red Cross Fractionation Corp
(FraCo). Bayer has the right to purchase all surplus fractions and all
of Factor VIII. This clotting factor, when purified, is valuable, worth
about C$1.5 million per gram.

Critics wonder, in light of these facts, whether the traditional
Canadian system of free donation of blood can continue to provide the
volume needed.

Melvyn Green, counsel for the Krever Commission which is inquiring into
blood collection, asked, "Is there not a risk that volunteer donors in
Canada will be deterred from donating by the knowledge that their Gift
of Life is in fact enriching a for-profit American corporation?" Steven
Vick, project director for FraCo, admits that if the collection centres
do not get sufficient volunteer donors, payment for plasma donations
will have to be considered.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

EU'S 4TH FRAMEWORK HEALTH TELEMATICS PROJECTS SET TO BEGIN

BRUSSELS - This month work begins by the winners of the European
Union's Fourth Framework research and development programme. Some 70
health sector projects have been selected by the European Commission's
Telematics Applications Programme. Competition was very intense as 235
proposals were received in response to the call for proposals which
first appeared in December, 1994.

Mr Jean-Claude Healy, head of the Health Telematics Unit within the
Telecommunications, Information Market and Exploitation of Research
(Directorate-General XIII) told IHN that there was an increase in the
number of proposals received, the number of partners involved and the
quality of the work offered. The amount of money requested was 10 times
the Ecu77 million ($102.8 million) awarded during this first round.
Although the winning proposals were known by the end of July 1995,
negotiations, which always involved reducing budget requests, were not
completed until the end of October.

The Fourth Framework, 1994-1998, research and development (R&D)
programme will provide Ecu12.3 billion for R&D projects in 13 areas of
interest. The telematics area commanded Ecu843 million, of which
approximately Ecu135 million  was for the healthcare sector. Mr Healy
stressed that the Fourth Framework was not an extension of the Third
Framework's Advanced Informatics in Medicine (AIM) programme which ran
from 1991-1994. The new work emphasises users, not technology. Projects
are to identify user needs and to deploy and implement technology to
meet those needs. In addition, this Framework is to support projects
for all Europe, including Eastern countries.
The selected projects fall into the following seven broad categories:

* Multimedia patient records
* Telematics assisted co-operative work for health professionals
* Departmental systems and advanced imaging
* Integration platforms, continuity of care, regional networks
* Telediagnostic, teleconsultation and emergency telemedicine
* Information for citizens and health sector professionals
* Cohesion, dissemination and exploitation of results, education

* For the complete list of projects and the co-ordinator's name,
address, telephone, fax and E-Mail address, contact: Michel Richonnier,
director Telematics Applications, European Commission Directorate
General XIII, Rue de la Loi 200, Office BU 29 3/47 B1049 Brussels,
Belgium.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

HEALTH MINISTER OUTLINES POLICY ON IT IN HEALTHCARE

AMSTERDAM - The Dutch minister of health, Dr Else Borst-Eilers, during
the recent AMICE conference, outlined the government's policy on
information technology (IT) in healthcare for the coming years. The
policy has one strategic objective - the integrated electronic patient
record. The objective is not only to have every patient record of a
specific care-giver computerised, but to merge all care related data
concerning one individual.

The Dutch hope to build on the success it has achieved within the
primary healthcare sector, where 80 per cent of general practitioners
(GPs) use automation and 50 per cent use an electronic patient record.
Hospitals and specialists, however, need to improve their use of
information technology. While all hospitals have some computers,
especially in their pharmacies and laboratories, most run legacy
systems that obstruct full integration.

The strategy is not to develop a huge data repository, but rather to
use distributed database technology. Chip cards for both patients and
doctors are to be employed as keys to access data, while enhancing data
protection and privacy. The Dutch IT policy is based on four pillars:

* Integrated electronic care records that use common architecture and
open infrastructures, that will lead to business process redesign and
improved care processes.

* Equip areas with sparse computerisation and educate managers and
health professionals in computer use.

* Assurance of data security, privacy, integrity and reliability, as
well as standards, to promote interconnectivity while enhancing the
responsibilities of trusted users.

* International co-operation and sharing of information technology
methods and tools.

The government believes that improvement in efficiencies will result
from using IT smartly, without reducing current standards of quality.
Many believe that both quality and efficiency can and will increase. It
is expected that hospitals will be seeking to cut costs and will see
integrated computerisation as a means to do so. Hospital administrators
are aware that they must become more efficient in order to survive
reimbursement cuts and price caps on healthcare bills.

The government will provide some research and development money for
work on the integrated patient file and seed money for improving
standards and data protection. In addition, several Dutch projects are
being funded by the European Commission's telematics programme.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

DIABCARD TRIAL IN BARCELONA

BARCELONA - A pilot programme to test the viability of a new data card
for diabetics has been initiated at Barcelona's Sant Pau Hospital. Some
100 patients are participating in the programme, one of the first of
its kind in Europe.

The card, called the Diabcard, contains a chip capable of storing
relevant information pertaining to a patient's condition, such as
clinical history, current medications, diet restrictions, etc. The
data's confidentiality is protected by an access code known only to the
patient, a family member and the doctor. Wide use of the card by
diabetics, who number 2.5 million in Spain, would not only benefit
particular patients and hospitals, but also would permit a detailed
study of the demographics of the condition as well as the comparative
costs of treatment.

The pilot test is part of the larger Diabcard project sponsored by the
Telematics Applications programme of the European Commission. Phase I
of the project began in 1992 and it has won continued funding in the
new Fourth Framework. The Diabcard chip card uses an open architecture,
making it easily integrated into existing information systems and
networking environments. The chip can store up to eight kilobytes of
data.

* Information about the Diabcard project can be obtained from the co-
ordinator, Rolf Engelbrecht, GSF-Forschunszentrum, MEDIS-Institut,
Neuherberg, Ingolstaedter Landstr. 1, D-85764 Oberschleissheim,
Germany.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

INFOMIX - A SUCCESS IN HUNGARIAN HEALTHCARE INFORMATICS

BUDAPEST - Infomix, the software developer company, represents one of
the rare success stories in Hungarian healthcare informatics. The
company started around 1988, as part of the since dissolved Microsystem
Corp, and was among the first to develop a user oriented application
for primary care. In 1995, the company had about 2,800 surgeries as
registered users and sales of over Ft120 million, ($886,132) a 20 per
cent growth from 1994.

Primary care practices in Hungary became equipped with computers,
almost exclusively with DOS based PCs, in the early 1990s. Although
more than 30 per cent of the about 6,000 physicians' offices own some
sort of hardware (mostly outdated 286 or 386 based clones), only a
portion of the doctors use the machines in everyday practice. The
number of those who use computers has been steadily growing as software
became more user friendly and primary care practices became privatised.

Automation in Hungary started in the late 1980s, when all practices
were part of the local government owned and run healthcare service. In
a series of contracts, PC clones were bought and set up in primary care
surgeries. The Ministry of Welfare agreed to pay for developing
software application packages for patient documentation and capitation
based billing for the insurance fund. Although the software was
provided free of charge to primary care physicians, the computer
programmes were of little use. Designed by ministry clerks, without
input and feedback from the physicians, the three programmes developed
were of little use.

At the same time, several profit-oriented software and hardware
companies began to develop application packages that fit end user
needs. More than 10 different programmes were on the market in the
early 1990s. A real market situation resulted, with different companies
offering systems that varied from dBase applications to sophisticated
Windows based programmes. The successful systems offered maintenance
and support services with their software.

Infomix was among the early successful companies. The first version of
its user friendly software was launched in 1988 and was bought by 65
surgeries, each with multiple users. (In Hungary, it is typical that
general practitioners share their surgeries, working in multiple
shifts). An updated version was offered in 1990 and by 1993, the number
of running applications grew to 890. The 2,800 licensed users in 1995
are served by a central developer and a maintenance group of full-time
employees. Infomix has four regional centres in Hungary and a 22-unit
dealer web that helps with distribution.

The company has followed its success in primary care with the
development of applications for polyclinics where 80 sites are equipped
and for dental surgeries with 150 users. Infomix has developed a few
hospital applications and is presently working on software for
occupational health specialists and other providers. The hospital
market is one in which the company expects keen competition, as that is
expected to represent the next phase of computerisation within the
health sector.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ALBERTA TESTS SMART CARD

VANCOUVER - A panel of doctors, health administrators and government
officials is completing work on a pilot project to provide "smart"
medical record cards to residents of one of the Alberta's 17 healthcare
regions some time this spring.

The card would provide healthcare professionals instant access to a
patient's medical history. "I feel [the project] is absolutely critical
from a business perspective," said Denis Herard, chairman of the Health
Information Network Committee, as the panel is known.

If adopted province-wide, Herard says, the card could cut 5 per cent
from the province's C$3.5 billion ($2.5 billion) a year of healthcare
charges. Duplication of expensive tests would be minimised, and use of
multiple prescriptions for the same illness prevented.

However, Herard admits the card poses some problems, especially in
protection of patient privacy. "Do you want to have 2.5 million health
histories walking around the province in wallets and purses?" he asked.
Herard favours a pass-key type of card, which would allow healthcare
professionals to access patient records in a central computer system.

However, some members of the panel prefer a card with the patient
records directly encoded on it. Brian Edy, director of the Alberta
Civil Liberties Association says safeguards must be imposed in areas
such as histories of Aids tests and psychiatric treatment, to prevent
abuse of the system. The government says the use of "firewall"
technology can prevent unauthorised personnel from accessing such
sensitive information. The pilot project has already been approved by
the provincial health department.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE MAKES PROFIT FROM PRIVATE PATIENTS

LONDON - Britain's publicly-funded National Health Service (NHS) is
making a healthy profit from treating private patients, a study by a
firm of consultants has found. The study Are Pay-Beds Profitable? by
National Economic Research Associates, found that the NHS was making a
profit of around #290 ($460) for each private patient treated. The
authors noted that even if hidden costs, such as the cost of training
doctors and nurses and unplanned admissions to intensive care were
taken into account, the hospitals would still make a profit of at least
#235 per patient.

National Economic Research Associates surveyed six NHS hospitals, which
together account for more than 10 per cent of dedicated private patient
beds in the NHS. The issue of whether the NHS makes money from private
patients has long been a controversial one, with the owners of
independent hospitals arguing that NHS hospitals are competing unfairly
by using NHS funds to subsidise private patient care. The authors of
the report said that because NHS hospitals now had a 14 per cent share
of the private patient market, it was important to find out whether or
not their private patients were helping to reduce funding problems in
the NHS.

David Cavers, the managing director of medical insurers Norwich
Healthcare, commented that the NHS was beginning to represent real
competition for private operators. "[Pay-beds at NHS Trust hospitals]
are generally competitively priced so that from an insured customer's
point of view, the premium saving which this can represent can be very
significant."

* A summary of the report Are Pay-Beds Profitable? is available from
Norwich Union Healthcare, Chilworth House, Templars Way, Eastleigh SO5
3RY, UK. Price: Free



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

UK ANNOUNCES SPENDING ON HEALTH

LONDON - The government has announced that current spending on health
in England will rise #1.3 billion to #31.49 billion ($50 billion) in
the 1996-1997 year. The increase amounts to 1.6 per cent, or #500
million in real terms. Current spending on hospital and community
health services is to rise by 1.1 per cent in real terms, to #23.18
billion.

The Secretary of State for Health, Stephen Dorrell, said four areas
would receive priority allocations next year: primary care, research
and development, education and training, and mental health services.
Primary care allocations will increase by #9 million or 1.25 per cent
to support spending by family doctors on practice staff and computing
costs. In addition, almost #39 million will go to support the provision
of out-of-hours services by general practitioners. Mr Dorrell said
spending on family health services as a whole will increase by 3.9 per
cent in real terms.

                  Current NHS spending: England
                          (# million)

Estimated                         Planned
1995-1996           1996-1997     1997-1998   1998-1999

30,151              31,491        32,396      33,251

Funding for research and development will increase by #27 million, to
#436 million, to ensure that better healthcare solutions will be
"widely disseminated and implemented". Support for education and
training in the National Health Services (NHS) will rise by #68
million, to #1,767 million. Mr Dorrell said that a new "mental health
fund" had also been set up to meet urgent priorities in the development
of mental health services.

The government has told health authorities that they must make
efficiency savings of three per cent, equivalent to #650 million, in
the 1996-1997 year. Mr Dorrell said this target includes planned
savings of #130 million on management and administration costs at NHS
trusts and health authorities.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

STUDY SHOWS UK HOSPITAL INTENSIVE CARE NEEDS IMPROVEMENT

LONDON - Britain must put more resources into improving standards of
intensive care, according to David Bennett, author of a study on ICU
services in the South West Thames Regional Health Authority. Bennett, a
reader in intensive care medicine at St George's Hospital Medical
School in London, looked at the outcomes for more than 10,000 patients
who were admitted to intensive care beds in the region.

Dr Bennett claims that the state of intensive care in the UK compares
unfavourably to other European countries and the US. He says that an
average of only one to two per cent of beds in Britain were for
patients in intensive care, compared to between four and six per cent
of beds in most other western countries. The UK spends only #5.90
($9.3) per head of population on intensive care compared to #54 ($85)
per capita spent by France.

Higher mortality rates

The two year study, Bennett says, showed that patients admitted to
intensive care beds in the UK had higher mortality rates than those in
the US.
The US spends an estimated #144 per head of population on intensive
care. Dr Bennett comments: "If you go to hospitals in the United
States, it's very obvious [that they spend more]. The facilities are
better and there are more of them. You don't have to do a scientific
study to come to that conclusion."

Bennett claims that even if the NHS were to increase the number of beds
available for seriously ill patients, there would still be too few
staff with the training to care for them. He argues that a properly
organised training programme and a formal career structure for
intensivists must be developed in order to encourage more doctors into
the speciality.

Not all seriously ill patients require intensive care, and Bennett
proposes an intermediate level hospital unit. He believes that National
Health Service hospitals should introduce high dependency units for
patients who require more care than they would receive in a general
ward, but less than that provided in intensive care. "We know that
we're looking after a substantial number of patients in intensive care
who could be looked after somewhere else; if somewhere else existed."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

IRELAND TO PROMOTE EXPORT SALES

DUBLIN - Pharmaceuticals and healthcare are among the 10 sectors slated
for growth by the new programme, "Opportunity Europe". Export sales
from Irish companies to Europe are expected to increase 17 per cent to
#1.45 billion ($230.2 billion) in 1996. If Irish companies take
advantage of the programme, Board Trachtala believes that Irish exports
could reach #3.2 billion in Europe by the year 2001.

Enda Kenny, minister for tourism and trade, said that Irish companies
have turned in an excellent performance on European markets in 1995,
#1.25 billion, up 17 percent from 1994. "With continued growth forecast
in all major European economies in 1996, Board Trachtala will be
spending a record #10 million, its biggest ever promotional campaign in
European markets to assist Irish companies to win more business," said
Mr Kenny.

The Opportunity Europe programme includes: providing financial
incentives for Irish companies to establish European sales offices;
undertaking business lead projects to identify new business areas;
sponsoring more than 40 trade and study missions and sales-support
programmes; flying 600 key European buyers to Ireland; and holding
about 29 regional seminars and workshops in Ireland to brief companies
on the European potential.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

FRENCH HOSPITAL REFORM REMAINS TO BE DETERMINED

PARIS - The French government's plans for reforming the healthcare
system have not yet fallen victim either to the social unrest that
swept the country in late November and early December or to the
opposition of certain elements of the medical profession. While the
government was forced to back down on a number of its proposals for
curtailing the privileges and fringe benefits enjoyed by many public
sector employees, prime minister Alain Juppe is pressing ahead to
reform the administration and financing of the social security system
in general and the health system in particular.

Hospital reform is currently receiving attention. To advise the
government on the best ways and means of streamlining the hospital
sector, an ad hoc Hospital Reform Commission was set up in June, which
submitted an interim report in September and its final report at the
end of November. The Commission proposals revolve around four main
principles: regionalisation of public supervision and funding of
hospitals; evaluation of hospital services (to maintain the most
efficient and eliminate the least cost-effective); setting of
objectives embodied in contracts negotiated between regional agencies
and individual establishments; and more effective co-ordination between
public and private hospitals.

A specific criticism of the proposals as presently conceived is that
they neither address the problems of the imbalance in funding among
hospitals nor the regional variations in both funding and the provision
of services. The oversupply of hospital facilities might be curtailed
to some extent by the elimination of the least efficient services, but
there are no specific measures for eliminating inefficiencies, such as
overstaffing or excessive hospital stays.

The fact is that some hospitals perform the same services as others
with only one-quarter or one-third the number of staff, or keep
patients in hospital after operations only half the time that others do
without any loss of quality.

While most doctors' and healthcare professionals' unions support these
proposed reforms, other organisations are violently opposed to them.
Moreover, it is clear that the government has no intention of simply
accepting all the Commission's recommendations; instead, it is treating
its report essentially as a discussion document.

Past mistakes

Ministers have apparently learned from past mistakes and are now
seeking to secure a consensus amongst hospital doctors and staff for an
agreed programme of reform, aware that it will only work if it has the
support and co-operation of those who will have to put it into
practice. Herve Gaymard, the health minister, started negotiating with
representatives of hospital doctors and staff in December, intimating
from the outset that some of the Commission's proposals would not be
implemented, although it is not clear which changes the government
thinks essential and which it regards as negotiable.

This softening of the government's position was greeted with some
satisfaction by hospital doctors' organisations, which think the
introduction of a system of evaluation and certification of hospital
services will result in the break-up of establishments. They have
called on the government to reject the Commission's proposals and
abandon plans for hospital reform altogether.

Hospital doctors are not the only critics of reform; other hospital
staff are also concerned, since there could be adverse consequences on
employment as a result of the closure of some services and
establishments.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

FRANCE SUPPORTS AIDS CAMPAIGN

PARIS - The French government will be spending well over FFr5 billion
($982.3 million) on fighting Aids in 1996, of which hospital care for
Aids patients will absorb some FFr4.2 billion. State spending on
research will top FFr500 million for the first time this year, while
FFr448 million has been allocated to a nation-wide Aids prevention and
support programme (up from FFr386 million in 1995).

Prevention remains the overriding priority of the government and will
absorb FFr264.2 million (59 per cent) of its FFr448-million campaign
budget this year, 14.5 per cent more than in 1995. The other components
of the government programme are providing home care support (FFr38.4
million), reducing risks for drug addicts (FFr50 million) and expanding
the network of free and anonymous HIV testing centres (FFr20.6
million). Nearly half of public funding for Aids research in 1996
(FFr231 million) is earmarked for the National Aids Research Agency,
while the rest will go to a variety of public and private
establishments.

The cost of hospital care for HIV-infected people amounted to FFr3.93
billion in 1995 and is expected to amount to FFr4.2 billion in 1996.
That sum includes direct credits advanced to hospitals to finance the
installation and operation of special facilities, services and
medicines for Aids patients. The government had allocated total credits
of just over FFr3 billion in 1995. A further FFr240 million is being
made available in 1996 specifically to pay for biological testing of
the "viral load" of Aids patients, which helps doctors track and
predict the development of the HIV virus.

An estimated 28,000-30,000 people have died of Aids in France to date,
and there are currently some 16,000-17,500 people suffering from the
disease. Altogether, 110,000 people are believed to be HIV-positive in
France, of which around 63,500 receive some form of medical care,
55,000 of them as in-patients or out-patients of hospitals and clinics.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

FRANCE INCREASES PACE OF CHANGE

PARIS - Having survived the wave of strikes in December, French prime
minister Alain Juppe is forcing the pace of legislation to bring health
and social spending into line.

His government has already drafted the first two orders designed to
control costs and boost revenues for the system. These were sent to
interested parties - such as medical unions and state health and social
security funds - with only a few days to submit comments before an 8
January deadline. The orders will be submitted to the president and are
expected to be approved by the Cabinet on the 17th or the 24th January.
The legislation will be backdated to 1 January.

One of the orders is designed to turn the social security regime around
from a deficit of FFr64.5 billion ($12.9 billion) in 1994 to a surplus
of FFr11.7 billion ($2.34 billion) by 1997. Family allowances will be
frozen. In addition, doctors' fees in 1996 and 1997 will be set under a
general regime negotiated by the doctors' unions and the health funds.
Such actions are expected to save as much as FFr1 billion.

At the same time, a decree published on 21 December has abolished some
of the privileges of the doctors operating in "sector 1" (where fees
are set). Until now a part of their social security contributions were
borne by the system. Making the physicians pay more should raise some
FFr500 million.

Opposition

These measures naturally face the opposition of the doctor's unions,
although a significant number of doctors do not want to take on the
government over its reforms. Social affairs minister Jacques Barrot met
with the leaders of the four largest doctors' associations last week to
discuss spending limits and reimbursement issues, hoping to reach a
consensus.

Mr Juppe's target for this year is to let health spending for private
medical practices, outside hospitals, rise by 2.1 per cent. But since
the spending last year rose by 7 per cent, instead of the agreed upon
3.3 per cent, this year's increase starts from a fairly high base.

Mr Juppe's plan also envisages making the pharmaceutical industry pay
FFr2.5 billion to the social security system. Quite how this might be
done has not been settled yet, but it is probable that companies will
pay on three counts. Firstly, the tax on their promotion expenses will
rise to 14 per cent from 9 per cent. Secondly, there will be a charge
based on the increase in sales in France; this will take into account
those companies that contained their costs. Finally, there will be a
charge of up to 1.5 per cent of turnover. Smallest companies may be
relieved of payment requirements.

The second government order concerns the new tax RDS (Remboursement de
la dette sociale), which is to be levied at a rate of 0.5 per cent on
all income, including most savings income and capital gains. It is
estimated that this tax will raise FFr25 billion a year. It is intended
to raise the revenue needed to erase France's social security deficit.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

EUROPEAN HEALTH MINISTERS SIGNAL TOUGHER ACTION ON ALCOHOL

PARIS - Health ministers from 50 European countries have signalled
tougher action against the drinks industry by adopting a new European
Charter on Alcohol. The Charter, adopted at a ministerial conference
organised by the World Health Organisation (WHO) in Paris in mid-
December, is not mandatory on governments, and it remains to be seen
what many of them will do to implement it. But there is no doubt it
will put the alcohol industry under further pressure and will place
more stringent restrictions in Europe's market.

The document calls on WHO's European member states to draw up
comprehensive alcohol policies and to implement programmes such as
influencing price through taxation, controlling advertising and
stopping all ads aimed at young people.

The alcohol industry was furious at the way the conference was handled,
claiming it was deliberately stage managed in favour of groups calling
for new anti-alcohol measures. Only the Amsterdam Group, a coalition of
leading European drinks producers, was allowed to attend, as observers.
Requests from other industry organisations to sit in were flatly
rejected by WHO.

A WHO official, Claes Goos, strongly denied that either WHO or the
Charter were "neo-prohibitionist" and that WHO was aiming for the
"complete elimination of alcohol" in Europe. WHO officials believe that
the Charter will give a significant political boost to the European
Alcohol Action Plan, approved in 1992, which aims to achieve a 25 per
cent cut in alcohol consumption across Europe between 1980 and the year
2000.

There were signs at the conference that some governments are unlikely
to act quickly, despite endorsing the Charter. Mr John Bowis, the UK
Under-Secretary for Health said: "for most people, some [drink] is
better than none". He was heckled by delegates when he also said: "If
you pretend that alcohol is bad, people won't accept the message of
moderate drinking". The Italian and German representatives also voiced
concern over parts of the Charter.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

GERMANY AHEAD OF SCHEDULE ON TRACKING DOCTORS' PRESCRIPTIONS

FRANKFURT - Although pharmacists were given until the new year to
report medications and dosages ordered by individual physicians, they
were doing so by the end of October, according to Dr Otfried P
Schaefer, Hessen Physicians Association (Kassenaerztliche vereinigung).


These reports go to the insurance funds where each doctor's prescribing
pattern is examined in relationship to those with similar specialties.
If it is believed that a physician is over-prescribing, then the state
physicians association is alerted. The associations send warnings to
those doctors who are ordering over 25 per cent more than their
colleagues. If corrective action is not taken, the doctor will have to
pay for the excess drugs ordered.

The smart cards that have been given to all Germans covered by
statutory insurance funds and the readers given to all physicians have
facilitated the reporting requirement. Moreover, pharmacists are given
a small stipend for each bill sent (less than 1 cent). Private
insurance companies will also distribute smart cards to their customers
during 1996.

The statutory insurance companies paid a total of DM410 million ($282
million) for developing the smart card project, issuing 72 million
insurance memory chip cards to the insured and granting 160,000 doctors
and dentists money to purchase card readers. The government expects
that these new cards and the requirement that physician associations
bill the insurance companies electronically will save DM2-3 billion a
year. However, Dr Schaefer claims that he is not aware of any cost-
benefit analysis that has taken place.

The smart card project is also credited with encouraging doctors to
computerise their offices. At the end of September 1995, over 60 per
cent of all doctors in Germany were using computers for administrative
work and for medical documentation. In some regions, close to 80 per
cent of doctors have computers. The use of computers is expected to
accelerate, as next month doctors will be required to place ICD-10
diagnostic codes on all bills.

Physicians are aware that such information will permit reviews of their
treatment and prescribing patterns. While they are not pleased by this
prospect, they are further angered that they are expected to foot the
entire bill so that such data are provided. Dr Schaefer told IHN that
over DM700 million for computerisation has been absorbed by the doctors
and another DM700 million will be spent before everyone is on-line.

Efforts are being made to ensure that there is interoperability between
computers and the software doctors use. However, Dr Schaefer notes that
the physicians have not been offered discounts or government allowances
to encourage them to follow the standards that have been worked about
by the insurance companies and the physicians associations. Rather, the
doctors are being told the standards that they must follow in billing
and reporting and compliance is expected.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

TRANSPLANT LAW FOR GERMANY AT LAST?

BONN -- There is a good chance that in 1996 Germany will finally have a
law dealing with organ transplants. The health ministry has prepared a
proposal that is supported by the Christian Democrat/Liberal majority,
as well as most members of the Social Democrat opposition. The German
states have also been involved and are expected to give their consent
to the proposed law.

Germany is one of the few countries in Europe without a transplant law.
Some 15 years ago, an unsuccessful attempt was made to introduce an
"opting out" bill, which implied that everyone is an organ donor unless
he/she specifically refuses to be one. Thereafter, the transplant
community derived a strict code of rules that included an "opting in"
solution. The wishes of the deceased were to be followed, or if not
apparent (for example, by a donor card), decisions by relatives.

Passionate public discussion

Although the proposed law follows current practise, it has stirred up
passionate public discussion and a great deal of media attention,
especially about brain death as a secure sign of death. A group of
theologists and doctors claim that brain dead patients are not dead,
but are dying. They feel that the process of dying must not be
disturbed by organ procurement, unless the dead person himself had
given consent to organ donation after brain death. Relatives should not
be able to give consent by proxy.

The Green Party has proposed a law that contains this argument. At a
public hearing last summer in Bonn, however, transplant surgeons made
it clear that transplantation would be entirely given up, unless brain
death was legally acknowledged as death.

Currently there are about 2,000 kidney transplants performed per year
in Germany, with 9,000 patients on the waiting list. About 500 livers
and 500 hearts are transplanted each year, but twice as many are needed
to help all waiting patients. For the past 26 years, Germany has
exchanged organs via Eurotransplant in Leiden (Netherlands) with
Austria, Belgium, Netherlands and Luxembourg.

It was hoped that a transplant law would provide legal security to
those involved in organ donation and serve to promote organ
transplantation. So far the proposed legislation has proven to be
counterproductive. Public discussion and the apprehensive attitudes of
doctors and nurses have contributed to a decline in the number of organ
donations in 1994. Figures for 1995 are to be published soon and are
expected to be slightly higher.

In January, the transplant law will be introduced into the Bonn
parliament, where further hearings and discussion will be held. It has
been agreed that party discipline will not be maintained and that each
member can follow his/her own conscience in respect to the critical
points of brain death and consent by proxy.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ITALY DRASTICALLY CUTS 1996 SPENDING FOR PHARMACEUTICALS

ROME - In a surprise and hotly contested move, the Italian parliament
has passed a law forcing further drastic reductions in state spending
on medicines for 1996. Parliament, while debating the government's 1996
Finance Bill (IHN 6,November 1995, page 1) attached a late amendment
stipulating that, although the government will continue to reimburse
the full cost of medication for life-threatening and chronic illness
through the so-called Class A Medicines and one-half for lesser
ailments (Class B). The payment for both categories will be based on
the most economic medicine available for cures.

Until now, reimbursement covered the varying prices of medicines and
was not pegged to the cheapest drug. The new law also stipulates that
doctors prescribing medicines in the two categories are to inform
patients that government reimbursement will be equivalent to the price
of the most economic medication.

The parliament acted a few days after the Italian government wrote off
the cost overrun of L700 billion ($43.1 million) for subsidised
medicine in 1995. The Finance Bill for 1995 had set a ceiling of L9,000
billion for subsidised medicine, but it was apparent within months that
the cap could not be maintained for the year. The government's self-
imposed limit was also breached in 1994. Despite these overruns, and no
expectation that costs for medicines will be reduced, the government
has retained the L9,000 ceiling for 1996.

Italy's slumping pharmaceutical industry registered a wave of protests.
It claims that all Class A and B medicines that cost more than the
cheapest ones will be forced into Class C, which does not receive any
governmental reimbursement. This may render the drugs no longer
marketable.

Italy's pharmaceutical industry association, Farmindustria, threatened
to pull out of the National Health Service, without specifying how, or
if, it could be achieved.

In a minor compensation, prices of Class A and B medicines are expected
to increase between 2.6 and 5 per cent in 1996. It is also expected
that Class C drugs, which are unregulated by the government, will have
similar increases. The rise will be less than the rate of inflation,
which is around 6 per cent annually.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ITALIANS CONSULT TRAVEL AGENTS FIRST WHEN TAKEN ILL

ROME - Increasing numbers of Italians are going abroad, particularly to
neighbouring France, for healthcare services. Unavailability of some
services and perceptions that health services abroad are superior are
reasons given by the estimated thousands who are called "health
refugees" or "health migrants". The numbers give validity to claims
that when some Italians fall seriously ill, they consult not only their
doctors but also their travel agents.

In 1993, the latest official Ministry of Health figures indicate that
the National Health Service (NHS) owed L216 billion ($133 million) to
its EU partners for services rendered to Italian citizens abroad. This
included L204 billion to France, L10 billion to Belgium and L1.2
billion to the UK. The amount for care abroad, however, has ballooned
since then. For example, the 1994 amount has been estimated as L481
billion.

A Ministry of Health study, based on 7,000 authorisations issued
between 1990 and 1993, indicates that some 2,300 persons went abroad
for cancer treatment, 1,500 for transplants, close to 1,000 for
neurological care (including surgery) and 800 for treatments of heart
diseases. The exact number of "health migrants" is not known, but it is
believed to be in the tens of thousands a year, including those who by-
pass the NHS and bear the entire cost.

The consensus is that the "health migrants" are forced to leave Italy
because waiting lists are too long, as adequate services are lacking.
Scarcity of transplant organs is identified as a major problem in
Italy; of some 3,500 needs a year, availability is put at 1,300. In
addition, cardiac by-pass surgery waiting lists are from six to eight
months in Milan, Rome and Naples.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

AUSTRIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION OFFERS REFORM PROPOSALS

VIENNA - the Austrian Medical Association (Arztekammer) has issued a
report that passes a devastating judgement on the country's healthcare
programme. The healthcare system is characterised by an overblown
bureaucracy and expensive care, both of which are responsible for the
system's financial crisis.

The association argues that more out-patient care is needed along with
reform of hospital financing. The healthcare programme should only
apply to basic medical care, although persons with high, long-term and
social problems should not be excluded from care. A cap related to
income should be applied and those who earn more than the cap should be
able to choose among health insurers.

Patients, except for the needy, should pay 20 per cent of their
healthcare costs. High risk activities such as those associated with
sports and leisure activities should be insured separately. In general,
local medical care, rather than major healthcare centres, should be
encouraged.

Additionally, the association views healthcare facility administration
as a major problem in need of resolution. For example, Vienna's vast
general hospital (AKH) is operated by both the federal and city
governments instead of having its own administration.

"We doctors have no control, we're not, as the public thinks, the
captains, not even the first officers of the medical flagship AKH. We
don't have the possibility to control the AKH", argues one university
professor.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

WHO CASH CRISIS DEEPENS

GENEVA - Some World Health Organisation (WHO) programmes are likely to
be transferred from Geneva and more job losses are expected, as the
organisation's cash crisis looks set to worsen this year.

Between 140-150 posts at headquarters were eliminated in 1995 because
of a $54 million shortfall in WHO's two year $842 million regular
budget. Another 50 posts are expected to be cut during 1996, and it is
rumoured that a provisional "hit list" of posts to go has been drawn up
already.

WHO's budget, suffering badly because of problems in getting the US to
pay its contributions, faces further uncertainty and possibly serious
body blows. There are doubts, for example, about whether Russia and
Ukraine, two other big contributors, will pay anything this year.

As well as cutting more posts, WHO officials have also launched an
urgent study into relocating programmes or parts of programmes out of
headquarters to places with a lower cost of living. The effect of this
would be to change WHO radically - into a network, with just a small
kernel of people remaining in Geneva mainly to interact with other UN
agencies.

A full report on WHO's cash crisis will be given to its executive board
this month. Director-general Dr Hiroshi Nakajima is expected to call
for a rethink in the way countries' contributions to WHO are assessed.
At present, 20 contributors provide 80 per cent of its budget. He is
also likely to say that WHO must find new, long-term solutions for
supporting its programmes, including developing new partnerships with
the private sector.

Meanwhile, morale remains low at WHO headquarters, where staff have
been bitterly critical of Dr Nakajima's handling of the crisis.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

UNAIDS STARTS UP AMID DOUBTS

GENEVA - The international community's latest effort to get to grips
with the global Aids epidemic, UNAids, started up on 1 January amid
doubts about its likely effectiveness or real value. UNAids is a joint
venture among six United Nation (UN) agencies: the World Health
Organisation (WHO); the UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation; the UN Children's Fund; the UN Development Programme; the
UN Population Fund; and the World Bank.

Located in Geneva, UNAids replaces WHO's Global Programme on Aids
(GPA), which attracted wide criticism for being over-staffed, wasting
resources and achieving few concrete results. While UNAids will have a
much smaller staff than GPA and most of them will be working outside
Geneva, it will cover essentially the same ground: identifying `best
practice' policies for prevention and care, providing technical support
to national governments, advocacy and co-ordination. It will also have
roughly the same budget as GPA, between $120-$140 million a year.

UNAids will give about 50 per cent less funds to national Aids
programmes than GPA, however. Governments are supposed to make up the
difference, but this is thought doubtful.

Although Dr Peter Piot was appointed the programme's executive director
in December 1994, staff have not yet been recruited. GPA staff, due to
lose their jobs with its shut down, have been switched temporarily to
the UNAid's payroll. There is concern about relations between UNAids
and WHO, which is keeping a Division on Aids and Sexually Transmitted
Diseases.

Sceptics also question whether the new programme is really needed,
especially in light of WHO's alleged failures. They point out that Dr
Piot has admitted that "there is an agenda here of UN reform that's
also behind this programme. We will show that it is possible in the UN
with a lean operation to be efficient and effective". Critics claim
that UNAids is an exercise in trying to show the UN in a better light.

Supporters, however, argue that the UN and its agencies cannot wash
their hands of the Aids problem. They say that UNAids will bring some
urgently needed streamlining and co-ordination of the UN's activities
and will do so with fewer staff and more cost effectiveness.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SPAIN FINDS 1996 FULL OF HEALTH SYSTEM PROBLEMS

MADRID - As 1996 begins, Spain's public health sector is faced with a
host of woes, including debt, fraud, internal dissension and the still
unresolved problems resulting from the two-month long physician's
strike.

Problems include:

* Hospitals throughout the country are up to two years behind in
payments to various companies which supply them with goods and
services. The suppliers have threatened on numerous occasions to halt
deliveries and suspend services if the situation doesn't improve. The
service supplier's association FENIN claims that the late payments are
a serious problem, especially for smaller suppliers, and has proposed 1
February as the new deadline for the threatened stoppage of supply
delivery. The association also has plans to denounce the situation
before the European Community.

* The ministry of health has made public its concern at the steep rise
over the last 10 years of absenteeism in the workplace due to illness.
Workplace illness has tripled costs for the public health sector. In
1995, it cost the government Pta466 billion ($3.72 billion) to pay for
temporary incapacities, up from Pta376 billion five years ago. The
ministry attributes much of this increase to insufficient control of
diagnoses by physicians, a charge strongly denied by the profession.

* Spain's 4,500 substitute doctors, temporarily employed by the
country's health system but without fixed contracts, are beginning to
protest against layoffs among their ranks due to the return to duty of
contracted physicians who have been on long-term sabbaticals. Several
hundred of Madrid's 1,300 substitute doctors, many who have worked for
years without a contract, have begun small-scale protests at the
layoffs at several of the city's hospitals, and the national body which
represents them is in the process of deciding whether to support them
with widespread actions. The state health agency, Insalud,
characterised the substitute physicians fears as exaggerated.

* Still pending in negotiations between Insalud and the physicians
union after an accord was reached to end last spring's strike are
agreements on many important topics, among them: the amount of pay
increases for 1997 and following years (salaries for 1996 had been
agreed on in the original negotiations); the increased role of doctors
in hospital management reform; the situation of substitute physicians;
and new standards for university medical degrees.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

NORWEGIAN DOCTORS FAVOUR PRIVATISATION

OSLO - Den norske Laegeforening (DnL) has formed a special working
group to promote the representative organisation's case for the phased-
privatisation of out-patients centres attached to Norway's state run
hospitals and clinics.

"Our case is that under a privatised structure, these out-patient
centres could achieve a higher level of product and give a better all-
round service. As it stands, they are poorly managed with low
efficiency rates. Privatisation is essential if they are to reach their
full potential," said DnL's chairman Hans Petter Aarseth. At issue are
over 200 out-patient centres which generated annual revenues of $317
million in 1994 and are forecast to show a 4 per cent rise in turnover,
adjusted for inflation, in 1995.

"Privatisation would have the added-effect of improving working
conditions, reducing work-loads for doctors and nurses, while paving
the way for better wages for medical personnel. Under the plan we are
advocating, doctors would work one to two days every week at out-
patient centres, taking care of their own patients," said Mr Aarseth.

"These centres must move with the times. Why should qualified doctors
who has gone through eight years of medical training want to work for a
basic annual salary of $29,000, when they could earn three times as
much in private healthcare," said Mr Aarseth. Medical staff assigned to
the out-patient centres are, according to Mr Aarseth, "battle weary",
and are fully behind the DnL's drive to lobby government action on the
privatisation issue. "Doctors are tired of struggling through outdated
systems, while younger doctors and specialists do not want to work for
state-operated medical centres. Along with this we have lengthening
queues of increasingly exasperated patients," he said.

The DnL recently published a highly critical report detailing the low
performance levels at state-managed out-patients centres. The report
found that centres were "too bureaucratic", under-staffed and run in a
disorganised fashion". The report concludes that state-run hospitals
are not designed or equipped to operate out-patients centres. "This is
a conclusion we reach every day. These institutions are simply too big
and bureaucratic," said Mr Aarseth.

"A patient attending a state out-patient centre for a check-up in
Norway is not met by a doctor, but by a huge bureaucracy, in which he
or she will see a doctor unfamiliar with their case or condition.
Records are often missing, and time is wasted as the relevant files are
located. This is not something that happens only on rare occasions. It
is a routine event at state-managed centres," said Mr Aarseth.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

FDA FLOODED WITH RESPONSES TO PROPOSED CIGARETTE RULING

ROCKVILLE, MD - The US Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) Dockets
Management Branch was a site to behold on 2 January 1995, the last day
for comments on FDA's proposed rule to restrict minors' exposure and
access to tobacco advertisements and products. The branch had received
59,992 comments on the proposed rule that appeared in the Federal
Register, 11 August 1995.

"We have filled three aisles and 3,688 files with the comments, not
including the 32 cartons of comments received from tobacco companies
and their attorneys," a manager of the branch told IHN. "The total
tally will be far more than 60,000 comments and 4,000 files, as we
haven't received many documents that were postmarked 2 January," she
continued. "I have been here over 20 years and this is the most that I
have ever seen."

The proposed rule and its supporting documents fill a folder. Studies
have been reproduced with lengthy footnotes to support the action
proposed by the FDA. The administration asserts that cigarettes are a
drug delivery device and therefore is subject to the jurisdiction of
the FDA. The rule claims that tobacco companies should be required to
fund $150 million per year in advertising campaigns that warn children
of the health dangers of smoking.

Various restrictions are proposed on tobacco company advertising that
is accessible to minors. Additionally it proposes to ban cigarette
sales from vending machines. The FDA estimates that the cost of the
rule to tobacco manufacturers will be $230 million annually over 15
years, while the benefits are estimated to be between $2.9 billion to
$4.3 billion, primarily in lives saved.

Responses to the proposed rule were received from a variety of people.
School children and groups opposed to cigarette smoking sent pages of
comments. Form letters were received from owners of grocery stores,
provided by the Retail Grocers Association, and from people who
attended health fairs. Civil libertarians opposed another area of
government infringement of personal rights, and state legislators,
especially from tobacco growing areas, were aghast at federal power
enhancement. In addition, 32 US senators wrote urging the FDA to
abandon the proposal.

The cigarette industry waited until the last day of comment to deliver
its response. Five companies and the Tobacco Institute, assisted by
major law firms, prepared a joint response to the ruling. In addition,
they have challenged the ruling in court, claiming that the FDA has
exceeded its legal authority in proposing to regulate cigarettes. The
industry asserts that neither the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act nor the
1976 medical device amendments grant FDA statutory authority to
regulate cigarettes.

The Philip Morris Company's Philip Morris US unit, BAT Industries PLC's
Brown & Williamson unit, Brooke Group Ltd's Ligget Group unit, RJR
Nabisco Holdings Corporation's RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company unit and
Loews Corporation's Lorillard Tobacco Company unit assert that nicotine
does not fit the legal definition of a drug and its effects do not fit
the legal definition of addiction. Moreover, they claim that the FDA
based its rule on secret documents and confidential industry papers.
The tobacco companies were assisted in preparing their response of 12
volumes of 2,000 pages and appendices of 40,000 pages by lawyers from
such prestigious firms as Arnold & Porter, Wiley, Rein & Fielding,
Covington & Burling and others.

The industry's estimated costs of the ruling differs significantly from
that of the FDA. It claims that the rule will cost manufacturers
between $748 million to $1.5 billion in one-time costs and $1.25
billion annually.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

MEDICAL MALPRACTICE AWARDS RISE

WASHINGTON, DC - Jury Verdict Research, Inc reports that the US median
medical malpractice jury award in 1995 was $500,000, some 40 per cent
higher than 1994. The number of $1 million awards increased to 35 per
cent of the verdicts. Responses from other groups indicate that 70 per
cent of malpractice claims filed against doctors do not result in
payment. Those that go to trial, however, result in 80 per cent decided
in favour of the defendant.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ALBERTA WILL NOT CUT DOCTOR FEES

VANCOUVER - The province of Alberta has dropped its demand for a C$50
million cut in doctors' healthcare billings. In its final meeting
before Christmas, the cabinet agreed to freeze doctors' fees at current
levels for the next three years. The province presently pays doctors
C$736.7 million ($533.8 million) annually.

The decision ends nine months of wrangling between the government and
the Alberta Medical Association. Ontario, however, appears headed for a
similar clash with the healthcare givers. Its controversial omnibus
Bill 26 would give the minister of health unilateral power to fund,
shut or merge hospitals, as part of an arsenal of budget-tightening
measures.

As well, the Bill would set up a provincial agency to inspect medical
and billing practices. It could terminate a doctor's right to practice,
bypassing the Ontario Medical Association. So far the Bill is still
wielding its bumpy way through the legislature, with stiff opposition
from all affected groups.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

MEXICO PLANS TO EXTEND HEALTHCARE

MEXICO CITY - Mexico's president, Ernesto Zedillo, unveiled plans to
provide healthcare services to remote areas and to expand service to
the country's poor. The stabilised economy and expected 1996 growth
will free resources to support the healthcare plan, claimed Zedillo.

"This package will be an essential component of the strategy with which
we propose to widen the coverage of health services to the most distant
parts of the country, to those places which until now have not had
these essential services," Zedillo said in a speech to Mexican nurses.
The government plans to implement a 12 point plan that will have
doctors and other health providers man health brigades and mobile
health units.

Additionally, the government plans to improve health services to the
needy. These efforts will include: expanding vaccination programmes;
increasing access to family planning methods; improving basic home
hygiene, monitoring child nutrition; increasing care to pregnant women;
and enhancing prevention and treatment of illnesses associated with
poverty.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "36"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

JAPANESE GROUP TO FIGHT MALPRACTICE

TOKYO - A new group, Society for the Study of Medical Safety, was
founded in Japan on 9 December 1995. Its aim is to identify dangerous
medical practices, learn from Western medical systems and exchange
information through seminars. The group's founders include lawyers,
medical professionals and citizen groups.

"Through these activities, we hope in the near future to draw up
guidelines and make suggestions to medical circles on how medical
workers can avoid accidents", the Society's founder, lawyer Yoshio
Kato, stated in an interview with a leading daily, The Japan Times.

Plaintiffs win only about one-third of the 400 to 500 malpractice suits
filed in Japan each year, and Kato blames these low figures on the lack
of transparency of Japan's medical system. "Under the legal system,
patients or their families who have almost no access to medical
information are obliged to prove malpractice that often occurs behind
the closed doors of operating rooms." This task is exacerbated by a
tendency among healthcare workers to cover up malpractice, he added.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "37"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

JAPAN PROPOSES TO REDUCE PHARMACEUTICAL SPENDING

TOKYO - The Japanese government continues to look for ways to control
drug spending, as it prepares for its biennial evaluation and
reconstruction of the National Health Insurance (NHI) Drug Price List.
The Central Social Insurance Medical Council (CSIMC), responsible for
making recommendations to the government on healthcare prices, has met
and made proposals for establishing the next drug price list, scheduled
to be published in April, 1996.

In Japan, ethical drugs are reimbursed according to the NHI Drug Price
List. The prices of drugs are calculated on a weighted average method.
A price is set by adding a given percentage of the current price to the
weighted average price of all packaged market prices by brand. Then
some adjustment amount is added to this price to set the new NHI drug
price.

While this method sounds complicated, and it
is, the outcome since 1981 has been a reduction in drug prices. The
table below is illustrative.

               NHI drug price reductions

                                  Per cent
Year                              reduction
1981                              18.6
1983                               4.9
1984                              16.6
1985                               6.0
1986                               5.1
1988                              10.2
1990                               9.2
1992                               8.1
1994                               6.6

Source: Japan Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association

The CSIMC made several proposals that could be implemented by April,
such as setting the price lower for drugs whose market size has
expanded. A suggestion that new methods for price calculation was also
submitted. In addition, a subcommittee of the CSIMC issued a report in
November that included various suggestions to reduce drug spending. The
suggestions ranged from debating the necessity of the drug price list
to paying doctors and hospitals for dispensing prescription drugs on a
capitation basis.

Additionally, the bonus scheme for introducing innovative new drugs was
discussed. Currently, drugs that are entirely new or that clearly offer
safer and more effective treatment can earn premiums of 10 to 30 per
cent on the drug price. Those drugs that are similar to an existing
medication but are scientifically proven to be either more effective or
safer can be permitted a premium from 1.5 to 4.5 per cent, the same
range percentage as orphan drugs.

The proposals to contain costs by changing the scheme for new drugs
that were similar to products already on the market faced strong
opposition from the pharmaceutical industry and was postponed. The
industry was concerned that the effect of the proposals would diminish
Japan's current drug market, valued at Y6 trillion ($62.8 billion), the
second largest in the world, by 10 per cent. It seems, however, the
loss will be less than Y100 billion.

The recommendations concerning prescription drugs represent only a
portion of the suggestions from the CSIMC to cut healthcare spending.
It is expected that this year the Ministry of Health and Welfare will
begin to adopt many of the CSIMC proposals for cost containment.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "38"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

TAIWAN'S NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE IN JEOPARDY

TAIPEI - The dawn of the new year marked the one-year anniversary of
Taiwan's National Health Insurance Bureau (NHIB). In a speech
celebrating the occasion, NHIB general manager Yeh Ching-chuan warned
that the plan was in jeopardy of going bankrupt within the next three
years if proper changes are not made to increase efficiency and
decrease costs within the plan.

Mr Yeh said the National Health Insurance Plan will be changed to boost
efficiency and win public confidence. The government wants to contract
some of the administrative duties to the private sector to decrease
expenses, while maintaining supervision over the entire plan.

Another move will be to increase the costs for patients visiting
hospital emergency rooms without first consulting a local doctor. This,
Mr Yeh said, would deter people from visiting hospitals when they are
suffering from minor ailments.

Tests and treatment involving high-tech equipment such as ultra-sound
will be charged to the patient as opposed to being covered under the
plan. The bureau, however, plans to ease fees for those patients
suffering from serious chronic illnesses requiring regular treatment.

The health plan has been under fire from the government's main
opposition party as well as large corporations that complain of the
plan's convoluted regulations and the high premiums companies are
required to pay per employee covered under the plan.

A recent survey showed that only half the respondents were satisfied
with the new health plan. About a third of those questioned said they
were "very unhappy" with the plan.

Mr Yeh said it was possible to get the nation's insurance plan
operating in a way that is acceptable to most people, and said the
bureau would work to solve problems caused by human error, waste or
corruption. People will gradually warm to the idea of the new health
plan, he said, but it will take time.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "39"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

MEDICAL BENEFITS COMPENSATION LEGISLATION PROPOSED

CANBERRA - The Australian government has introduced legislation to
recover taxpayer-funded Medicare or nursing home benefits payments for
injuries or diseases for which the injured persons are compensated
through common law remedies, workers compensation, third party or
general insurance. The practice is referred to as "double dipping".

The scheme essentially revolves around insurers notifying the Health
Insurance Commission of a claim. The Commission then works out how much
it is owed for Medicare and nursing home benefits and after the
settlement of the insurance claim takes place, the insurer pays that
sum to the federal government. The insurer then pays the remainder of
the insurance settlement to the claimant.

Although in principle opposed to double dipping, the parliamentary
opposition parties have nonetheless opposed the amending bills on the
fundamental point that the "cure for the double dipping problem first
proposed by the government is worse in fact than the disease".

The opposition parties argue that the A$40 million ($29.9 million) or
so per year that the government estimates it will save for the taxpayer
will be almost totally swallowed up by the cost of the administrative
machinery operated by the Health Insurance Commission, insurance
companies and other compensation payers.

The most contentious feature of the government proposed moves against
double dipping is the administration fee imposed on compensation payers
to make the government reform self-funding. In reality, argues the
opposition, this is an industry tax imposed on insurers, be they
general, third party, work cover or workers' compensation. In effect,
it is shifting to these insurers the cost of what is effectively a
function of government - collecting the revenue.

Furthermore, doctors, lawyers and insurers have all expressed concerns
about the proposed legislation. The Law Council, for example, believes
that the requirement for the Health Insurance Commission to be notified
of the various stages of the claims process will just wreak havoc in
the areas of personal injury and workers' compensation. It also
foresees complicated disputes about what benefits are associated with
the injury or condition for which compensation is being sought. The
Insurance Council of Australia says the burdens imposed by these
disputes could cost claimants and insurers as much as A$30 million
annually.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "40"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

NEW ZEALAND AND AUSTRALIA AMEND MEDICAL PRACTITIONER LAWS

WELLINGTON/SYDNEY - New Zealand has completed a comprehensive overhaul
of its laws on medical practitioners, while Australia has completed
minor changes designed to prevent doctors from circumventing the rules
on claiming under its Medicare system. This includes tightening the
definition of medical practitioner.

The New Zealand legislation devolves more powers to the Medical Council
in deciding whether to register doctors and leaves it to the Council to
decide whether it will recognise overseas medical training for
registration purposes. Doctors trained in the UK, Ireland, Canada,
Australia and South Africa previously had a quasi-automatic right in
law to registration in New Zealand. They will lose this, although
Australian-trained doctors will not in practice notice a change, as
there are already mutual recognition arrangements in place between the
Medical Councils of Australia and New Zealand.

The legislation also allows the Council to withhold or attach
conditions to practising certificates where there are doubts about a
doctor's competence. It gives the Council the right to require a
medical practitioner to submit to a medical examination or otherwise
act if it has evidence that the practitioner is not physically or
mentally fit to practice and substitutes vocational registration (ie,
including GP's) for specialist registration.

Australia's Human Services and Health Legislation Amendment Bill (No 2)
1995 incorporated changes to the Health Insurance Act and the National
Health Act. The changes to the Health Insurance Act stop doctors who
have temporary registration or who are occupational trainees billing
the Medicare scheme for services provided "on behalf" of another
practitioner. This is a breach of their visa and registration
conditions but has been difficult to detect.

The changes to the National Health Act increase patients' liability for
co-payments amounts under Australia's universal healthcare scheme,
Medicare. Previously out-of-hospital medical services were free once
patients had totalled A$400 ($298.5) in co-payments in any one year.
From 1 January 1996, this has become A$600. The co-payment amount is
generally around 15 per cent of the cost of a consultation or
treatment. (All hospital treatment is free.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "41"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

NEW ZEALAND ADDS MONEY TO CUT WAITING LISTS

WELLINGTON - The New Zealand government has budgeted an additional
NZ$30 million ($20 million) to manage waiting list backlogs as a
prelude to introduction of booking systems and a guaranteed maximum
wait of six months for elective surgery. The money to cut waiting lists
is for the year beginning 1 July 1996. It will be directed particularly
at ophthalmology, orthopaedics and urology.

The policy objective is to have waiting lists for non-urgent surgical,
medical or diagnostic procedures replaced by booking systems based on
clinical priority by 1 July 1997. Patients will either be booked for a
procedure to occur within six months or be directed back to their
primary care practitioner for continuing management.

Management of waiting times is one of two priorities in policy
guidelines for regional health authorities published at end-November
1995. The other is mental health. Key issues in mental health are
greater availability of methadone treatment and implementation of
individual service plans, including discharge plans for mental health
patients.

Additional funding has also been allocated to essential dental care for
low income groups, breast cancer control, tobacco control and
reproductive and sexual health. In the year starting 1 July 1996, the
regional health authorities will receive an additional NZ$22 million
($14.5 million) for these programmes. Total funding is NZ$5.126 billion
($3.3 billion).

A review of tertiary services was published at the same time as the
policy guidelines, indicating preferred options in terms of the number
of centres for bone marrow transplants, cardiac surgical services,
liver and kidney transplants, neonatal intensive care, neurosurgical
services, oncology services and spinal cord injury rehabilitation
services.

The recommendations are based on the premise that the data on which the
rationale for concentration of tertiary services "is not strong enough
to conclude that bigger is necessarily better for tertiary services in
New Zealand". The Committee which reviewed tertiary services concluded
that it is possible to have a greater number of smaller tertiary
service centres providing good quality patient care in a cost-effective
way which is reasonably in close proximity to patients and their
families.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "42"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SOUTH AFRICA HEALTH REFORMS TO CURTAIL DRUG SALES

JOHANNESBURG - Health minister Nkosazana Zuma has drafted a health
reform plan that has infuriated drug companies. The reforms that
include controls on the sale, price and reimbursement for drugs are
necessary, Zuma claims, to address the inequities of the health system
that resulted from apartheid.

The plan, that is expected to be presented to the cabinet soon,
includes such measures as: establishing a national committee to monitor
and regulate drug prices; creating a national essential drug list that
will restrict the number of drugs available in the public sector, with
extension to the private arena at a future date; requiring that generic
drugs be substituted for brand name medications in the public and
private sectors; and promoting parallel importation of drugs from
outside the country, beginning with high volume essential drugs. The
proposals stem from a government commission report that claims if an
essential drug list reduced the number of medications available from
3,000 to 200-500, the country would save about R500 million.

The South African drug industry, worth R5.5 billion ($1.5 billion),
warns that such plans will have severe negative affects, discourage
research and development and discourage international drug company
investments. The country's pharmaceutical manufacturers association
claims that the measures are tantamount to nationalisation and that
price controls have been ineffective and unworkable in other countries
that have tried them.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "43"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

HUNGARIAN DRUG COMPANIES HOLD STEADY IN SPITE OF COMPETITION

BUDAPEST - Hungarian pharmaceutical companies are getting a handle on
fierce competition from multinational drug giants who have established
a presence in the country since 1990. The companies that have performed
best on the ex-COMECON drug market have not increased their brand name
offerings, but have developed the marketing infrastructure to retain
their strength.

Drug sales in Hungary in 1995 were about $650 million, or about $64 per
person per year. Expenditures for medications account for 39 per cent
of the total healthcare costs, $166 per person annually. Government and
insurance officials agree that drug costs are unsustainable and have
tried different techniques to limit the growth in drug sales.

Between 1990 and 1994, the number of brand drugs offered to Hungarians
has increased by 65 per cent, almost all accountable to foreign
companies. The country's liberal drug registration has resulted in a
market saturated with medications not significantly different from one
another. For example, 29 different drugs containing paracetamol are on
the market and another 51 preparations are being considered for
registration.

The Hungarian pharmaceutical companies are making efforts that seem
successful, in stabilising their position in the home market. During
the past few years, all the major firms have completed or are
undergoing privatisation. With little experience in direct marketing,
efforts have focused on developing a western style marketing structure,
with concentrated marketing strategies aimed at physicians.

Drug companies have been able to stay aloft

Despite relative internal market losses, the Hungarian pharmaceutical
industry has been able to stay aloft in contrast with heavy losses in
other industries facing the international market. Pharmaceutical
companies were among the first shareholder businesses to appear on the
Budapest Stock Exchange and their success is illustrated by the
following stocks on the market.

* Richter, the biggest pharmaceutical company closed a favourable first
half year in 1995 by doubling its previous half year production to
around Ft4.7 billion ($347million). Stock prices rose between November
1994 and November 1995 about 80 per cent which significantly exceeded
inflation (below 30 per cent during this time period).

* Human Rt produces, among other products, Naksol, a preparation for
the treatment of burns. The company was introduced to the stock market
in July 1995 with initial prices about 115 per cent of its nominal
value. In September, there was a corrective lowering of the stock
price.

* Egis finished privatisation in August, when the last 28 per cent
owned by the State Privatising Agency was sold to Natwest. The initial
offering brought Ft1.5 billion, the largest in the history of the new
Budapest Stock Market. The initial stock price of Ft2,625 gained 31 per
cent within five months to the current price Ft3,445.

* Pharmavit, selling generic drugs and vitamins, had stock prices that
fluctuated between Ft3,750 and 6,000 throughout the autumn.

Two other pharmaceutical companies, Alkaloida and Biogal, are
undergoing a gradual privatisation process and are not yet on the
registered stock market.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "44"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BRACCO PURCHASES INTEREST IN ESAOTE

Italy's Bracco corp, specialising in diagnostic equipment and new
technology for echography, has purchased 15 per cent interest in Esaote
Biomedica for $11 million. Esaote, also involved in diagnostics,
expects 1995 sales of $17.2 million, an increase of $3 million from
1994. Bracco sales in 1995 are expected to be L1,600 billion ($1
billion) up from L1,142 billion in 1994. An overseas operation,
particularly in the US, is planned for both companies.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "45"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BB MEDTECH FORMED TO INVEST IN MEDICAL AND HEALTHCARE COMPANIES

BB Medtech AG, a holding company formed by Bellevue Asset Management
was listed 21 December 1995 on the Zurich Bourse. BB Medtech was formed
15 November to invest in medical and healthcare companies. Prior to its
listing, BB Medtech had 84 per cent of its assets investing in such
companies as Phycor Inc, Boston Scientific Corp, Columbia/HCA
Healthcare, United HealthCare Corp and Healthsource Inc.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "46"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SUN LIFE AWARDED CANADA'S HEALTH INSURANCE BUSINESS

Sun Life Assurance Co of Toronto has been awarded Canada's federal
government's health insurance business, covering over 230,000 civil
servants (including the royal police and defence forces). Total persons
covered, including dependents, and pensioners, is over one million.
Total yearly premiums are estimated at C$230 million ($166.7 million).
Mutual Life Assurance Co of Waterloo had the business since l960, and
the account is believed to represent two thirds of Mutual's total
health insurance business.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "47"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SWEDISH MEDICAL LABORATORIES MERG

Three Swedish medical laboratories, Calab Medicinska Laboratories,
Medilab Kliniska Laboratorier and St Gvrans Sjukhus Laboratorier, have
merged into a new company, CMS Medicinska Laboratorier. The new
company, which will offer diagnostic services to private and state run
hospitals, clinics and doctors, will have annual revenues of $41.1
million.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "48"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SYNECTICS MEDICAL BUYS ALL SHARES IN DANTEC MEDICAL

Synectics Medical Ab, a Swedish healthcare group headquartered in
Stockholm, has bought all shares in Dantec Medical a/s, a Danish
manufacturer of diagnostic laboratory test systems and kits used by
private and public sector hospitals and clinics. In what constituted a
reverse take-over, Synectics Medical Ab paid seller Incentive Group $12
million for Dantec, which had revenues of $37 million in 1994 and has
forecast a 10 per cent increase in sales volume for 1995. By contrast,
Synectics Medical had revenues of $30 million in 1994, with sales
expected to increase by 6 per cent in 1995.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "49"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

MEDSTAT GROUP CONTRACT

Medstat Group (Ann Arbor, MI) was awarded a three year, $3.8 million
contract to conduct research and policy related tasks for the Office of
the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation's Division of
Disability, Aging and Long-Term Care within the US Department of Health
and Human Services.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "50"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

FLORIDA HEALTH CENTRES SOLD TO HUMANA

Coastal Physicians Group Inc (Durham, NC) sold 47 South Florida health
centres to Humana Inc (Louisville, KY) for $50 million. Humana, a
health maintenance organisation, used Coastal's network of physicians
to provide care to more than 75,000 of its members in South Florida.
The two companies have had a difficult relationship during the past
year.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "51"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

AARP TO END ARRANGEMENT WITH PRUDENTIAL

The American Association of Retired Persons (AARP) announced that it
would end its exclusive arrangement with the Prudential Insurance
Company of America at the end of 1997, when the current agreement
expires. Prudential has 5.6 million AARP members as customers, more
than one-third of the company's 15 million health insurance customers.
While Prudential can still offer members insurance cover, AARP wants
other companies to also participate in its health insurance programme.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "52"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

HEALTHSOUTH TO PURCHASE ADVANTAGE HEALTH CORP

HealthSouth (Birmingham, AL) has agreed to purchase Advantage Health
Corp (Woburn, MA) in a stock swap valued at about $325 million. The
purchase will add 150 rehabilitation hospitals and clinics to
HealthSouth's 42 state network of out-patient and in-patient
rehabilitation facilities, diagnostic centres and surgical clinics.
With this acquisition, HealthSouth will operate more than 850
facilities in 44 states. HealthSouth's revenue, not including the
Advantage purchase, is projected to top $2.2 billion in 1996. Advantage
has estimated 1995 revenue of $200 million.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "53"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

STERIS TO ACQUIRE AMSCO INTERNATIONAL

Steris Corp (Mentor, OH) has agreed to acquire Amsco International Inc
(Pittsburgh, PA) in a stock transaction valued at about $508 million.
Steris's fiscal year (ending 31 March) sales are projected at less than
$100 million, while Amsco expects 1995 sales of $450 million. Under the
terms of the agreement Amsco shareholders would get 0.46 share of
Steris common stock for each share of Amsco. The transaction is
expected to be concluded by April, 1996. Steris believes that the buy
will make it a major player in providing sterilisation and surgical
support equipment and services to the healthcare industry.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "54"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB TO ACQUIRE 77 PER CENT OF PHARMAVIT

Bristol-Myers Squibb Co has entered into an agreement to acquire 77 per
cent of shares in Pharmavit Gyogyszer-es Elelmiszeripari Reszvemytarsas
AG, one of Hungary's largest manufacturers of generic pharmaceuticals,
over-the-counter medicines and nutritional products. The offer price
was $62.35 per share. In the first half of 1995, Pharmavit posted a pre-
tax profit of Ft299.6 million ($2.2 million) on consolidated sales
revenues of Ft2.23 billion.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "55"></A>Copyright
INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

MEDICAL DEVICES SECTOR SHOWS STRONG GROWTH POTENTIAL

LONDON - Shares in Anagen, a small UK-based emerging immunodiagnostic
company, jumped 19p to 79p following news that it has received US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) clearance for its new assay to measure
testosterone. This brings to 16 the number of assays cleared by the FDA
for sale of its AuraFlex automated immunoassay system.

AuraFlex, the company's lead product, is an automated in vitro
immunodiagnostic testing machine, designed by Anagen and built by
contractors. Confident of securing a marketing deal soon, the company
expects sales to flow within the first half of 1996.

Mervyn Sennett, chief executive and founder of Anagen, told IHN:
"Bundling is a word that is beginning to be bounced around the
diagnostics business at the moment. The big managed care units are
integrating with huge purchasing power; they want to do deals across
the board so that they have one supplier for a whole level of services.
The large diagnostics companies are expanding their range so they have
a larger package to offer."

The $15 billion in vitro diagnostics testing market is crowded and
getting more crowded. Immunodiagnostics represent the fastest growing
segment with around $6 billion sales. Anagen is concentrating on
developing the essential high volume tests required by around a fifth
of the immunodiagnostics market. "The market potential is
considerable," said Sennett.

Divestment and consolidation presents major growth opportunities for
scale-minded diagnostics companies. DuPont Co, for instance, announced
the sale of its Medical Product's in-vitro diagnostics business to Dade
International, an independent company controlled by investment funds
managed by Bain Capital Inc, with shareholders including Goldman Sachs
Capital Partners and Dade management. The acquisition will create a
group with combined sales of $1 billion annually, creating one of the
world's leading diagnostics companies. In 1994, Dade had sales of $625
million, with 4,000 staff worldwide. Products include cardiac
immunodiagnostics, laboratory controls and data management.

Other deals concluded recently include Trinity Biotech's three-year $20
million contract as Warner-Lambert's exclusive supplier of pregnancy
tests for the US over-the-counter (OTC) market. Abaxis secured a three-
year non-exclusive distribution agreement with Baxter Healthcare Group
for the latter to distribute Abaxis' Piccolo portable point-of-care
blood analyser to medical providers in the US. The product allows
clinicians to perform routine blood tests on a few drops of whole blood
and provides test results in less than 14 minutes with the precision
and accuracy equivalent to a clinical laboratory.

Medical device analysts raised their ratings on Ventritex to strong buy
from buy, with shares up $1-1/2 to $19-1/2 on 12 December. Ventritex's
Cadet implantable defibrillator for treating too-rapid heartbeat is
expected to be approved on schedule and likely to prove a strong
challenge to Medtronic's Jewel implantable defibrillator line. One
analyst rejected market rumours that the FDA might delay Cadet's
approval as unwarranted. Shares in Medtronic, downgraded from strong
buy to buy by one Wall Street analyst, slipped $1-1/4 at $55-1/4.

Bio-Vascular Inc, launched in the mid-80s and focused on medical
imaging and surgical tissues, posted a fiscal 1995 profit, its first
move into the black. Last year it posted a loss of $0.26 per share on
sales of $6.6 million. The company reported a non-recurring $1.5
million revenue gain in the fourth quarter to end-October, relating to
a licensing deal involving its VoxelGeo three-dimensional visualisation
software. The company's Per-Strip product, an air-tight, staple-line
reinforcement used in lung volume reduction surgery to treat late-stage
emphysema, accounts for more than half of the company's revenues and is
expected to boost sales growth further next year. Its Dura-Guard brain
tissue patch was approved by the FDA in July.

In late-December Vita Signs, Inc announced it had received marketing
approval from the FDA for the company's Viringe vascular access flush
device for both saline and heparin applications. It plans to begin
marketing the device in the US in March 1996, targeting the US home
care market through an exclusive relationship with a national alliance
of home care dealers. Its own sales force will market the product to US
hospitals. European marketing is planned for later in 1996.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-15</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B040-139</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh75.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015843 text/html 35530
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:56:50 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:34 GMT
Content-length: 35343
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh75.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
February 22, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>Primary Care Substance Abuse Training Gives Plans&nbsp;Chances for Quick Payback</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(415 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Managed Medicaid Plan's Providers Contend Program&nbsp;Owes Them Millions</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(508 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>Plan Builds Disorder Pathway As Cue for Patients,&nbsp;Providers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(551 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Breast Cancer Study Could Give Carve-Out Plans the Blues</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(251 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Little-Fish CompCare Deals Could Trigger More Mergers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(594 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Group Captures Patient Views Using Electronic System</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(375 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>HHS Rejects Medicaid Waiver For Mental Health-Only Plan</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(295 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Consider Employer Concerns In Outcome Measure Design</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(431 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>POLICY & REPORTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(645 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>Credentialing Service May Go Electronic</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(159 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>INDUSTRY NEWS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(474 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNet
February 22, 1996

Primary Care Substance Abuse Training Gives Plans
Chances for Quick Payback


Arming primary care physicians with the tools to
diagnose substance abuse is one example of how quality improvement
initiatives actually lower costs.

Better substance abuse training in primary care physician residency
programs could improve dismal diagnosis rates, a panel of
clinicians and health administrators recommends.
But managed care organizations shouldn't leave the job to graduate
medical education, one health plan administrator urges. Taking the
lead in educating primary care physicians on substance abuse
treatment can help health plans achieve a substantial and quick
return on their investments.
Arming primary care physicians with the tools to diagnose substance
abuse is one example of how quality improvement initiatives
actually lower costs, says Dr. John Ludden, senior vice president
for medical affairs at Harvard Pilgrim Health Care of Brookline,
Mass. "The patient feels better, the PCPs' lives are made more
organized, the cost picture is better, and the employer wins."
And substance abuse patients can be treated with greater success
rates than people with many other chronic illnesses, says A. Thomas
McLellan, professor of psychiatry at the University of
Pennsylvania.
The competency model recommended by the Josiah Macy Jr. Foundation
offers health plans a starting point for education efforts, Ludden
adds. "Those are things that ought to be expected of PCPs in
currently functioning organizations."
Ludden and McLellan were members of a panel of 45 physicians,
employers, academics, public officials and administrators that
composed the list of competencies that primary care physicians
should learn in residency programs.
Substance abuse education historically has been at the bottom of
managed care organizations' list of priorities, but that could
change rapidly.
"What forces this up the priority list, especially in integrated
MCOs that do behavioral health, is that it's one of those few
situations where everyone wins," Ludden says.
And enhancing a health plan's ability to identify and treat
substance abuse patients will pay back quickly, probably in 18
months or less, Ludden argues. "It's one of the very clear areas
where employers understand the payback," he says. "They don't have
to be sold that anymore."

Among the primary care physician competencies recommended by the
foundation:

o        Screening patients for alcohol and
drug abuse;
o        Using office-based therapy,
including brief intervention techniques, counseling and
pharmacotherapy;
o        Referral to specialized treatment
and other community programs;
o        Care of affected family members; and
o        Recognizing and assisting colleagues
with substance abuse problems.

Contact Joe Sutherland of the Macy Foundation at (301) 652-1558,
and Ludden at (617) 730-4746.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNet
February 22, 1996

Managed Medicaid Plan's Providers Contend Program
Owes Them Millions


About 65 mental health agencies in Massachusetts may
sue a Medicaid managed mental health contractor for $6 million to
$9 million in unpaid claims, saying a billing catch-22 deprived
them  of the money.

A managed behavioral health firm has found itself caught under
attack from providers who want payment for services rendered under
the Massachusetts managed mental health program.
The providers may sue the state's Medicaid managed mental health
care contractor, Mental Health Management of America, for breach of
contract over $6 million to $9 million in allegedly unpaid claims.
The state has promised to make sure money owed providers is paid.
The providers say the contractor trapped them in a catch-22 to
avoid paying claims for mental health and substance abuse
treatment. The contractor required that claims be submitted within
90 days of service and include preauthorization numbers, then
allegedly didn't furnish the numbers promptly enough for the
providers to meet the deadline.
"Claims processing was not [Mental Health Management's] strength,"
acknowledges Bruce Bullen, commissioner of the state Division for
Medical Assistance, which oversees Medicaid. For example, there was
a problem with a claims backlog.
"We'll make sure [Mental Health Management] is resonsible for
complying with the contract," Bullen says. "But it doesn't mean
we'll pay all claims."
He noted that Mental Health Management "performed in a superior
fashion in some areas, like quality management."
John Kahn, a lawyer representing 65 mental health agencies
allegedly owed money by Mental Health Management,
agreed that quality of care wasn't at issue.
But Massachusetts canceled Mental Health Management's Medicaid
managed care contract. The company's parent, First Health Services,
did not have its contract to run New Mexico's certified Medicaid
management system renewed in 1994.
Mental Health Management of America, owned by First Financial
Management of Atlanta, got the Massachusetts managed care contract
for mental health and substance abuse treatment in 1992.
In a letter to a Mental Health Management outside lawyer, Kahn asks
the contractor to process the providers' unpaid claims and suspend
troublesome edits related to prior approval, billing within 90
days, a 365-day payment appeals process and claims identification
numbers.
Kahn says Mental Health Management hasn't met providers' demands
yet, but the two sides are scheduled to meet next week. 
At press time, Mental Health Management had not granted a request
for comment to MBH.
Mental Health Management broke new ground in providing
comprehensive managed mental health care to Medicaid, so there were
growing pains, says Ron Preston, HCFA associate regional
administrator. But that's not why Mental Health Management's
contract wasn't renewed past June. "Other applicants had more solid
applications," Preston says. Massachusetts Behavioral Health
Partners won the bid.
Under the contract with Massachusetts, Mental Health Management was
paid $11.5 million in admini- strative expenses under a
risk-bearing contract that allowed it to make up to $750,000 if it
kept expenses in line or shell out up to $750,000 if it went over
budget. The first 92 cents of every dollar saved went to the state,
and the remaining 8 cents to Mental Health  Management.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNet
February 22, 1996

Plan Builds Disorder Pathway As Cue for Patients,
Providers


Confronting a relatively uncharted illness, a health
network used its experience with past pathways to shape guidelines
for treatment of dissociative identity disorder.

Starting from scratch, Presbyterian Behavioral Health Network of
Albuquerque, N.M., has designed a clinical pathway to guide
patients with dissociative identity disorder and the providers who
treat them down a standard route.
"With DID, there were no models and no clinical studies to work
from," explains Selene Mahaffey, quality improvement specialist at
Presbyterian. But Albuquerque's intensely competitive managed care
environment puts a premium on controlling inpatient length of stay
and proving treatment value.
So Presbyterian built a DID pathway from the ground up, drawing
from experiences that it gained in crafting protocols for bipolar
disorder and alcohol  detoxification.

Among lessons learned during those earlier efforts:

o        Work very closely as a team when
creating treatment guidelines.
o        Come to a consensus on what
constitutes effective treatment.
o        Dig up the latest research on a
target illness, concentrating especially on controlled clinical
studies.
o        Communicate constantly with staff
members, making sure they understand the goals of the path and how
to use it.

Presbyterian kept the pathway design group small and focused,
including only two outpatient therapists, two physicians, an
inpatient mental health therapist and a quality improvement
specialist. The pathway came together in four 90-minute meetings.

Complexity Keeps Goals Focused

In tackling DID, the Presbyterian pathway creators confronted a
complex illness: Anxiety, depression and sleeplessness all are
involved, and a large number of DID patients also have substance
abuse problems.
The group settled on several goals, including lengths of stay of no
more than seven days and keeping patients from harming themselves
in medically serious ways. Dealing with past memory was deemed too
difficult to achieve in a seven-day stay.
Without a trail of clinical studies, the clinical judgment of
nurses and physicians continues to play a large role in a patient's
treatment, though the DID guideline identifies situations when
patients should be taken off the path.
The pathway rests in Presbyterian's existing computer system, and
standard order sets programmed into the network allow charge nurses
to move patients along the path without having physicians sign off
every time. That's been a hit with the nursing staff, Mahaffey
says: "They feel there's plenty of room for their professional
input."
The pathway is also becoming a motivational tool for DID patients.
"Most of them like that it's very concrete - they know what the
goals are and what's going to happen every day," she says.
The price tag for the pathway: A minimal consulting fee of less
than $500 for the outpatient therapist's time. Using the existing
computer system and doing planning work during regular staff hours
cost Presbyterian nothing.
Presbyterian's DID pathway has run into several serious obstacles,
Mahaffey admits. "We had people who didn't believe in it as a
disorder opposed to providers who specialize in it," she explains.
And the lack of clinical studies stymied efforts to standardize
drug treatment.
"If we had the studies to fall back on, that would help handle the
physicians who are more creative in their prescriptions," Mahaffey
says. "We had to be honest about the differences in opinion and
focus on the things we could agree on."
Contact Mahaffey at (505) 291-2522. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNet
February 22, 1996

Breast Cancer Study Could Give Carve-Out Plans the Blues


Investigators hope to show that integrating mental and
medical health services will improve breast cancer treatment
outcomes.

A two-year clinical investigation uniting the American
Psychological Assn. and Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Massachusetts
could be good news for cancer patients but bad news for the managed
behavioral health carve-out concept.
The study's hypothesis: Integrating mental and medical health
services would improve outcomes for women with breast cancer and
save payers money.
The first of 120 women newly diagnosed with breast cancer will
enter the study within the next two months. Those patients will
then participate in a 16-week group managed psychological
intervention program conducted by Massachusetts Blues mental health
providers.
Mental health services won't be integrated into the medical
treatment program of a comparison group of cancer patients.
Instead, the group will follow the "existing standard of care," the
study's creators explain, accessing psychological services on their
own from a list of behavioral health resources.
Investigators will track immunological functioning, long-term
cancer recurrence and mortality within the two groups. Preliminary
results could come as early as this year.
The association expects those results will clearly demonstrate that
the early integration of psychological services into medical
treatment will improve clinical outcomes. That could give
scientific backing to the APA's argument that integrated delivery
systems should bring psychological services back into their menu of
primary and specialty medical services.
For information, call Jan Peterson of APA at (202) 336-5898, and
Susan Leahy of the Massachusetts Blues at (617) 832-4823.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNet
February 22, 1996

Little-Fish CompCare Deals Could Trigger More Mergers


The refurbished national specialty care company has big
dreams for public sector mental health business, and that could
mean fewer independent players by year-end.

On the heels of recent acquisitions of two regional managed
behavioral health companies, relatively unknown Comprehensive Care
Corp. has nationwide ambitions in public sector managed mental
health care - ambitions that could accelerate consolidation in the
managed behavioral health arena.
After nearly dropping completely from market screens in the early
1990s with a failed push into hospital ownership and tax troubles
with federal authorities, Costa Mesa, Calif.-based CompCare
reshuffled top leadership and restructured operations. CompCare has
targeted $2 billion in business in 1996, and acquisitions will be
crucial to success.
Late last year, CompCare's managed behavioral care subsidiary,
Comprehensive Behavioral Care, purchased Health Management Services
of Bloomfield Hills, Mich. The acquisition brought 350,000 covered
lives in the Midwest to CompCare, boosting total managed behavioral
care membership to 1.25 million, up from 400,000 a year earlier.
This month, CompCare bought Philadelphia-based Mustard Seed, adding
140,000 public sector covered lives in Pennsylvania to its managed
mental health division (MBH 2/8/96, p. 7).
Those moves expanded CompCare's managed behavioral care presence
out of the West and the South, and came on top of deals last fall
with HIP Health Plan of Pennsylvania and PCA Health Plans in Puerto
Rico.
The Mustard Seed deal strengthens CompCare's position at the
doorstep of the New Jersey/New York public sector mental health
market. The company is reportedly eyeing a large piece of public
sector business in the metropolitan New York region.

Mustard Seed, HMS Won't Be Last to Go

But industry observers wonder if the Medicaid managed mental health
care pool is large enough for yet another national player.
"[CompCare's] growth isn't going to disrupt the structure of the
market," says Dr. Michael Freeman, president of the Portola Valley,
Calif.-based Institute for Behavioral Healthcare. "They're just one
of several very focused organizations" in a market that will
continue to grow for several years.
Comprehensive Behavioral Care's numbers don't approach the more
than 15 million lives of Park Ridge, N.J.-based Merit Behavioral
Care Corp., for instance, or the 20 million lives covered by Value
Behavioral Health of Falls Church, Va.
Nevertheless, "There's an attitude [among the largest managed
behavioral health firms] of, 'We don't know who these people are,
but we're going to keep an eye on them,'" says Suzanne Gelber,
president of SGR Health and a senior research fellow at Brandeis
University's Institute for Health Policy. "They kind of came out of
nowhere."
Mustard Seed won't be the last of the managed behavioral health
care market's smaller players to look for larger friends, industry
observers predict.
"The small guys just have limited access to larger contracts,"
explains Mustard Seed Vice President for Business Development
Robert Bailey.
CompCare CEO Chriss Street concurs. "The mental health market tends
to be very fractured, with lots of 'mom and pop' providers," Street
says. "As the bar gets raised, those providers are going to be
ground out or bought out."
Among smaller fish mentioned by some observers as potential
takeover targets: Vista Health Plans of San Diego, with 470,000
covered lives.
But new acquisitions may not top the priority lists of big players
such as Value Behavioral Health and Magellan Health Services, which
are still digesting  previous purchases. 
"They now have to integrate their acquisitions, and that takes time
and effort," Freeman said.
For more details, call Matt Lepo for CompCare at (818) 789-9000,
Bailey at (215) 836-3205, Freeman at (415) 435-9821, and Gelber at
(203) 761-0860. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
MANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNet
February 22, 1996

Group Captures Patient Views Using Electronic System


A computer-based patient functional assessment tool gave
a behavioral health group practice a window into its own operations
and greater stature with payers.

Using an electronic functional assessment tool, an Albuquerque,
N.M., mental health group practice pairs clinicians' observations
with comprehensive patient-generated information - and the
combination has attracted the notice of payers.
In the past, pencil and paper were Mesa Mental Health's standard
tools for capturing patient perceptions of service quality,
explains Gayle Zieman, chief clinical officer. Patient views on
their functional levels slipped by completely, leaving clinician
notes as the only word on functional status.
Standardized measures were nonexistent.
BEHAVIORisk, an electronic assessment tool created by Response
Healthcare Information Management of East Greenwich, R.I., changed
that. Using a survey instrument that the behavioral health
organization chooses, patients fill out a bubble-sheet
questionnaire, which is scanned into the organization's information
system.
Mesa's customized survey questions cover a range of issues,
including patient satisfaction, symptoms, functional levels and
even perceptions of physical health.
What Mesa providers found surprised them, Zieman says. Most new
patients expected their treatment would last less than 10 sessions,
lower than Mesa's  estimate.
The system also covers areas providers had often overlooked. "Some
of our clinicians never asked about chemical dependency," he says. 
The electronic patient survey does ask about chemical dependency,
alerting providers when the condition could be present.
The system's selling points: BEHAVIORisk uses Microsoft's Access
database, software Mesa already had licensed. An open-architecture
design allows the group practice to customize the software.
The creation of a central database proved most attractive, Zieman
says. "The ability to export our data into an aggregate pool is
very important."
Response is building a national data warehouse for patient
satisfaction information, functional improvement data and outcomes
measures. 
The database cuts across care divisions, gathering information from
HMOs, group practices and hospitals as well as behavioral health
providers.
Response eventually plans to shape performance measures from the
data.
The payoff: The ability to capture the patients' side of functional
assessment recently helped Mesa land a partnership deal with one of
Albuquerque's major behavioral health payers to track the treatment
of depression in primary care settings.
For details, call Zieman at (505) 291-5300, and James Spitzer of
Response at (401) 885-6900. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
MANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNet
February 22, 1996

HHS Rejects Medicaid Waiver For Mental Health-Only Plan


Montana may yet land a waiver for a com- prehensive
Medicaid managed care plan  that includes a special focus on
managed mental health.

While HHS recently shot down Montana's plans for a Medicaid managed
mental health care-only demonstration, state officials say a less
ambitious plan could earn a waiver by the fall.
State officials last summer asked for a Sec. 1115 Medicaid
demonstration waiver to begin the Montana Mental Health Access
Plan. The program would have moved Medicaid mental health services
into a single, statewide managed care program extending coverage to
residents with incomes up to 200% of the federal poverty level.
The demonstration would not have covered other health services for
newly eligible recipients.
That exclusion killed the plan's chance for a Sec. 1115 waiver, HHS
said in rejecting Montana's plan. Without a guarantee of basic
health services for the new group, HHS won't OK the project.
But HHS Secretary Donna Shalala told Gov. Marc Racicot (R) that
federal officials could fast-track an application for a Sec. 1915
waiver or a revised Sec. 1115 waiver proposal that expands services
to physical as well as mental health care.
That's sent state officials back to the drawing board. Pushing
ahead with the planned extension of mental health benefits without
federal matching funds isn't an option, says Dan Anderson,
administrator of the state's Division of Addictive and Mental
Disorders.
Alternate plans include pursuing a Sec. 1915 waiver to move current
Medicaid eligibles into a managed mental health plan and using
state funds to cover target groups such as severely mentally ill
adults and adolescents.
The state is also considering adding coverage of basic health
services for newly eligible beneficiaries to its original Sec. 1115
waiver application.
For more information, contact Anderson at  (406) 444-3969.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
MANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNet
February 22, 1996

Consider Employer Concerns In Outcome Measure Design


Don't jump into outcomes measurement without understanding
the basics, one expert says, and always keep an eye out for
measures payers want.

Asking some basic questions before building a behavioral health
outcomes measurement system can keep an organization's efforts on
track and ensure the final product offers measures that payers will
value.
Robert Shomer, president and CEO of Encino, Calif.-based Hawthorne
Community Medical Group, cautions behavioral health organizations
to have the answers to the following questions before pushing
ahead:

o        Why are you doing this? Know your
target audience before you begin crafting an outcomes measurement
system. Is it for a report card? Will the results be used in
marketing? Does a payer want to see enrollee utilization trends?
Are you benchmarking your performance against other players?
o        Do you want to measure satisfaction
or outcomes? Know the difference, Shomer warns. Patient
satisfaction surveys are effective at uncovering needed
improvements. But the reasons why patient satisfaction levels are
down or why interventions fall flat will elude you. Outcomes
studies give behavioral health groups the power to track causality.
o        What level of precision do you want?
Greater detail can mean greater expense. For some, an inexpensive
patient satisfaction survey using postcards that patients fill out
at the office is enough.
o        Do you have the in-house talent to
build a system? If the pool of internal expertise is too shallow,
groups can turn to consultants or existing proprietary systems.
Don't dismiss a team effort with the psychiatry department of a
local university, Shomer says. They're extremely interested in the
impact of managed care, and they're more adept at real-world field
work than many behavioral care companies expect.

Move Beyond Clinical Quality Measures

Behavioral health groups shouldn't stop at clinical quality and
patient satisfaction measures. Anticipate the demands of employers,
for whom greater employee productivity on the job and stability at
home can be more important than clinical improvement, Shomer says.
Studies tracking functional status at work and within the home can
win and keep contracts.
"The therapist may be content, but for the family and the job, the
patient is just as dysfunctional," he says. "Employers aren't
interested in re-engineering employees' personalities - they want
people to be able to get back to work."
Other key information payers want: medical cost offset data. "If
you can show that you're providing lots of access, and because of
that patients don't end up in the hospital or in the primary care
physician's office inappropriately, that's extremely powerful,'
Shomer says.
For more information, contact Shomer at (818)  609-1761.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
MANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNet
February 22, 1996

POLICY & REPORTS


       New developments in managed mental
health care will be among the topics at the Feb. 28 meeting in
Washington of the National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics
Subcommittee on Mental Health. The subcommittee will also discuss
new  research on alcohol abuse. Contact Gail Fisher of NCVHS at
(301) 436-7050.

       The Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration is seeking comments on its
requirement that states asking for a substance abuse prevention and
treatment block grant for 1997 report on their efforts to stop the
sale of tobacco to minors. SAMHSA estimates the additional
requirement will add only 24 hours to the application process. Send
comments to Deborah Trunzo,  SAMHSA Reports Clearance Officer,
Room 16-105, Parklawn Building, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, Md.
20857.

       The first formal meeting between
managed behavioral health care companies and mental health consumer
groups ended with the creation of work groups and a promise to keep
talking. Nine executives of American Managed Behavioral Healthcare
Assn. member firms met early this month with 10 representatives of
national consumer organizations in a wide-ranging, two-day
discussion. The result: Three work groups covering issues such as
consumer education and the use of practice guidelines will produce
reports on their findings. For details, call Clarke Ross of AMBHA
at (202) 434-4565.

       The Consumer Managed Care Network,
a mental health consumer advocacy group, released its "Platform for
Action," outlining the basics of a consumer-friendly managed care
system. Among planks in the six-point platform: (1) service
delivery in the least-restrictive community-based setting;  (2)
"meaningful" consumer involvement in contract development, clinical
protocols and provider credentialing; (3) prevention of
cost-shifting to public mental health systems; and (4) access to
all quality assurance measurement findings. For more information,
contact Laura Van Tosh, CMCN coordinator, at (703) 739-9333.

       A report studying the relationship
between changes in Massachusetts' public mental health care system
and client deaths found that mortality rates among patients using
Department of Mental Health inpatient, case management or
residential services declined between the beginning of 1991 and the
end of 1993. But investigators refused to link the drop in
mortality rates to changes such as managed care, citing
insufficient data. Among recommendations in "Report on
Massachusetts Department of Mental Health Service Recipient
Mortality (1991-1993)": DMH should integrate existing data on
patients treated in department inpatient, case management or
residential services; and create a comprehensive data system to
track mental health patients treated through outpatient therapy,
clubhouses or emergency services.

       Managed behavioral health care firms
could get their first peek at the National Committee for Quality
Assurance's managed behavioral health care accreditation system as
early as April. NCQA says it will release the system for industry
comment this spring. For more information, contact Claire Sharda,
assistant director of accreditation policy,  at (202) 955-3500.

       A bill allowing managed care
enrollees to see psychologists and other specialists without a
referral is moving through the Indiana legislature. State Rep. Jeff
Espich (R) is sponsoring the legislation, H.B. 1289, which would
allow specialists to treat managed care plan patients who had not
gone through plan "gatekeepers." The Indiana House passed the bill,
which has been sent to committee in the Senate. But powerful
opponents, including the state's Chamber of Commerce and the
Indiana Manufacturers Assn., have lined up against the legislation.
With the legislative session set to end in mid-March, however, the
clock, not business groups, may snuff the bill's chances this year.
Call Espich's office at (317) 232-9606.

       More than four out of five employers
offered employee assistance programs in 1995, according to a survey
of 1,050 major U.S. businesses conducted by Hewitt Associates of
Lincolnshire, Ill. In 1990, 73% of employers had EAPs in place.
Five years later, the number had jumped to 84%, with most employers
contracting with an outside provider for EAP services. Contact
Monica Gallagher of Hewitt Associates at (847) 295-5000.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
MANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNet
February 22, 1996

Credentialing Service May Go Electronic


As early as June, managed care companies could begin
tapping into the American Managed Behavioral Healthcare Assn.'s
provider credential verification service.

The National Behavioral Healthcare Credential
Verification Service should cut the cost and effort of checking out
potential network providers by offering behavioral health plans and
providers a clearinghouse for credential verification (MBH 1/11/96,
p. 5).

The association plans to sign a contractor by March and
have the system operational three months later, says Darcy
Gruttadaro, a consultant who helped develop the program.
The service will verify a physician's license, proof of
residency program, lack of major malpractice judgments and other
documents.

Still uncertain is the cost of using the system.
Proposed charges include a fee per verification  request, annual
fees or provider recredentialing charges.

The whole process could go on-line sometime down the
road, Gruttadaro predicts, with plans, providers and the
credentialing service linking together electronically.

Contact Gruttadaro at (703) 519-8539.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
MANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNet
February 22, 1996

INDUSTRY NEWS


       The popularity of specialty PPOs for
mental health and substance abuse benefits keeps growing, according
to a survey by Foster Higgins of New York. Findings: 20% of
employers offered behavioral care PPOs in 1995, up from 14% in
1994. Call Stephanie Poe of Foster Higgins at (212) 574-9034 to
obtain information on the study.

       Universal Health Services of King of
Prussia, Pa., which operates 29 behavioral and acute care
hospitals, posted a 24% increase in profits in 1995, to $35.5
million. Revenues rose to $931.1 million, thanks in part to the
purchase of four hospitals in 1995, including a behavioral health
facility. Call Universal at (610) 768-3300.

       Losses continued at New
Orleans-based Ramsay Managed Care, which announced a net loss of
$740,000 in the three months ended Dec. 31. Losses in the last six
months of 1995 totaled $1.5 million. The company blames significant
marketing and development costs in its managed behavioral health
business as well as start-up costs in Ramsay's HMOs. Ramsay offers
managed behavioral health services to 730,000 people in 13 states.
Contact Ramsay at (504) 585-0508.

       A terminated psychiatric facility
management contract helped push earnings down at Integrated Health
Services of Owings Mills, Md. IHS predicted fourth quarter profits
would come in at 52 cents a share, below earlier estimates. IHS
ended a contract with Crestwood Hospitals to manage 23 psychiatric
and long-term care facilities in California, blaming insufficient
Medi-Cal rate increases for undermining the arrangement's financial
viability. For more information, contact Susan Noonan at (212)
696-4455, ext. 203.

       Compass Information Services of King
of Prussia, Pa., sold the exclusive pharmaceutical rights to
distribute COMPASS, a mental health outcomes measurement system,
to Bristol-Myers Squibb of Princeton, N.J. Bristol-Myers Squibb
will incorporate COMPASS into its disease management program. More
than 4 million people are covered by mental health treatment
programs using the COMPASS system. Call Patrick Donohue of
Bristol- Myers Squibb at (609) 252-5685, and Kimberly Veitch of
Compass at (610) 992-7076.

       The Chicago Transit Authority
(CTA) tapped Green Spring Health Services of Columbia, Md., to
manage mental health and substance abuse benefits for 16,300 CTA
employees and retirees. The agreement, which began Feb. 1,
includes a precertification program for the CTA's utilization
management services. Green Spring's Illinois subsidiary manages
behavioral health for more than 1 million people. For more
information, contact Erin Somers of Green Spring at (410) 964-1593.

       Mental Health Management of McLean,
Va., will sell Oakview Treatment Center, which runs two in-patient
facilities. The unnamed buyer will pay $2.2 million for the center.
Mental Health Management has been eager to shed its seven
financially troubled hospitals and concentrate on the acquisition
and management of non-physician mental health professional
practices. Prior to the Oakview deal, the company found a buyer for
five of the facilities. Contact Mental Health Management at (703)
749-4612.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-16</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B040-154</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh28.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015900 text/html 25785
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:57:05 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:44 GMT
Content-length: 25598
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh28.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
HEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNet <BR>
NOVEMBER 06, 1991<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Bush, Congress Negotiate On Medicaid Funding Rules</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(375 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>States Liberally Choosing Hospitals That Treat Many Poor Patients</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(170 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Medicare/Medicaid</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(815 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Health Care Costs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(295 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Managed Care</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(107 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Industry News</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(330 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Other Washington News</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(734 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>FINAL RULES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(200 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>PROPOSED RULES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(138 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>NOTICES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(403 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 06, 1991

Bush, Congress Negotiate On Medicaid Funding Rules

With less than two months to go before a Jan. 1 deadline, Congress
and the Bush Administration are trying to hammer out a compromise
on state Medicaid fundraising. In the balance is nearly $5.5 billion in
federal Medicaid matching funds that go to states using taxes on
health care providers or "voluntary" donations by providers to raise
money. In September, HCFA published regulations that would wipe
out most tax and donation programs as of Jan. 1. On Oct. 31, the
agency published a final version of those rules that attempts to
"clarify" the intent of the September proposal. The new plan would
give some states until July 1, 1992, to eliminate tax programs.
Programs begun after Sept. 12, 1991, would not qualify for the
additional time and contribution programs must end by New Year's
day. The new rules are "too little, too late, and leave too many
questions unanswered," says Senate Finance Committee Chairman
Lloyd Bentsen (D-TX), who is pressing HCFA to withdraw them.
Pressure also is coming from the House, where the Commerce Health
Subcommittee has voted 16-6 to approve a bill (H.R.3595) blocking
the rules until Sept. 30, 1992. To compound matters, HCFA proposed
new regulations, also on Oct. 31, that would limit the number of
hospitals each state can designate as "disproportionate share." Such
facilities receive higher reimbursement, often paid for with tax or
donation funds. While HCFA's hard line stance provoked anger on
Capitol Hill, private negotiations are underway to iron out a
compromise. HCFA wants to cap states' ability to raise funds
through taxes at 20 percent of total state Medicaid funding; the
National Governors' Assn. says the cap should be 60 percent. HCFA
also wants to limit the number of disproportionate share hospitals,
some states have designated all of their facilities in that way --
and to cap the amount that can be paid to such providers. NGA says it
will accept no limits on states' ability to choose hospitals for that
status but members of the Senate Finance Committee are said to be
sympathetic to some limits. In case the negotiations fail, the full
Commerce Committee plans a Nov. 7 vote on the moratorium bill and
Sen. Mitch McConnell (R-KY) has introduced a companion bill
(S.1886).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 06, 1991

States Liberally Choosing Hospitals That Treat Many Poor Patients

The Bush Administration's charge that states are liberally
designating hospitals as Medicaid "disproportionate share" facilities
is borne out by a recent study by the Prospective Payment
Assessment Commission (ProPAC). "The trend among the state
Medicaid programs has been to provide more disproportionate share
payments to more hospitals," ProPAC says. In New York, for example,
ProPAC found all 260 general hospitals designated as
disproportionate share; in contrast, only one of Utah's 40 hospitals
was so designated. The move to upgrade more hospitals to that
status has accelerated as states have made use of provider taxes to
subsidize Medicaid. In Texas, for example, only a quarter of hospitals
were eligible in 1988; today, all hospitals in the state qualify. And
in Kentucky, the number of hospitals designated has tripled since
1988. In an October report, ProPAC says HHS should develop policies
to ensure that Medicaid money goes to hospitals that need it the
most. A disproportionate share hospital is supposed to have a high
volume of Medicaid and other low-income patients.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 06, 1991

Medicare/Medicaid

Florida's Health Care Cost Containment Board wants the state
legislature to ban most referrals by doctors to facilities they own.
The ban on referrals would cover doctor-owned laboratories,
imaging, rehabilitation, and radiation therapy facilities. The broad
proposal, which would include all types of patients, would go well
beyond federal legislation aimed only at Medicare/Medicaid cases.
The board, which has studied the effect of physician ownership on
referrals, also wants to require greater disclosure of doctors'
investments in health care businesses. Thirteen states already limit
physician ownership; New Jersey and Michigan have the most
comprehensive laws. Under Florida's proposal, doctors with a stake
in nursing homes, hospitals, medical supply firms, home health
agencies, and ambulatory surgery centers would have to disclose
their financial interests to patients. "Obviously, we feel that very
stringent measures need to be taken to protect consumers in the
state," says board spokesman David Coley. The Florida Medical Assn.
says the study is flawed and the referral ban would hurt rural
patients.

Arizona, Maryland, and New Jersey Medicaid programs paid hospitals
more than the cost of treating Medicaid patients in 1989, says the
Prospective Payment Assessment Commission. Medicaid almost
covered costs in Indiana, Montana, and North Dakota. But Illinois and
Oregon paid less than half of costs -- 56 percent and 59 percent,
respectively. From 1980 to 1989, states in the East North Central,
West South Central, and Pacific regions of the U.S. cut Medicaid
hospital rates an average of 20 percent. In 1989, the two states
with all payer systems, Maryland and New Jersey, had two of the
highest Medicaid payments with costs at 104 and 102 percent,
respectively.

HHS says it will "aggressively" pursue fraud and abuse in the sale of
durable medical equipment. On Nov. 1 the Department proposed
regulations that would bar Medicare Part B carriers from shopping
neighboring states for the most lucrative Medicare payment, prohibit
unbundling of DME charges, and reduce the number of Medicare
carriers from 33 to 4. The latter is intended to reduce variation in
payment decisions. The government also will ask Congress for
authority to levy fines on miscreant suppliers. Today, HCFA has only
one choice: kick a supplier out of Medicare or allow its misbehavior
to continue. "We prefer to have an array of ways to deal with the
problem between benign neglect and the atom bomb," says HCFA
Administrator Gail Wilensky. Medicare pays about half of the annual
$2 billion DME bill, says the National Assn. of Medical Equipment
Suppliers, which is supporting bills (H.R.2534, S.1736) to set
certification and accreditation standards similar to Medicare's
conditions of participation.

A 6.5 percent reduction in Medicare physician fees is necessary to
"account for changes in consumer and physician behavior" that
otherwise would increase Medicare spending, says HCFA
Administrator Gail Wilensky in a letter to Congress. The 19-page
missive seeks to justify HCFA's plan to reduce fees under Medicare's
new fee schedule to offset behavioral changes. The American Medical
Assn. is pressing Congress to block that move before Jan. 1, claiming
it would cost doctors $7 billion over five years. In a Nov. 1 letter to
Congress, AMA says HCFA is presenting a "distorted view." Opponents
of the preemptive change argue that HCFA can recoup any lost
revenue by limiting future fee increases via the Medicare volume
performance standard. But Wilensky says the VPS is "simply
inadequate" for that purpose. HCFA plans to issue final rules later
this month; so far, Congress still seems unwilling to intervene.
Meanwhile, family physicians are trying to hold off implementation
of a new Medicare coding system for office visits. The new codes
aren't tested and will confuse physicians, says the American
Academy of Family Physicians.

To boost medical services for Medicare patients in rural areas, HCFA
will give $9.8 million to seven states and 51 rural hospitals. Funds
will enable states and health care facilities to form networks
through communication and transport systems to improve access to
primary care and emergency services in rural areas. The states are
California, Colorado, Kansas, New York, North Carolina, South Dakota,
and West Virginia.

The Henry Kaiser Family Foundation is spending $5 million over the
next five years to study Medicaid. The foundation has designated a
15-member panel to study problems with the state-federal program
for the poor under the leadership of New York State Assembly
Majority Leader James Tallon. The panel will examine the
effectiveness and costs of the program and address the role of
federal and state government to recommend a future agenda. Kaiser
also has lined up an impressive staff, headed by Johns Hopkins
University assistant professor Diane Rowland, and including
Georgetown University's Judith Feder, and RAND Corp.'s Steven Long.
Commission members include: Parkland Memorial Hospital CEO Ron
Anderson, MD; former HHS Asst. Secretary for Health Edward Brandt,
MD; California Health Commissioner Molly Coye, MD; and Hopkins
professor Karen Davis.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 06, 1991

Health Care Costs

The rate of increase in community hospital expenses dipped to a
five-year low for the first half of 1991, says the American Hospital
Assn. The AHA panel survey of 2,000 hospitals found that a 9.3
percent hike in total expenses, down from nearly 11.3 percent in
1990. Moderate interest rates, a shallow climb in inflation, and
greater use of more part time workers helped hospitals hold the
line, AHA says. The 3.4 percent hike in capital costs was less than
half of last year's 8.9 percent rate and dramatically down from 1982
when it reached 27.4 percent.

Congress should set federal standards for long term care insurance
if states don't strengthen consumer protection laws, says the
General Accounting Office. While some laws are stronger, many
states haven't adopted standards developed by the National Assn. of
Insurance Commissioners (NAIC), GAO's Janet Shikles told the House
Commerce Consumer Protection Subcommittee Oct. 24. Prominently
missing are guaranteed policy renewal and prohibitions against
exclusion of Alzheimer's patients. Insurers are doing a better job of
adopting standards, but they need to do better, GAO noted. Shikles
also faulted NAIC, arguing that its model long term care insurance
law should contain uniform definitions, improved methods for
determining eligibility, and greater protection against abusive
marketing practices.

Life and health insurers paid $1.2 billion in AIDS-related claims in
1990, more than four times the level in 1986, reports the Health
Insurance Assn. of America and the American Council on Life
Insurance. The 1990 estimate brings the industry's total in AIDS-
related claims to more than $3.5 billion since 1986. The latest
estimated total for 1990 -- $1.2 billion -- is four times the $292.2
million estimated for 1986. Private health insurers write checks for
about 40 percent of AIDS-related health care costs.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 06, 1991

Managed Care

More than a third of psychiatric and substance abuse hospital
admissions are unnecessary, says a new study. Researchers at Blue
Cross & Blue Shield of Michigan are recommending a prospective
payment system for psych/substance abuse hospitalizations, along
with aggressive preadmission review and case management.
Researchers randomly selected 539 cases drawn from 61 hospitals
in southeastern Michigan covering services delivered in 1987 and
1988. Nearly 40 percent of 425 mental illness admissions were
judged unnecessary, while nearly 60 percent of 114 substance abuse
admissions were so viewed. Authors speculate that psychiatrists
are biased toward a "medical model" and insurers provide an
additional financial incentive for hospitalizing patients.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 06, 1991

Industry News

The FDA would have additional tools to combat criminal fraud in the
generic drug industry under a bill (H.R.2454) approved by the House
Oct. 31. FDA would be able to debar for at least one year firms and
individuals convicted or implicated in bribery, fraud, false
statements, or other crimes that undermine the FDA approval
process. The bill also would establish penalties of as much as
$250,000 per individual and $1 million per company and permit the
temporary denial of product approvals for up to 18 months. Another
18 months would be tagged on for bribery and fraud. Companies under
suspicion could have their products suspended unless they could
prove their products were untainted. The bill also would revoke
illegally obtained generic drug approvals and provide standby
investigational authority for the HHS Inspector General. A similar
bill (S.1164) by Sen. Orrin Hatch (R-UT) is pending.

Medical device manufacturers want to quash an insurance industry
effort to enlarge the government's medical technology assessment
system. Four health insurance groups have offered to chip in $1
million to HHS' Office of Technology Assessment. Currently budgeted
at about $1 million, the office evaluates an average of 20 types of
technology each year. The extra money would double the reviews and
make the government a bigger player in technology dissemination.
But the Health Industry Manufacturers Assn. says the plan would
create a monolithic approach to technology assessment and could
"kill promising technology and deter innovators from going forward
with certain technologies." Insurers say the current technology
assessment process -- which draws on the expertise of some 80
different organizations -- often is conflicting and leaves insurers in
limbo. Insurers are looking for "a solid assessment," says Prudential
Insurance VP Dan Dragalin, MD. The insurers want to start the new
effort in January, but HHS official J. Jarrett Clinton, MD, hasn't
decided whether to accept the offer. Provider groups such as the
American Medical Assn. also are deciding whether to sign on with
the insurers.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 06, 1991

Other Washington News

The long-awaited veto showdown over abortion counseling at family
planning clinics is imminent. Congressional negotiators agreed to a
one-year prohibition on implementation of regulations that ban
abortion counseling, a move President Bush has promised to veto.
The legislative ban appears in a $207 billion fiscal 1992 funding bill
for HHS and the Departments of Education and Labor (H.R.2707). That
bill includes significant increases in spending on biomedical
research into cancer and Alzheimer's disease. The National
Institutes of Health (NIH) would receive $9 billion in FY92, including
$1.9 billion for the National Cancer Institute and $387 million for
the National Aging Institute, of which $15 million would go toward
Alzheimer's research. To stay under statutory spending limits,
lawmakers agreed to defer spending $575 million of the NIH total
until the last day of the federal fiscal year. Congress took similar
action on several other program areas in the bill, which also could
provoke Bush to wield his veto pen. If Bush does veto the bill, it will
take two thirds of both the House and Senate to override him; to date
Bush never has been overridden. As part of the final bill, conferees
upped funding for HHS' "Healthy Start" initiative to prevent infant
mortality. The bill includes $75 million in FY92, triple the FY91
total but well below the $138.7 million Bush requested. Of that
total, $40 million would immediately go to 15 U.S. cities and
counties; another $25 million would be paid out on the last day of
FY92; and $10 million would go to community health centers (CHCs).
The bill also hikes CHC funding from $478.2 million in FY91 to
$527.2 million in FY92 and raises funding for the maternal and child
health block grant to $650 million, compared with FY91's $587
million. Some cities will also get more money to deal with AIDS.
Other highlights: the Medicare contractor budget went from $1.5
billion in FY91 to $1.7 billion in FY92, but $257 million of that is in
a contingency reserve. Another $150 million is slated for state
survey and certification programs with no requirement for "user
fees."

Hoping to achieve at least partial health care reform, a pair of
powerful congressional Democrats are pressing efforts to reform
the dysfunctional small group health insurance market. House Ways
& Means Committee Chairman Dan Rostenkowski (D-IL) and Senate
Finance Committee chief Lloyd Bentsen (D-TX) announced Oct. 24
that they will push for action in 1992. While neither is forsaking
comprehensive reform, both think insurance changes can get White
House backing. "My hope is that this legislation will end a
frustrating impasse," says Rostenkowski. Their bill would set
minimum standards for small firms, ban medical underwriting, and
force renewal of policies. It also would limit how much premiums
could vary and would set parameters on how much insurers could
charge business. Rostenkowski would require insurers to offer
Medicare's benefit package plus new prevention coverage. Bentsen
plans to design his own benefit package. Rostenkowski would have
HHS set and enforce standards, while Bentsen would leave it to state
insurance commissioners. The most expensive element of the plan
would hike the 25 percent tax deduction for the self-insured to 100
percent. That would cost $7.5 billion over five years. Bentsen wants
it done immediately; Rostenkowski would phase it in.

Funding for mental health and substance abuse research would
increase under a bill (H.R.3698) introduced Nov. 1 by Rep. Henry
Waxman (D-CA). The measure also would retain the current structure
of the Alcohol, Drug Abuse & Mental Health Administration
(ADAMHA), despite an Administration proposal to shift research
programs to the National Institutes of Health. Waxman, who chairs
the House Commerce Health Subcommittee, would authorize $525
million for mental health research in fiscal 1992 compared to
$483.8 million spent in FY91. His bill also would authorize $293
million in FY92 for drug abuse research up from $265.2 million in
FY91; and fund alcohol research at $160 million FY92, up from $143
million in FY91. In August, the Senate approved an ADAMHA bill
(S.1306) that would move the ADAMHA research components to NIH.
Waxman's bill would create a new state-run community mental
health services block grant.

Following are summaries of health-related regulations and notices
that have appeared in the "Federal Register." To order individual
copies of the "Federal Register,"end $1.50 to: Superintendent of
Documents, GPO, Washington DC 20402.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
HEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 06, 1991

FINAL RULES

Final rule expanding the Medicare swing-bed program to encompass
rural hospitals with 50 to 99 beds and establishing requirements for
swing-bed hospitals with more than 49 beds. Effective Nov. 21. FR
10-22-91, p. 54539. HHS/HCFA, Thomas Hoyer, 301/966-4607.

Final rule amending Medicare regulations on prepaid health care.
Effective Nov. 18. FR 10-17-91, p. 51984. HHS/HCFA, Luisa Iglesias,
202/245-0383.

Final rule changing the existing CHAMPUS day limits and waiver
criteria for acute inpatient psychiatric care, introducing new day
limits for residential treatment center care, and protecting against
economic interests in referrals to inpatient facilities by health care
professionals. Effective Nov. 18. FR 10-18-91, p. 52193. DOD/OS,
Stephen Knight, 703/697-8975.

Final rule establishing a mandatory preadmission authorization
program for mental health services under CHAMPUS. Effective Nov.
18. FR 10-18-91, p. 52198. DOD/OS, Stephen Knight, 703/697-8975.

Final rule requiring each health care provider who administers a
particular vaccine set forth in the Vaccine Injury Table to provide a
copy of the vaccine information pamphlets. Effective Apr. 15, 1992.
FR 10-15-91, p. 51798. HHS/PHS, Walter Orenstein, 404/639-1880.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
HEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 06, 1991

PROPOSED RULES

List of priority regulations being developed by HHS, the regulation
identification number, and, if available, the date of the last, or next
anticipated action. FR 10-21-91, p. 53262. HHS, Gloria Ellis,
202/245-6824.

Proposed rule establishing Medicare requirements for designating
certain hospitals as Essential Access Community Hospitals (EACHs)
or Rural Primary Care Hospitals (RPCHs), conditions that an RPCH
must meet to participate in Medicare, rules for Medicare payment
for services furnished by EACHs and RPCHs. Comments due Dec. 24,
1991. FR 10-24-91, p. 55382. HHS/HCFA, Thomas Hoyer, 301/966-
4607.

FDA is reopening the period for submission of comments on the
proposed rule amending the tentative final monograph for over-the-
counter topical acne drug products to Nov. 7. FR 10-17-91, p. 52008.
HHS/FDA, William Gilbertson, 301/295-8000.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
HEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNet
NOVEMBER 06, 1991

NOTICES

Notice providing the list of laboratories currently certified to meet
standards of Subpart C of Mandatory Guidelines for Federal
Workplace Drug Testing Programs. FR 10-22-91, p. 54582.
HHS/ADAMHA, National Institute of Drug Abuse, Drug Testing
Section, 301/443-6014.

Notice announcing administrative hearing to reconsider the decision
to disapprove Minnesota State Plan Amendment, a list of Medicaid
obstetrical and pediatric payment rates and data alleging at least 50
percent of obstetrical and pediatric practitioners are full Medicaid
participants. FR 10-23-91, p. 54876. HHS/HCFA, Docket Clerk,
301/597-3013.

HRSA is accepting applications for fiscal 1992 grants for programs
for physician assistants. Comments due Nov. 20. FR 10-21-91, p.
52552. HHS/HRSA, Judy Bowen, 301/443-6960.

HRSA announces the filing of the Maternal and Child Health Research
Grants Review Committee annual report with the Library of
Congress. FR 10-25-91, p. 55330. HHS/HRSA, Gontran Lamberty,
301/443-2190.

OASH is accepting applications for a continuing cooperative
agreement with the Association of School of Public Health. FR 10-
21-91, p. 52551. HHS/OASH, James Harrell, 202/245-7611.

NIH is seeking agreements with companies for the marketing and
commercialization of cancer information products and services of
the National Cancer Institute to community-based practicing
oncologists via an Integrated Clinical Workstation. FR 10-24-91, p.
55131. Robert Esterhay, 301/496-8880.

Notice outlining the three sets of rates in connection with the
recovery, from tortiously liable third persons, of the cost of
hospital medical care and treatment furnished by the U.S. FR 10-16-
91, p. 51940. OMB, Richard Darman, 202/395-4840.

OSAP is accepting grant applications for projects to enable
communities to implement and systematically study approaches to
prevent and reduce alcohol and other drug abuse through the
development of partnerships of multiple agencies and organizations
at the local level. Deadline is Jan. 20, 1992. FR 10-17-91, p. 52307.
HHS/ADAMHA, OSAP, 301/443-9438.

HHS/OS, self-evaluation and recordkeeping required by regulations
implementing Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (0990-
0124). FR 10-18-91, p. 52271. HHS OS, Reports Clearance Officer,
202/619-0511.

Notice announcing an action taken by the NIH Director under the NIH
Guidelines for Research involving Recombinant DNA Molecules from
May 7, 1986. Effective Dec. 15. FR 10-15-91, p. 51784. HHS/NIH,
Bernadine Healy, 301/496-2433.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-17</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B040-183</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh16.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015920 text/html 40738
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:57:23 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:46 GMT
Content-length: 40551
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh16.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet <BR>
January 9, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>PHYSICIANS SUE N.Y. HEALTH DEPARTMENT OVER HMO CONTRACTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(568 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>EEOC, ERISA PLANS STRUGGLE OVER ADA INTERPRETATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(855 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>PA. BILLS WOULD RESTRICT MCOS' ABILITY TO DENY PAYMENT FOR&nbsp;ER VISITS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(182 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>AWP, PATIENT CHOICE BILLS ANTICIPATED IN OHIO, MICH., IDAHO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(720 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>PENDING ANY WILLING PROVIDER LEGISLATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(7 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>CAPITALCARE TOLD TO RECONSIDER DENIAL OF AIDS PATIENT'S&nbsp;CLAIM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(885 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>ERISA KEEPS A HOLD ON FEDERAL REFORM EFFORTS, REPORT SAYS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(243 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>FLA. COMP LAWYERS PUSH FOR PATIENT CHOICE AMENDMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(593 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>GAO:  ARIZ. POSTS SAVINGS WITH MEDICAID MANAGED CARE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(592 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>AMENDMENTS POSE THREAT TO 'TARGETED' HEALTH REFORM BILL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(624 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>ORE. MCOS PREPARING TO FIGHT PLAN TO BAN CAPITATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(466 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

PHYSICIANS SUE N.Y. HEALTH DEPARTMENT OVER HMO CONTRACTS

A group of physicians, claiming that the New York State
Department of Health failed to review an HMO contract, has
sued the department in an effort to force it to conduct the
required reviews.

The 1,000-member League of Physicians and Surgeons, a New
York City-based advocacy group, said in the suit that the
state agency should not have approved the contract offered
to physicians by ChoiceCare, a Melville, N.Y.-based HMO,
because of a physician "gag rule" and a lack of appeal
rights in the contract.

However, the underlying message in the lawsuit was that the
agency must begin following the rules and review all
contracts presented to it, as required by state law, says
league executive director Yvonne Archer.

"The Department of Health is supposed to approve each new
generation of a contract and evaluate it for any negative
effect" on physicians and/or patients, Archer says.  "That
never seems to get done, so we decided to force the issue.
This puts them on notice that they'd better do what they're
supposed to do."

The group particularly objected in its lawsuit to what it
termed a "gag rule" in the contract, which Archer says
prohibits physicians from discussing the health plan with
patients.  The group also objected to what it termed a lack
of appeal rights for physicians in the contract.

"The gag rule is to keep patients in the dark so they don't
switch plans," said Archer in an interview with Managed Care
Law Outlook.  "What we're talking about is doctors' ability
to freely express to patients any concerns" they might have
about the managed care organization in question, Archer
says.

The league is seeking a judicial order that would force the
health department to review contracts and would require
ChoiceCare to remove or modify the clause that Archer terms
a gag rule.

Health department officials declined comment on the lawsuit.

However, ChoiceCare Senior Vice President of Marketing John
Kaegi says the clause is not a gag rule at all.  "It
protects the doctors as well as us," he says.

The clause, about one paragraph long, states that ChoiceCare
and its contracting physicians agree to protect the rights
of confidentiality of both parties, along with plan members
and patients, Kaegi says.

After the suit was filed, "We considered removing it, but it
wasn't necessary," Kaegi said in an interview.  "Everybody
who's looked at the thing says there's no way it can be
interpreted as a gag order."

Instead of removing the phrase, the managed care
organization decided to provide additional education to
physicians about its meaning, in the form of verbal guidance
from plan representatives in the field, Kaegi says.  On the
subject of appeal rights, Kaegi says the health plan has
"two very distinct appeals processes," one for providers and
one for members.  However, those procedures are spelled out
in an addendum to the physician contract, which the league
"apparently didn't have" when it filed the lawsuit, Kaegi
says.

Kaegi says ChoiceCare has no objection to health department
review of contracts.  "We would encourage the Department of
Health to consider very carefully all language in all
contracts," he says.  "Certainly, the situation of their not
reviewing all contracts is not our doing."

For more information on the lawsuit against the New York
Department of Health, call Archer at (212)768-0605 and Kaegi
at (516)694-4000.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

EEOC, ERISA PLANS STRUGGLE OVER ADA INTERPRETATION

Federal officials' unpredictable interpretations of the
Americans with Disabilities Act are frustrating self-insured
employers' efforts to design healthcare benefits packages,
some industry observers say.  And the federal agency
crafting the final rules isn't likely to clear up the
confusion any time soon.

"We don't have any easy answers," Peggy Mastroianni,
division director with the federal Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission office of legal counsel, told
attendees at the ERISA Industry Committee quarterly meeting
in December.  "We're just starting to develop final guidance
in this area."  She offered no date for when those final
rules will come out.

However, Stephanie Kanwit, vice president for health claims
and litigation at Aetna Life and Casualty Co., blasts the
EEOC for its "attempt to micromanage the American healthcare
system."

Employers are suffering because the rules are not
predictable and provide a powerful disincentive to providing
healthcare benefits, she says.

"In the words of the statute, Congress believed that people
with disabilities are a discrete and insular minority.
That's not what the EEOC is doing," Kanwit says.  EEOC's
interpretation of the ADA ignores legislative history and
ignores legal interpretations of similar anti-discrimination
statutes, she says.

"I feel [the EEOC's] interpretation is counter-productive to
the goals of the agency," she says.

"I have to assume that Congress knew what it was doing when
it passed the ADA," Kanwit says.  "I have to assume that it
does not automatically void ERISA.  The two can co-exist,
but not in the way the EEOC believes."

In the ADA, Congress failed to make clear whether the new
law applied to employer-sponsored health plans, Mastroianni
says.  "What we have tried to do is to provide rules for
evaluating benefits when trying to cut costs," she says.

The EEOC issued interim guidance in 1993 that indicated the
ADA would apply if a coverage limitation applied to a
specific disability.  For example, Mastroianni says, a
blanket pre-existing condition exclusion is not disability-
based, nor are general exclusions of experimental drugs or
limits on pharmaceuticals or X-rays.

In general, less-favorable treatment of mental
health/nervous conditions also is not disability-based
because it involves a wide variety of dissimilar conditions,
she says.

Coverage limits or exclusions that do not affect people with
or without disabilities, or people with a wide variety of
dissimilar conditions, could become subject to the ADA, she
says.

"What is the consequence of a disability-based distinction?"
she asks.  "If it is [disability-based], the employer has to
explain why it is not a subterfuge to evade the purpose of
the ADA.  In cases like this, the burden ought to be on the
employer."

Case law leaves few clues for ERISA plans to follow,
employers find

There has been very little relevant case law on the issue of
disability-based discrimination within health plans,
Mastroianni says, adding, "The law in this area is still
developing."

Employers are having a tough time determining how the ADA
affects their benefits packages, says Kevin Anderson,
director of healthcare initiatives with General Motors Corp.
"With the passage of the ADA, the question is:  What is a
disability under the ADA, and what does it apply to?"
Anderson says.

"Our plan does include limitations on mental health and
substance abuse -- limited in terms of the number of visits
reimbursed," Anderson says, adding that some interpretations
of the ADA would place General Motors in non-compliance with
the law.

Another example in GM's benefits package involves speech
therapy, Anderson says.  The benefit applies only to
children younger than age six, and he says the same question
applies:  Does the ADA impact that benefit?

A third example, Anderson says, is language denying coverage
for experimental procedures, including bone marrow
transplants for women suffering from breast cancer or
patients with AIDS.  In a recent court case, Henderson v.
Bodine Aluminum, the federal 8th Circuit Court of Appeals,
St. Louis, ordered an employer to cover an experimental
breast cancer treatment after the plaintiff alleged that the
denial violated the ADA by denying benefits for breast
cancer but not for other forms of cancer.  The appeals court
returned the case to the district court for a full hearing.

Mastroianni says her office didn't necessarily agree with
the decision in Henderson v. Bodine Aluminum.

"If it's okay to have a general exclusion of experimental
treatments, then why do we have cases like this?" she asks.
"We're looking at it differently.  If we see in a case that
the standards for [coverage of] high-dosage chemotherapy in
breast cancer are different than for other [cancers], the
question then becomes whether exclusions for experimental
treatment are being applied in a discriminatory way."

"Henderson v. Bodine Aluminum is terrible law," Kanwit adds,
noting that in the case, Karen Henderson ultimately was
included in the clinical trial for the experimental
treatment, but ended up in the placebo group, not in the
group receiving the actual treatment.

For additional information on the ADA and ERISA plans,
contact the ERISA Industry Committee at (202)789-1400.

y  Henderson v. Bodine Aluminum, No. 95-2469 (8th Cir. June
16, 1995)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

PA. BILLS WOULD RESTRICT MCOS' ABILITY TO DENY PAYMENT FOR
ER VISITS

Pennsylvania managed care plans would have to foot the bill
for an enrollee's out-of-network emergency room care if a
"reasonable person" would believe the symptoms indicated an
emergency, under legislation recently introduced by two
Keystone State lawmakers.

Acting in response to consumer and provider complaints about
MCOs refusing to reimburse enrollees for certain emergency
room services, state Sens. Roy Afflerbach (D-Lehigh-
Northampton) and Jim Gerlach (R-Chester County) introduced
companion legislation Jan. 4 that the two say will better
regulate and define Pennsylvania MCOs' responsibilities.

Gerlach's S.B. 1356 contains the same language as
legislation introduced in the House by Rep. John A. Lawless
(R-Audubon).  Both apply a "reasonable person" standard to
enrollees who seek emergency care.  Regardless of the final
diagnosis, if it is determined that a reasonable person
experiencing the symptoms described by an enrollee seeking
care would believe it to be an emergency, the patient would
be reimbursed.

The bills will be assigned to committees after state
lawmakers return to work Jan. 22.  For details, call Sen.
Afflerbach's office at (717)787-1349 and Sen. Gerlach's
office at (717)787-1398.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

AWP, PATIENT CHOICE BILLS ANTICIPATED IN OHIO, MICH., IDAHO

Any willing provider legislation and its newer cousins,
freedom of choice and patient protection acts, already have
been introduced in at least 21 states, and it's likely that
the proposals will spark spirited fights between bill
proponents and managed care forces in at least a few of
those states, industry officials say.

It's difficult to say where the AWP "hot spots" might be,
says Herb Schultz, director of state advocacy for the Group
Health Association of America/American Managed Care and
Review Association.  The group is tracking 48 bills,
including carryover legislation from 1995.

"We're at the beginning of it," he says.  "In the next
couple of months we'll see where the trend is.  We expect,
like last year, to see any willing provider, freedom of
choice and other anti-managed care bills in many states."

Schultz adds that the last couple of years have shown that
managed care forces are capable of defeating those bills
when they crop up.  "I'm confident we will be able, as an
industry, to bring information to state legislators that
they need to see on this legislation," he says.

Last year, any willing provider-type bills were introduced
in more than 20 states, Schultz says.  However, only two of
those became law:  In Texas, legislators approved a
pharmacy-only any willing provider bill but vetoed a highly
regulatory patient protection bill, and in Arkansas, a broad
any willing provider bill was enacted.  Several insurers are
challenging the Arkansas law on the grounds that it violates
federal law.

Managed care foes moving away from AWP approach, trying
patient protection tack

The trend appears to be moving away from any willing
provider bills toward broader patient protection measures,
industry analysts say.

More states are considering patient protection act-style
legislation than "pure" any willing provider bills, says Guy
D'Andrea, director of state services for GHAA/AMCRA.

"Patient protection act-type legislation touches on a
variety of subject areas beyond provider participation," he
says.  "It usually focuses more on the process by which
plans make decisions on provider participation, often
stopping short of requiring participation."

However, "there's sometimes a very fine line between patient
protection acts and any willing provider legislation,"
D'Andrea says.

In addition, any willing provider bills that are introduced
often have a broader focus than they might have a few years
ago, D'Andrea says.  "In the past, they focused on
pharmacy," he says.  "Now, it's more common to see an any
willing provider bill that just says 'any willing provider'
[without specifying types of providers].  Obviously, the
more providers you bring under the umbrella, the bigger the
impact on managed care."

Although it's difficult to determine where any willing
provider-type legislation might make progress this year,
managed care forces in several states already have geared up
to fight it:

y  The Association of HMOs in Michigan met last fall with
state Rep. John Jamian (R), who is interested in drafting
patient protection act legislation.  According to the group,
Jamian assured managed care representatives that he did not
want to write an anti-managed care bill, and said the
legislation would not be a vehicle for an any willing
provider proposal.

However, the lawmaker did express concern about
authorization for out-of-panel providers within managed care
organizations, the HMO group said.

The legislation still is being written, according to a
spokeswoman for the group.

y  In Ohio, businesses, insurers, consumer and labor
organizations have formed a coalition to defeat any willing
provider legislation (Managed Care Law Outlook, November
1995).

The group, which calls itself the Coalition for Managed
Care, will oppose legislative initiatives before the Ohio
General Assembly this year.

Several committees already are considering AWP bills,
according to the group.

y  In Idaho, the Idaho Medical Society has distributed a
draft of a proposed patient protection act to industry
leaders for comments.  The draft does not include AWP
language, but does have a requirement that all managed care
entities, except those exempt from federal income tax under
IRS code section 501(c)(3) or (4), offer enrollees a point-
of-service option.

For additional information, contact D'Andrea and Schultz at
(202)778-3200.  Contact the Association of HMOs in Michigan
at (517)371-3181.  Contact the Idaho Medical Association at
(208)344-7888.  Contact the Ohio Coalition for Managed Care
at (800)360-2065.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

PENDING ANY WILLING PROVIDER LEGISLATION

(See original issue)

Source:  GHAA/AMCRA




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

CAPITALCARE TOLD TO RECONSIDER DENIAL OF AIDS PATIENT'S
CLAIM

Managed care organizations need to follow the rules spelled
out in ERISA when making coverage decisions on patients'
claims.  That's the message from a U.S. court of appeals'
decision in Bernstein v. CapitalCare, a legal expert says.

The Dec. 4 decision, from the U.S. Court of Appeals of the
4th Circuit, Richmond, Va., said that CapitalCare, an HMO
subsidiary of Blue Cross and Blue Shield of the National
Capital Area, Washington, D.C., had failed to take all
medical evidence into account when denying coverage for out-
of-area hospital care for Jeffrey Bernstein, an AIDS patient
from Washington, D.C.  The court also found that CapitalCare
had not followed procedures spelled out in ERISA for the
denial of coverage.

The court remanded the case to the U.S. District Court for
the Eastern District of Virginia, Alexandria, with
instructions for CapitalCare to reconsider coverage for
Bernstein's care, this time considering all medical
evidence.  However, the court left it up to CapitalCare
whether to cover the hospital care in question.

The case involved medical care Bernstein, who was an
enrollee in CapitalCare, received in New York in May 1992.

Bernstein was diagnosed as HIV-positive in 1986.  In
February 1992, while in New York, Bernstein was committed to
a psychiatric facility and treated for dementia.  Upon
discharge, Bernstein stayed at his brother Philip's home for
a short time before returning with his brother to his home -
- and to CapitalCare's service area -- in Washington.  He
then went back to New York with his brother.

Several days later, Bernstein began exhibiting stroke-like
symptoms and was taken to the emergency room in Manhattan's
New York Hospital.  He was admitted to the hospital the next
day, and hospital records indicated his hospitalization was
for CNS lymphoma, a form of brain cancer.  He was
transferred to a healthcare facility in Virginia in July
1992 and died a day after arriving.

CapitalCare denied coverage for Bernstein's second
hospitalization, citing his location outside the MCO's
service area and its policy of not providing benefits when
the need for care could have been foreseen.

Bernstein's brother immediately protested the coverage
denial and later took the case to the district court, which
found that "it was reasonably foreseen that [Bernstein]
would need acute medical attention."  The court also found
that it wasn't necessary for the patient to know the
specific illness for which he might be hospitalized.  The
court granted summary judgment to CapitalCare.

The appeals court, however, found that CapitalCare denied
care without following the requirements outlined in ERISA.
In addition, the court said, that denial decision preceded
the arrival of some of Bernstein's medical and hospital
records, meaning that clinicians at CapitalCare could not
have taken that information into account when denying
coverage.

"The initial issue in this appeal is whether the
administrative record before CapitalCare at the time of the
benefit determination contained sufficient evidence to allow
the district court adequately to assess the reasonableness
of the plan's decision," the decision says.  "This threshold
inquiry ensures the plan beneficiary that he or she receives
procedural fairness under the plan and that the plan
administrator's decisions are principled and deliberate."

Unfortunately, the information in the CapitalCare
administrative record did not meet that standard, the court
said.

"The administrative record before CapitalCare at the time it
denied benefits for Jeffrey's hospitalization fails to
adequately document the administrator's decisional process,"
the decision said.  "Indeed, CapitalCare's administrative
record contained very little evidence at all."

The court noted that, at the time of the initial denial, the
administrative record contained only four items, including
phone logs detailing calls from Bernstein's brother during
the illness and information about Bernstein's stay at the
psychiatric facility.

"These documents provide little support for CapitalCare's
initial determination that Jeffrey's need for care was
reasonably foreseeable," the court said.  "Furthermore, no
one at CapitalCare had spoken to Jeffrey's physicians in New
York to ascertain the complete circumstances of his
hospitalization."

CapitalCare maintains that it reviewed the denial after
receiving Bernstein's medical records from New York;
however, the appeals court said that the administrative
record contains no documentation of this review.  The
appeals court returned the case to the district court with
instructions to tell CapitalCare to take another look at its
denial.

The case provides notice to managed care organizations that
they must follow the procedures spelled out in ERISA before
denying coverage, says attorney Charles Steele of Foley &
Lardner in Washington.

However, Steele notes that the court "didn't get into some
of the meatier issues, such as the rights of people with
AIDS to move."

The appeals court did say that "One may presume that at some
point in the progression of an AIDS patient's disease, the
need for hospitalization or acute medical care, because of
some AIDS-related complication, would become foreseeable."

But the court concluded that "such complex medical
determinations are peculiarly within the ken of medical
professionals, not federal judges.  Under a deferential
standard of review, the district court's role is limited to
determining whether those findings are supported by
substantial evidence."

For more information, call Steele at (202)672-5300 or
Richard Carter, of Huggins Carter & Coleman, at (703)684-
3444.

y  Bernstein v. CapitalCare, No. 94-2448 (4th Cir. 1994)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

ERISA KEEPS A HOLD ON FEDERAL REFORM EFFORTS, REPORT SAYS

The Employee Retirement Income Security Act will continue to
be an important influence on private-sector health plans as
legislative initiatives, the healthcare market and legal
doctrine evolve, concludes a new report.

The report, by the Washington, D.C.-based Employee Benefit
Research Institute, says that ERISA, which greatly
influenced debate on President Clinton's healthcare reform
proposals, also is at the center of congressional proposals
for health insurance reform.

State versus federal regulation also is a central point of
contention in the debate over Medicare reform, the report
says.

"The health market has changed fundamentally since ERISA was
enacted in 1974, and the regulatory role of Washington
versus the states is now being reexamined," says EBRI
president Dallas Salisbury, who adds, "The outcome will
affect the health insurance of over 160 million
individuals."

The report includes three sections:  an overview of ERISA
and health regulation by Peter Schmidt of Arnold and Porter;
a section on multi-employer plans by Judy Mazo of the Segal
Company; and a section on ERISA and state health reform
written by Kala Ladenheim of the Intergovernmental Health
Policy Project.

The report examines the following issues:
y  ERISA's broad pre-emptive effect;
y  The changing relationship between three categories of
state health initiatives -- insurance mandates, medical
high-risk pools and uncompensated care pools; and
y  ERISA's effect on the rise in the number of self-funded
plans.

Copies of the study are available for $25.  Call (410)516-
6946.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

FLA. COMP LAWYERS PUSH FOR PATIENT CHOICE AMENDMENT

If a group of workers' compensation lawyers in Florida has
its way, state residents will have the right to select the
healthcare provider of their choice for all care, not just
workers' comp.

Meanwhile, another constitutional issue is erupting in
Florida:  a single-payer effort spearheaded by a group
called the Floridians for Health Security.

The workers' comp lawyers group is pushing a proposed state
constitutional amendment that would guarantee state
residents the right to select the healthcare provider of
their choice.

The group, known as the Florida Workers' Advocates, has
received ballot approval from the state Division of
Elections and has begun collecting signatures to place the
amendment on the ballot via the citizen initiative process.

If the group collects the necessary signatures, the
initiative will be placed on the Florida ballot in 1996.  If
approved, it would affect all managed care in the state --
not just workers' comp managed care.

The amendment reads:  "An individual's absolute right to
select his or her healthcare providers shall not be denied
or limited by law or contract."

Opponents of the initiative -- which include businesses and
insurers -- say it would destroy the state's expanding
managed care industry and would drive insurance rates up.

"We have the highest healthcare costs on the planet, and
this just makes it worse," says Jodi Chase, general counsel
for Associated Industries of Florida.

"This is an attempt by workers' comp lawyers to make more
money," she adds.

Managed care companies and businesses are gearing up to
fight the proposal, and could end up spending millions doing
so if the initiative is included on the ballot in November.

Florida Workers' Advocates first needs to gather 42,945
signatures from registered voters in three congressional
districts.

If that occurs, the measure comes before the attorney
general and the state supreme court.  If they approve it,
the group then must collect and have verified an additional
429,428 signatures from registered voters in at least 12
congressional districts to place the initiative on the 1996
ballot.

Florida is in the process of becoming the first major state
where managed care is mandatory in the workers' comp system.
As a result, the market is heating up as the January 1997
deadline for workers' comp managed care approaches.

If the proposed amendment is approved, some observers say,
it could eliminate the savings that otherwise would be
gained in workers' comp and in the Florida group health
market, which also is undergoing large growth in managed
care.

Although it's not clear what chance the Florida Workers'
Advocates have to place their initiative on the ballot,
attorney Glen Wieland, president of the group, says a poll
shows that Florida voters would approve it overwhelmingly.

According to the poll, which surveyed 500 registered Florida
voters, 73% favor the amendment, 14% oppose it and 10% are
undecided.

The poll was conducted in mid-November by Hill Research
Consultants, a Houston-based public opinion research firm
that has been involved in three successful referendum
efforts in Florida.

The single payer initiative, which according to Florida
Association of HMOs industry analyst Richard Dorff "has much
less impetus than the any willing provider initiative,"
would create a statewide single payer system in Florida.

The ballot initiative would "provide all persons the right
to comprehensive healthcare services from the healthcare
provider of their choice in a single-payer healthcare
system."  It also contains any willing provider language.

Call Wieland at (407)841-7698.  Contact Dorff at (904)386-
2904.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

GAO:  ARIZ. POSTS SAVINGS WITH MEDICAID MANAGED CARE

Arizona's Medicaid cost-containment program has saved the
federal government and the state millions over the past
several years, showing that it's possible to control costs
by fostering competition and monitoring plan performance, a
new government report shows.

The General Accounting Office report, "Arizona Medicaid:
Competition Among Managed Care Plans Lowers Program Costs,"
found that the state succeeded in containing costs by
developing a competitive Medicaid healthcare market in which
health plans that submit capitation rates higher than their
competitors' rates risk losing Medicaid contracts.

"While other states' per capita costs for Medicaid have
continued to grow, Arizona's capitation rates declined by
11% in 1994," the report says.  "Reviews have also shown
that, since its inception, the per capita growth rate for
Arizona's program has been less than the national per capita
growth rate for states with traditional Medicaid programs."

Arizona's Medicaid program has been different from the
start.  The state never participated in the traditional fee-
for-service Medicaid program, implementing instead in 1982 a
program that mandates managed care for all beneficiaries and
capitates health plans.

The program, Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System,
features a competitive contract award process to purchase
healthcare services from private- or county-operated
healthcare plans.  The capitation rate is set after a
bidding process in which health plans submit separate bids
for each county they want to serve.

Health plan contracts stipulate specific provider networks,
which the state says ensures provider availability in both
urban and rural locations.  The state also monitors the
medical and financial performance of contracting plans.

The program has worked to control costs, the GAO report
found.  It saved the federal government $37 million and the
state $15 million in acute care costs in 1991, according to
the latest study available on Arizona's cost-containment
performance as compared to similar states with traditional
Medicaid programs.

AHCCCS capitation rates fell, on average, by 11% from 1994
to 1995, even though average spending per Medicaid
beneficiary was projected to rise nationally during the same
period.  The cost of serving beneficiaries in the AHCCCS
program already was below the cost that would have been
incurred in a traditional Medicaid program.

The GAO report concludes that a major factor in cost-
containment was the competitive bidding process.  "Plans are
not assured of winning a contract; consequently, they have
an incentive to submit the lowest bid for which they can
provide the required beneficiary services and still earn a
profit," the GAO report says.

Twenty-one plans submitted 95 bids to provide Medicaid
services in Arizona's 15 counties for the 1995-1997 contract
period.  AHCCCS awarded 42 contracts to 14 of the 21
bidders, including both commercial and non-commercial health
plans, according to the report.

Health plans serving Arizona Medicaid beneficiaries are
exposed to greater risk than under previous contracts.

AHCCCS health plans earned a combined $44 million in profits
in 1993, which represented about 5.4% of revenue, the report
says.  However, the focus on cost and cost-containment "does
not appear to harm access to appropriate care," the report
says.

"Several indicators suggest that beneficiary satisfaction is
high," the GAO says.  That may be because the program places
more weight on access and quality factors than it does on
capitation rates, requires networks to meet certain
standards for primary care coverage and routinely monitors
health plans' financial and operational performance, the
report says.

Additionally, AHCCCS is set to implement a new quality
management system emphasizing outcome-based clinical
measures, the report says.

Contact the GAO at (202)512-6000.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

AMENDMENTS POSE THREAT TO 'TARGETED' HEALTH REFORM BILL

Bipartisan congressional legislation that would make health
insurance more accessible and portable has fairly broad
support and could come to the Senate floor soon, an industry
analyst says.  But that bill also could be sunk by several
possible amendments, including one prohibiting lifetime caps
on benefits, the analyst says.

The bill, S. 1028, was introduced by Senate Labor Committee
chair Nancy Kassebaum (R-Kan.) and Ranking Member Edward
Kennedy (D-Mass.) and is co-sponsored by 24 senators.

The proposal would:
y  Limit the use of pre-existing condition exclusions.  For
people who change jobs, otherwise applicable pre-existing
condition exclusions would be reduced by one month for each
month of prior qualifying coverage.
y  Provide insurance market reforms such as guaranteed
availability and renewability.
y  Provide limited federal pre-emption for fully-insured
purchasing cooperatives.
y  Clarify certain COBRA continuation coverage requirements.

The legislation has a number of holds on it, and "the odds
are against it coming to the floor under unanimous consent,"
said ERISA Industry Committee legislative analyst Anthony
Knettel at the group's quarterly meeting in December.  "But
there has been discussion about Kennedy offering it as an
amendment to another bill.  It could come up at any time in
that way.

"There are some substantial obstacles to the bill coming up
on the Senate floor," Knettel says, adding, however, "It's
being taken seriously."  The problem isn't so much the
proposal itself, Knettel says.  "What has caused a lot of
the controversy are possible amendments to S. 1028."

The most likely amendment is one that would prohibit
lifetime caps on benefits, Knettel says.  That would have a
huge impact on employer-sponsored benefit plans, he warns.

"Even if the amendment is relatively narrow in scope, the
consequences for employer-sponsored plans are potentially
significant, depending on the caps used by particular
plans," Knettel's group wrote in a paper on the subject.
Since some employers can only afford to offer coverage if it
has a low lifetime cap -- for example, about $250,000 --
"the effect would be devastating for some," according to the
analysis.

"Prohibiting the use of lifetime caps will force some
employers to drop coverage entirely, while others will be
forced to use higher cost-sharing and/or a narrower scope of
covered benefits to offset the increased plan costs," the
group said.  "The most likely effect of the amendment will
be to extend coverage for a relative few and to reduce or
eliminate coverage for many more."

Another likely amendment would require parity in the
treatment of mental illness.  The most likely language would
require parity for "serious mental illnesses," according to
the ERISA Industry Committee.  "That appears to mean, at a
minimum, drawing a distinction between 'serious' mental
illnesses like schizophrenia or bipolar disorder and
situations like marriage counseling that are not treatment
of a specific mental illness."

"It would require health plans to treat mental health
services in a comparable or equal way" to other services
offered in benefits packages, Knettel says.  For example, if
a plan placed limits on inpatient days for mental health
treatment, but did not have limits on other treatment,
"there is some question whether this amendment would require
you to equalize that."

Knettel adds:  "The impact of this kind of amendment could
be enormous in terms of bringing the scope of mental health
coverage up to everything else, or bringing everything else
down."

The amendments eliminating lifetime caps and requiring
parity are the most likely to be offered, Knettel says,
although other proposals might also be proffered.

Another possible amendment would require health plans to
extend hospital maternity stays, likely to 48 hours for a
vaginal delivery and 96 hours for a Caesarean delivery.

Contact Knettel at (202)789-1400.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

ORE. MCOS PREPARING TO FIGHT PLAN TO BAN CAPITATION

Predicting steep healthcare cost increases, Oregon HMO
administrators, employers and primary care physicians are
gearing up to stop a ballot initiative that would
effectively end capitation in the Beaver State.

The proposed referendum, which would ban capitation payments
to providers, has garnered nearly one-third of the 76,000
signatures it needs to be placed on the November ballot,
according to Tom Mann, the initiative's campaign director.

The language of the bill -- written by Salem ophthalmologist
Gordon Miller -- establishes five acceptable methods of
reimbursement for providers:  payment for work performed;
hourly wage; prearranged salary/benefits; bonuses based on
work performed; and reimbursement for expenses.  All other
forms of reimbursement, including any newly developed
payment strategies, would be banned.

Should the bill pass, HMO administrators predict premiums
will increase significantly.

The bill would likely precipitate a 10% to 15% increase in
premium rates, says Providence Good Health Plans Executive
Director Jack Friedman.  The state would see an even larger
rise in the cost of serving its Medicare beneficiaries,
where increases in Medicare supplemental and risk plan costs
could go higher than 20%, he predicts.

Oregon Blue Cross/Blue Shield Vice President of Corporate
Development Barney Speight expresses similar concern for the
state's recently restructured Medicaid program, which has
moved 80% to 90% of its eligibles into managed care.

But while Miller agrees that there may be an initial jump in
premium costs, he says the cost of comprehensive medical
care will remain largely unaffected by changes in pay
structure.

The Oregon Medical Association hasn't taken sides yet.  But
because of the diversity of its membership, says OMA
Executive Director Robert Dernedde, it's unlikely that the
association would support the initiative.

Miller contends that capitation arrangements are immoral,
saying they cause physicians to withhold care out of
financial interest.  "If you ever say anything different to
a patient because of financial status, you have compromised
your medical ethics," says Miller, who adds that in a
capitated market, all doctors will have to meet the contract
costs of the least ethical physician.

"I've always been very deeply disturbed by those
allegations," Speight says.  "[They] paint doctors totally
as economic entities."

Proponents of the initiative are fairly confident that the
measure will receive enough signatures to make it on the
November ballot, and even those most staunchly opposed to
the legislation seem to agree.

That sets the stage for a sizable conflict come November,
when a wide array of bill opponents could come out against
the legislation.

"I believe there will be an opposition campaign," says
Speight, who adds that employer groups and primary care
physicians would probably be part of a multi-disciplinary
movement against the measure.

Call Tom Mann at (503)370-2318 and Providence Good Health
Plans at (503)215-7500.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-18</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B041-16</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh12.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015936 text/html 29691
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:57:42 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:47 GMT
Content-length: 29504
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh12.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNet <BR>
January 12, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>ORE. MCOS GEARING UP TO FIGHT PROPOSED END OF CAPITATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(539 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>PROJECTED HOSPITAL UTILIZATION RATES PER 100,000 COVERED&nbsp;LIVES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(9 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>PA. BILLS WOULD RESTRICT ER PAYMENT DENIALS FOR MCOS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(510 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>CONSUMERS GIVE FOR-PROFIT HMOS QUALITY EDGE, SURVEY FINDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(62 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>CONSUMER PROTECTION REGS "UNIFORM," GHAA/AMCRA SAYS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(283 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>AWP FIGHT HEATS UP AS 1996 LEGISLATIVE SESSION OPENS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(321 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>PSNS, PREMIUM BATTLES AHEAD FOR MCOS IN 1996, EXPERT SAYS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1235 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>REGIONAL NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>CALIF. OFFICIALS OKAY CAREMARK'S PURCHASE OF CIGNA MEDICAL&nbsp;GROUP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(58 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>FHP/CMG COLORADO DEAL EXTENDED UNTIL DECEMBER 1998</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(64 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>PURCHASE OF THREE IPAS EXPANDS FPA'S GOLDEN STATE PRESENCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(56 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>INTEGRATED HEALTH SERVICES INKS NEV. CONTRACT WITH SIERRA&nbsp;HEALTH SERVICES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(59 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>COMPDENT EXPANDS MANAGED DENTAL PLAN WITH TEXAS FFS PLAN&nbsp;PURCHASE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(46 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>WELLCARE GETS GREEN LIGHT FOR PLANNED BROOME COUNTY, N.Y.,&nbsp;HMO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(66 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>WELLPOINT TO BUY MASS MUTUAL'S HEALTH SUBSIDIARY IN $380&nbsp;MILLION DEAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(55 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><LI>CCN TEAMS WITH CHICAGO EMPLOYERS ON CARDIAC CARE PILOT&nbsp;PROGRAM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(82 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>ARIZONA'S MEDICAID MANAGED CARE SAVING MILLIONS IN COSTS,&nbsp;GAO SAYS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(142 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

ORE. MCOS GEARING UP TO FIGHT PROPOSED END OF CAPITATION

by David McGuire

An Oregon ballot initiative that would effectively end
capitation in the Beaver State has HMO administrators,
employers and primary care physicians concerned about their
futures and the future of the state's healthcare system.

The proposed referendum, which would ban capitation payments
to providers, has garnered nearly one-third of the 76,000
signatures it needs to be placed on the November ballot,
according to Tom Mann, the initiative's campaign director.

The language of the bill -- written by Salem ophthalmologist
Gordon Miller -- establishes five acceptable methods of
reimbursement for providers:  payment for work performed;
hourly wage; prearranged salary/benefits; bonuses based on
work performed; and reimbursement for expenses.  All other
forms of reimbursement, including any newly developed
payment strategies, would be banned.

Should the bill pass, HMO administrators predict premiums
will increase significantly.

The bill would likely precipitate a 10% to 15% increase in
premium rates, says Providence Good Health Plans Executive
Director Jack Friedman.  The state would see an even larger
rise in the cost of serving its Medicare beneficiaries,
where increases in Medicare supplemental and risk plan costs
could go higher than 20%, he predicts.

Oregon Blue Cross/Blue Shield Vice President of Corporate
Development Barney Speight expresses similar concern for the
state's recently restructured Medicaid program, which has
moved 80% to 90% of its eligibles into managed care.

But while Miller agrees that there may be an initial jump in
premium costs, he says the cost of comprehensive medical
care will remain largely unaffected by changes in pay
structure.

"There is no question that if physicians are withholding
care [because of capitation], premiums will be up," he says.
"But as for cost of service, it's a wash."

The Oregon Medical Association hasn't taken sides yet.  But
because of the diversity of its membership, says OMA
Executive Director Robert Dernedde, it's unlikely that the
association would support the initiative.

Miller contends that capitation arrangements are immoral,
saying they cause physicians to withhold care out of
financial interest.

"If you ever say anything different to a patient because of
financial status, you have compromised your medical ethics,"
says Miller, who adds that in an increasingly capitated
market, all doctors will have to meet the contract costs of
the least ethical physician.

"I've always been very deeply disturbed by those
allegations," Speight says.  "[They] paint doctors totally
as economic entities.

"Any reimbursement system is flawed because it's dealing
with human motivations," he adds, who says there is "as much
evil on the fee-for-service side" as there is in capitated
arrangements.

Proponents of the initiative are fairly confident that the
measure will receive enough signatures to make it on the
November ballot, and even those most staunchly opposed to
the legislation seem to agree.

That sets the stage for a sizable conflict come November,
when a wide array of bill opponents could come out against
the legislation.

"I believe there will be an opposition campaign," says
Speight, who adds that employer groups and primary care
physicians would probably be part of a multi-disciplinary
movement against the measure.

For more information, contact Tom Mann at (503)370-2318 and
Providence Good Health Plans at (503)215-7500.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

PROJECTED HOSPITAL UTILIZATION RATES PER 100,000 COVERED
LIVES

(See original issue)

Source:  Chi Systems Inc.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

PA. BILLS WOULD RESTRICT ER PAYMENT DENIALS FOR MCOS

Pennsylvania managed care plans would have to foot the bill
for an enrollee's out-of-network emergency room care if a
"reasonable person" would believe the symptoms indicated an
emergency, under legislation recently introduced by two
Keystone State lawmakers.

Acting in response to consumer and provider complaints about
MCOs refusing to reimburse enrollees for certain emergency
room services, state Sens. Roy Afflerbach (D-Lehigh-
Northampton) and Jim Gerlach (R-Chester County) introduced
companion legislation Jan. 4 that the two say will better
regulate and define Pennsylvania MCOs' responsibilities.

State MCOs have not taken a stand on the bills, but Gerlach
suspects positions will become clearer as the two pieces of
legislation gain momentum in the Senate.

"You shouldn't be sitting at home with chest pains saying,
'Is this a heart attack or not,'" says Gerlach, adding that
while an MCO's ability to control costs is important, the
lives of patients must take precedent.

Gerlach's S.B. 1356 contains the same language as
legislation introduced in the House by Rep. John A. Lawless
(R-Audubon).  Both apply a "reasonable person" standard to
enrollees who seek emergency care.  Regardless of the final
diagnosis, if it is determined that a reasonable person
experiencing the symptoms described by an enrollee seeking
care would believe it to be an emergency, the patient would
be reimbursed.

"The idea is to make a definition that is standard," says
Gerlach spokeswoman Carol Hilty.  "We don't want to penalize
insurance companies."

Companion ER legislation's requirements even stricter on
MCOs

Afflerbach's S.B. 1357 would extend consumer protection a
bit further than Gerlach's proposal.  If passed, it would
require plans to reimburse enrollees for services performed
to the point when a patient's condition is stabilized.

The bill adds that reimbursement may be refused only if it
is found that the services charged for were not performed.
MCOs may also deny payment for medical screening
examinations in "cases when the plan enrollee reasonably
should have known that an emergency did not exist."

Under S.B. 1357, MCOs that require authorization for payment
would have to maintain a 24-hour hotline for emergency room
providers and enrollees to obtain approval for care.

It also stipulates that a physician and a surgeon be
available to mediate authorization disputes.

If the emergency provider and hotline physician still
disagree over treatment, the MCO would be required to take
over the care of the patient either by sending a doctor to
the location or arranging transfer to a plan hospital.

Neither bill pleases the Pennsylvania Hospital Association,
says its director of state legislation, Kathleen Mebus.
Although the association supports the bills' premise, both
are "Band-Aid remedies" to a more serious problem, says
Mebus.

"We have no utilization review standards in this state,"
says Mebus, who believes that the proliferation of consumer
protection legislation in Pennsylvania only obscures that
fact.

The bills will be assigned to committees after state
lawmakers return to work Jan. 22.

For more information, call Sen. Afflerbach's office at
(717)787-1349 and Sen. Gerlach's office at (717)787-1398.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

CONSUMERS GIVE FOR-PROFIT HMOS QUALITY EDGE, SURVEY FINDS

Consumers give for-profit HMOs the edge in efficiency, but
believe not-for-profit HMOs are less costly, a study
released by the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation finds.
According to the study, most Americans think that, while
for-profit HMOs are generally more efficient and provide
better quality care, not-for-profit HMOs are more community-
based and less costly.  For more information, call (202)347-
5270.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

CONSUMER PROTECTION REGS "UNIFORM," GHAA/AMCRA SAYS

Disputing a recent study critical of states' HMO consumer
protection regulations, the Group Health Association of
America/American Managed Care and Review Association says
there is a great deal of uniformity in the levels of HMO
regulation and oversight from one state to another.

A study by the Los Angeles-based Center for Health Care
Rights found wide disparities in the level of consumer
protection afforded HMO enrollees in various states (MCO,
Dec. 29).  Study authors further indicated that in most
states the level of protection was insufficient.

Not so, according to the newly merged GHAA/AMCRA, which
released a statement claiming problems with the survey's
premise and methodology.  "To a large extent, I think the
report is misleading," says GHAA/AMCRA Vice President Garry
Carneal.  "More states are up to speed than not."

GHAA/AMCRA says CHCR failed to take into account the
overlapping federal and private oversight measures that
affect HMOs.  By focusing solely on written state
legislation, says Carneal, CHCR reported much wider
disparities than actually exist.

"Fifty percent of HMOs have applied for National Committee
on Quality Assurance accreditation," says Carneal, who adds
that with the combination of federal and state HMO acts,
HMOs are far more closely watched than fee-for-service
insurers.

CHCR defends its study, however, asserting that despite
private accreditation and federal oversight, significant
shortfalls in state legislation in the areas of quality
assurance, information disclosure and grievance procedures
are still very much an issue.

"[GHAA/AMCRA's] assertion is that healthcare is a nationally
regulated industry, and that's just not the case," says CHCR
Counsel Peter Lee.

For more information on the consumer protection study,
contact CHCR at (213)383-4519.  For details, contact
GHAA/AMCRA
at (202)778-3200.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

AWP FIGHT HEATS UP AS 1996 LEGISLATIVE SESSION OPENS

Any-willing-provider legislation and its newer cousins,
freedom-of-choice and patient-protection acts, already have
been introduced in at least 21 states, and it's likely that
the proposals will spark spirited fights between bill
proponents and managed care forces in at least a few of
those states, industry officials say.

It's difficult to say where the AWP "hot spots" might be,
says Herb Schultz, director of state advocacy for the Group
Health Association of America/American Managed Care and
Review Association.  The group is tracking 48 bills,
including carry-over legislation from 1995.

Despite the uncertainty, managed care forces in several
states already have geared up to fight it:

*  The Association of HMOs in Michigan met last fall with
state Rep. John Jamian (R), who is interested in drafting
patient protection act legislation.  According to the group,
Jamian assured managed care representatives that he did not
want to write an anti-managed care bill, and said the
legislation would not be a vehicle for an any-willing-
provider proposal.  However, the lawmaker did express
concern about authorization for out-of-panel providers
within managed care organizations, the HMO group said.  The
legislation still is being written, according to a
spokeswoman for the group.

*  In Ohio, businesses, insurers, consumer and labor
organizations have formed a coalition to defeat any-willing-
provider legislation (Managed Care Law Outlook, November
1995).  The group, which calls itself the "Coalition for
Managed Care," will oppose legislative initiatives before
the Ohio General Assembly this year.  Several committees
already are considering AWP bills, according to the group.

*  In Idaho, the Idaho Medical Society has distributed a
draft of a proposed patient-protection act to industry
leaders for comments.  The draft does not include AWP
language, but does have a requirement that all managed care
entities, except those exempt from federal income tax under
IRS code section 501(c)(3) or (4), offer a point-of-service
option to all enrollees.

Call Schultz at (202)778-3200.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

PSNS, PREMIUM BATTLES AHEAD FOR MCOS IN 1996, EXPERT SAYS

by Russell C. Coile, Jr.

What's in store for managed care organizations in 1996?  The
healthcare market will begin changing dramatically as payers
demand even lower prices and provider-sponsored networks
battle established MCOs for Medicare dollars, predicts
Russell C. Coile, Jr., president of the Health Forecasting
Group, Santa Clarita, Calif.

Competition, capitation and consolidation are at the
forefront of the forces that will drive health trends in
1996.  It's all part of the re-engineering of the American
healthcare market, propelled by payers -- employers,
business coalitions and government -- who are demanding and
getting lower prices and reduced expenditures from the
healthcare sector.

The year ahead will be a war over the premium.  Price wars
between HMOs and insurers are expanding on a national basis.
The decline in HMO/insurance premiums is triggering a wave
of health industry consolidations and deeply slashed
provider payments.  Angered by the cuts, physicians and
hospitals are organizing their own provider-sponsored
networks and fighting back.  The year ahead will be a battle
between providers and payers to control more of the
shrinking premium.

Purchasers will win, providers will lose

Purchasers and government health programs are "winners,"
delighted that national health inflation is coming down.
Corporate health benefit costs rose only 2% from 1994 to
1995, due to widespread switching by employers to managed
care.  Employer-sponsored health costs were one-third below
the level of consumer inflation, according to the
Philadelphia-based Hay Group.

Health plans and providers will be "losers," as price
competition starts a downward spiral for HMO profits and
provider payments.  For the first time in a decade, medical
care prices slipped down to the level of overall consumer
inflation, rising only 0.3% in October 1995, according to
the Wall Street Journal.

Managed care and employer-driven price competition are
slashing health costs.  As recently as 1988, the nation's
healthcare prices were soaring at an annual rate of 14%.
Government payment cuts and private-sector competition are
looming for 1996.  The impact of those trends will ripple
across America's $1 trillion health system, affecting every
hospital, physician, health plan and consumer.

Premium wars could turn ugly

Economic competition between providers and payers --
HMOs/insurers -- over control of the premium could turn ugly
in 1996.  All buyers -- employers, business coalitions and
government programs -- are driving cost competition among
HMOs and insurers.  In 1995, HMO prices fell by 1.2%.  The
down cycle is not over.  Early signals for HMO prices
indicate that health plan premiums will range from no
increases to 2% to 3% rollbacks from 1995 price levels.

In Northern California, which is an emerging "Stage Five"
market including many metropolitan areas with more than 40%
HMO enrollment, the average health plan premium has shrunk
50% in a 10-year period, from $2,460 per enrollee for a
managed care plan in 1986 to $1,260 for HMO coverage in
1995, according to Steve McDermott, CEO of PriMed Inc. and
executive director of the Hill Medical Group, San Ramon,
Calif.  PriMed manages more than 250,000 capitated lives
through a network of 2,160 physicians.

In 1986, hospitals got 41% of the premium, and physician
services accounted for 33%.  Doctors increased their share
of premium to 37% in 1995, while the hospital component
shrank to 30%.  The big winner was the payer, whose
administrative costs and profits grew from 14% in 1986 to
21% today, according to McDermott.

Newt Gingrich:  "Health reform czar"?

Move over Hillary.  Newt Gingrich is the next "health reform
czar" for the 1990s.  The Republican-driven federal budget
reconciliation act of 1996 would end the Great Society
commitment to healthcare for the poor and elderly, according
to the Wall Street Journal.  House Speaker Newt Gingrich's
(R-Ga.) deficit-reduction proposal is the most sweeping
federal health program reform legislation since 1983, when
Congress converted Medicare to a prepaid health plan.
Wrenching cuts in Medicare and Medicaid spending may total
some $440 billion in the next seven years.  Doctors could
see their federal payments reduced by almost $30 billion,
while hospitals could lose $120 billion or more.

That strategy leans more toward Margaret Thatcher than
Hillary Rodham Clinton.  Medicare and Medicaid would be
privatized, with incentives for conversion to HMOs.

The result would be a multi-tiered health system in which
beneficiaries choose health plans with different coverages,
depending on their ability to pay extra for wider provider
choice or scope of benefits.

Federal budget battles could lead to "unbundled" GOP health
reforms

Extended wrangling between the White House and GOP
Congressional majority could delay -- but probably not stop
-- GOP-led health reform initiatives.  If Republicans cannot
overcome Clinton vetoes, the GOP may take an "unbundled"
approach to health reform, inserting pieces of their health
reform strategy into other legislation.  Key objectives for
Republican health reformers include:

y  Placing spending limits on entitlement programs such as
Medicare and Medicaid.
y  Reducing Medicare and Medicaid spending and holding down
federal expenditures to 4% to 7% annual increases for the
next five to seven years.
y  Conversion of Medicaid to a block-grant program managed
by the states.
y  Conversion of Medicare to a managed care program that
puts HMOs and provider-sponsored networks -- not government
-- at risk for managing health costs.
y  Caps on Medicare hospital and physician payments.
y  Provider-sponsored networks to allow physicians and
hospitals to enroll Medicare beneficiaries without an HMO
license.
y  Small-business insurance reforms to eliminate waiting
periods, pre-existing conditions and experience ratings.
y  Malpractice reform that limits "pain-and-suffering" non-
medical damages to $250,000 per case.
y  Medical IRAs and medical savings accounts.
y  Reducing subsidies for teaching hospitals and
"disproportionate share" facilities.
y  Protecting rural hospitals.

Are PSNs unfair competition -- or MCO business
opportunities?

The "silver lining" in the massive budget reconciliation
bill is congressional support for provider-sponsored
networks.  Here is a compelling rationale for the 3,000
physician-hospital organizations and integrated networks.
PSNs would give physicians and hospitals a new managed care
vehicle to compete for control of the premium.  The PSN
concept may help level the playing field between providers
and payers.

There could be thousands of PSNs competing for certification
by the Health Care Financing Administration to enroll 37
million Medicare beneficiaries.  New competitors would
potentially include an estimated 3,000 physician-hospital
organizations, hundreds of large physician groups and dozens
of regional integrated delivery systems.

Becoming a PSN could be risky business.  PSNs may need more
experienced partners, such as HMOs and insurers, to control
costs and manage the network.  Managing risk will be the
make-or-break challenge of provider-sponsored networks and,
outside of California, most providers have little or no
experience in capitation.

Providers may turn to HMOs and insurers for cost management,
quality control and information systems under a variety of
PSN-HMO arrangements, including those in which providers:

y  "Rent" the HMO/insurer to manage the network, a technique
called administrative services only, in which managed care
plans often contract with self-funded employer health plans.
y  Utilize an independent third-party administrator to link
the provider network contractually, manage contracting and
control utilization and quality.
y  Form strategic business relationships with the
HMO/insurer for management services on a profit-sharing
basis (but no equity sharing).
y  Joint venture with shared HMO/insurer equity in the PSN,
where providers develop the healthcare delivery network and
the HMO/insurer supplies the fiscal and management services.

Contact Coile at (805)286-1085.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

CALIF. OFFICIALS OKAY CAREMARK'S PURCHASE OF CIGNA MEDICAL
GROUP

Following approval by the California Department of
Corporations, Caremark's sub-sidiary, Friendly Hills, La
Habra, Calif., has finalized its purchase of CIGNA Medical
Group, CIGNA HealthCare's Los Angeles-based staff-model
delivery system.  The deal will expand the Friendly Hills
system to cover about 400,000 HMO members in Southern
California.  For more information on the acquisition,
contact CIGNA
at (818)500-6948.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

FHP/CMG COLORADO DEAL EXTENDED UNTIL DECEMBER 1998

FHP Health Care, Englewood, Colo., and Columbine Medical
Group of Colorado will extend their existing mutual contract
for three more years.  CMG is the exclusive Denver area
provider of physician services to the Colorado region of
FHP.  CMG serves about 180,000 FHP HMO members in the area
and an additional 17,000 members of FHP's Senior Plan.  For
further information, call FHP at (303)714-3082.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

PURCHASE OF THREE IPAS EXPANDS FPA'S GOLDEN STATE PRESENCE

FPA Medical Management, a multi-state healthcare management
services organization, has signed a definitive agreement to
purchase three California IPAs affiliated with Foundation
Health Corporation and its HMO subsidiary, Foundation
Health.  The IPAs slated for purchase have about 450 primary
care physicians and 2,000 specialists in the Golden State.
For more information, contact FPA at (619)295-7005.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

INTEGRATED HEALTH SERVICES INKS NEV. CONTRACT WITH SIERRA
HEALTH SERVICES

Integrated Health Services of Maryland has entered an
exclusive capitation contract to provide subacute care,
long-term care and outpatient rehabilitation services to
members of Health Plan Nevada, a subsidiary of Sierra Health
Services.  HPN is one of Nevada's largest HMOs, with more
than 112,000 commercial enrollees and 24,000 Medicare
managed care plan enrollees.  For details, call (212)696-
4455.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

COMPDENT EXPANDS MANAGED DENTAL PLAN WITH TEXAS FFS PLAN
PURCHASE

Managed dental care company CompDent Corp., Atlanta, has
purchased Texas Dental Plans/Dental Plan
International/Dental Plan Resources, a fee-for-service
dental referral company based in San Antonio.  With the
acquisition, CompDent covers 1.8 million plan members in 23
states.  For more information, call CompDent at (404)998-
8936.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

WELLCARE GETS GREEN LIGHT FOR PLANNED BROOME COUNTY, N.Y.,
HMO

WellCare of New York Inc., a subsidiary of the WellCare
Management Group Inc., has been approved by the New York
Department of Health to operate an HMO in Broome County,
including the city of Binghamton.  Serving more than 98,000
members in New York, WellCare hopes to increase HMO
saturation in the county, which currently has only 13% HMO
enrollment.  For details, call WellCare at (914)338-4110.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

WELLPOINT TO BUY MASS MUTUAL'S HEALTH SUBSIDIARY IN $380
MILLION DEAL

Managed care giant WellPoint Health Networks Inc., Woodland
Hills, Calif., has signed a definitive agreement to buy
Group Life and Health, a subsidiary of Massachusetts Mutual
Life Insurance Company, for about $380 million.  The deal
will create one of the nation's largest publicly held
managed care organizations, with nearly 4 million members.
Call (818)703-4321.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

CCN TEAMS WITH CHICAGO EMPLOYERS ON CARDIAC CARE PILOT
PROGRAM

In an effort to reduce the incidence, severity and cost of
heart disease, Chicago area companies and hospitals are
teaming with the Employers Healthcare Purchasing Initiative
for Quality and Value Health's Community Care Network, a
managed care organization, to launch a pilot program aimed
at high-risk patients.  The key element of the Coordinated
Cardiac Care Project is a free year-long counseling and
support program for employees at risk for coronary artery
disease and other heart problems.  For more information,
call (203)678-3472.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

ARIZONA'S MEDICAID MANAGED CARE SAVING MILLIONS IN COSTS,
GAO SAYS

Arizona's Medicaid cost-containment program has saved the
federal government and the state millions over the past
several years, showing that it's possible to control costs
by fostering competition and monitoring plan performance, a
new government report shows.

The General Accounting Office report, "Arizona Medicaid:
Competition Among Managed Care Plans Lowers Program Costs,"
found that the state succeeded in containing costs by
developing a competitive Medicaid healthcare market in which
health plans that submit capitation rates higher than their
competitors' rates risk losing Medicaid contracts.

The program, Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System,
features a competitive contract award process to purchase
healthcare services from private- or county-operated
healthcare plans.  The capitation rate is set after a
bidding process in which health plans submit separate bids
for each county they want to serve.  For copies of the
report, call GAO at (202)512-6000.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-19</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B041-38</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh62.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015952 text/html 43458
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:57:58 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:36 GMT
Content-length: 43271
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh62.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet <BR>
February 26, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>Mass. Blue Cross' Medicare HMO First to Get Hit by&nbsp;New HCFA Sanctions</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(214 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Penn. Medicaid Program to Mandate 438,000 into&nbsp;Managed Care Plans</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(364 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>HMOs' Voluntary Compliance Squelches Colo. Maternity Bill</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(249 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Medicare Adding Procedures To Bundled Payment Demo</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(224 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Mayo's Jacksonville Clinic, Ga. IDS Seeking HMO Licenses</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(294 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>WellPoint, Trigon Struggle With Charitable Obligations</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(402 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>GHAA/AMCRA Changes Name, Courts PPOs, UR Firms</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(137 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>MANAGED CARE BRIEFS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(306 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MANAGED CARE STATS & FACTS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>Mortality, Hospital Costs Drop As Managed Care&nbsp;Spreads </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(162 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>24 States Mandate or Regulate Workers' Comp&nbsp;Managed Care</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(136 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>Physician Practices Worth More In High Managed&nbsp;Care Markets</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(123 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>Success of IPA, Network HMOs Not Linked to Care&nbsp;Quality</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(202 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>State Employees Offered More HMOs in 1995</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(175 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>Oxford Shines, HIP Stumbles, Says New York&nbsp;Public Advocate</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(243 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><LI>California's HMOs Show Widely Varying&nbsp;Utilization</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(233 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>California's Nonprofit HMOs Have Highest Medical&nbsp;Loss Ratios </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(242 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><LI>Maternity Stay Lengths Shrink For Women in Twin&nbsp;Cities </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(214 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><LI>Medicare HMO Members Satisfied In Southern&nbsp;California</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(198 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>Studies in Brief</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(234 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>Medicare Managed Care Update</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(81 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PROVIDER CONTRACTING & CAPITATION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#21"><A HREF = "#21"><LI>Admar PPO, Hancock POS Test Risk Pools, Bonuses to&nbsp;Boost Physician Performance</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(618 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>HMO Puts IDS at Full Risk For Plan's Medicare Population</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(467 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Mass. Blue Cross' Medicare HMO First to Get Hit by
New HCFA Sanctions


HCFA has slapped intermediate sanctions on Blue Cross and Blue
Shield of Massachusetts for "knowingly" including misleading
marketing information in its Medicare HMO application, according to
a HCFA source.
In freezing the enrollment and marketing functions of Blue Cross'
"Blue Care 65" HMO product, the action represents the first time
HCFA has levied intermediate sanctions on a Medicare risk-contract
HMO.
The sanctions are expected to take effect in March and stay in
place pending the outcome of a HCFA investigation, the agency
source told MCW. 
Blue Cross apparently claimed a number of non-contracted physicians
were in the Blue Care 65 provider network, the source says.
But the insurer expects to have the problem rectified before the
sanctions take effect, Evelyn Murphy, vice president for corporate
affairs for Blue Cross, told MCW.
Murphy says Blue Cross itself brought the matter to HCFA's
attention after discovering that 25-30 documents had been "altered"
in the insurer's application to the agency. Most of the
non-contracted MDs have since signed contracts with the Blues plan,
she adds.
Blue Cross recently got HCFA approval to offer a Medicare HMO in
Massachusetts in 1996. In fact, the plan just started marketing its
product late last month to seniors throughout the state.
Blue Care 65 is a zero-premium Medicare HMO. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Penn. Medicaid Program to Mandate 438,000 into
Managed Care Plans


In its first step toward a statewide program, Pennsylvania this
month drafted a plan to mandate 438,000 Medicaid recipients into
HMOs in five counties surrounding Philadelphia.
The initiative, dubbed "HealthChoices," is part of a statewide
mandatory managed care program to be phased in over the next three
years. The state has had a limited mandatory program for 100,000
Philadelphia Medicaid recipients since 1986.
Pennsylvania got a Sec. 1915(b) Medicaid waiver from HHS to set up
"HealthChoices" in 1993 under then-Gov. Bob Casey (D). But the plan
was criticized by some groups for lacking Medicaid HMO regulations
and implementation was delayed. A class action lawsuit over the
proposal is still pending.
Incoming Gov. Tom Ridge (R) made a number of changes to
HealthChoices before the state issued a draft request for proposals
(RFP) this month. HMO bids will be awarded in the summer, open
enrollment will begin Aug. 6, and the program will start Nov. 1.
HMO enrollment will be phased in, with coverage for certain groups
like AFDC recipients starting Nov. 1. Remaining eligibles will be
folded in on July 1, 1997. Medicaid recipients targeted for 1997
entry may voluntarily join HMOs sooner. 
Recipients who don't select an HMO within a specified time period
will be randomly assigned to a plan.
To address criticisms lobbed at the initial HealthChoices proposal,
the department will:

o       Ban HMO direct marketing, such as
door-to-door solicitation, and instead have a benefits consultant
conduct enrollment activities.
o       Carve out behavioral health services
for a separate procurement process. Counties will be given the
first rights of refusal to manage mental health-substance abuse
treatment benefits before a private capitated contractor is picked.
o       Require HMOs to submit encounter
data and comply with Medicaid HEDIS (MCW 2/5/96, p. 3).
o       Capitate HMOs, build in an allowable
profit margin, and link performance and outcome measures to profit
levels. This addresses concerns about the Philadelphia Medicaid
program, whose private contractor was found by the HHS Inspector
General to have made  excessive profits. That program is
scheduled to terminate Oct. 31.
o       Make direct payments to hospitals
for disproportionate share and graduate medical education instead
of including them in the HMO capitation. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

HMOs' Voluntary Compliance Squelches Colo. Maternity Bill


Colorado's HMOs and insurers convinced a state legislator to pull
her mandatory maternity stay bill after the health plans agreed to
voluntarily comply with the provisions.
The bill would have required health plans to cover 48 hours of
hospital care following a normal delivery and 96 hours following a
Caesarean section.
Last year, four states enacted similar laws, and a fifth adopted
the mandate by regulation.
The Group Health Assn. of America/American Managed Care and Review
Assn. expects similar activity this year in at least 14 states
(MCW's Managed Care Perspectives 1/29/96, p. 3).
The HMOs and insurers that agreed to voluntarily comply represent
95% of the market. The health plans agreed:

o       Not to require reauthorization for
maternity and newborn inpatient care for at least 48 hours after
delivery.
o       To apply guidelines issued by the
American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology and the American
Academy of Pediatrics on utilization reviews and authorization
requests.
o       To conduct maternity policy
education programs for pregnant women, new mothers, pediatricians,
family physicians and OB-GYNs.

Through various concessions in recent years, Colorado insurers and
HMOs have fought off several other legislative attempts, including
any-willing-pharmacy and any-willing-provider laws.
Separately, Maryland's doctors earlier this month agreed not to
push for a state any-willing-provider law after HMOs made various
concessions, including disclosure of economic credentialling
criteria. 
The Maryland HMOs also agreed to revise provider contracts to
clarify that physicians won't be penalized for making certain
public statements about the health plans. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Medicare Adding Procedures To Bundled Payment Demo


A Medicare bundled payment demonstration project that HCFA expects
to announce within the next two months will be expanded to include
several orthopedic and cardiology procedures.
HCFA has already tested this centers-of-excellence concept on
bypasses and cataracts, but those demos are expiring this year.
Under the upcoming cardiology pilot, the agency will pay facilities
a negotiated bundled rate to cover both hospital and physician
services for heart bypasses, angioplasties, valve replacements and
catheterizations. The new orthopedic demo will cover total hip and
knee joint replacements.
Hospitals can participate in either the cardiology or the
orthopedic demo, or both. The bundled payment will account for
outlier cases; separate payments won't be made for particularly
expensive patients.
HCFA hasn't decided on the number of sites, but most likely will
choose facilities in a region comprised of several contiguous
states. The sites will be well-dispersed throughout the region. The
agency will use qualitative data to choose participating hospitals,
with price "way down the line," says a HCFA official.
Pre-applications will be sent in March or April to all hospitals
that routinely perform the procedures in the chosen region. HCFA
hopes to select hospitals by late 1996 and have the first sites
operating by early 1997.
The scope of the demo could change if bundled payment for Medicare
services is enacted as part of budget reconciliation.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Mayo's Jacksonville Clinic, Ga. IDS Seeking HMO Licenses


The Mayo Clinic in Jacksonville, Fla., intends to file for an HMO
license by May, while a Georgia integrated delivery system (IDS)
that came under fire for accepting capitated payments will apply
for an HMO license this week.
Mayo thus becomes one of the latest and most prestigious provider
organizations to form its own health plan, a trend that is
spreading like wildfire (MCW 10/9/95, p. 4).
The clinic already contracts with more than a dozen managed care
plans that send over 10,000 patients a month to Mayo. By forming
its own HMO, Mayo will have another option to offer patients. Mayo
hopes to offer the HMO in northeast Florida by September.
Mayo's Jacksonville clinic has 30 primary care MDs among its 170
doctors. Mayo will honor its contracts with other managed care
plans.
In Atlanta, Promina Health System, which claims to be Georgia's
largest community-based, nonprofit health system, will apply for an
HMO license this week and hopes to have the plan up and running by
January 1997. The IDS is plunging into the HMO market because the
state requires licensure of provider entities that take capitation
from self-funded employers.
Last year Promina scrapped its capitated arrangement with Cobb
County after state regulators rapped the IDS' knuckles for
accepting capitation without an HMO or insurance license (MCW
7/10/95, p. 4).
Promina initially will offer the HMO to its own 13,000 workers and
to public employers. Promina may later solicit private employer
contracts. But only a small portion of Promina patients will be in
its HMO; the majority will be members of other health plans that
contract with the IDS for health services.
The Promina HMO will capitate primary care MDs, specialists and
hospitals. Providers will be free to join other plans.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

WellPoint, Trigon Struggle With Charitable Obligations


Blue Cross of California and Trigon Blue Cross-Blue Shield in
Virginia are grappling with their public charity obligations as
they convert to for-profit publicly traded companies.
California Blue Cross last week said it will recapitalize its
for-profit, publicly traded managed care spinoff, WellPoint Health
Networks, so the Blues plan can contribute all its assets to two
new charitable foundations and resolve its public charity
obligations.
The move involves an "upstream merger" in which WellPoint will buy
Blue Cross of California's remaining commercial business, acquire
the rights to the Blue Cross name and mark in California, and gain
about 310,000 PPO members. WellPoint has 2.8 million PPO,
point-of-service and HMO enrollees.
WellPoint stockholders will get a cash dividend of $10 per share,
followed by a two-for-three reverse stock split. Total cash
proceeds to WellPoint's largest stockholder, Blue Cross, will
exceed $1 billion.
Blue Cross, which owns 80 million shares in WellPoint, will
transfer $1 billion in cash to one foundation, and about $2 billion
worth of stock, or 80.4% of the stock in the new WellPoint, to the
second foundation. That's similar to the $3 billion the two
foundations would have received if WellPoint and Blue Cross had
merged with Health Systems International Inc. (MCW 1/1/96, p. 4).
The recapitalization is subject to approval by the Calif.
Department of Corporations and by stockholders other than Blue
Cross.
Meanwhile, Trigon Blue Cross-Blue Shield recently filed an amended
conversion plan with the Virginia State Corporation Commission.
The amended plan incorporates a recent agreement with the state's
Attorney General to allocate $165 million to public charity when
Trigon converts from a not-for-profit, taxable mutual insurance
company to a publicly traded stock company (MCW 12/18/95, p. 4).
The amended plan would set aside $165 million in a special class of
stock for public or charitable uses.
Trigon originally was going to give all policyholders as of May 31,
1995, the company's value in the form of stock. The amended plan
would allow eligible policyholders to be those on record as of Dec.
31, 1995.
But the Virginia legislature is debating the state budget and the
amount of Trigon public charity funds. Several legislators want to
increase the Blues' public charity obligation to at least $175
million.
The State Corporation Commission has set a May 6 hearing on the
Trigon plan. The insurer covers nearly 1 million PPO, POS and HMO
enrollees and 800,000 indemnity lives. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

GHAA/AMCRA Changes Name, Courts PPOs, UR Firms


The Group Health Assn.of America/American Managed Care and Review
Assn. is changing its name to the American Assn. of Health Plans,
subject to board approval Feb. 25.
The trade group didn't want "managed care" in the new title because
field testing found the term has a negative connotation in the
public's mind, several board members told MCW.
In addition to the name change, the merged trade association is
reaching out to all managed care organizations, including
utilization review firms and PPOs, "though there's still some fight
against that from the old [HMO] guard" within GHAA, says one board
member.
To reflect its expanded mission, the association has put on its
board Robert Patricelli, chairman-CEO of Value Health Inc., a
national specialty managed care company, and Marcus Merz, president
of Preferred One, a Minneapolis PPO firm. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

MANAGED CARE BRIEFS


        Viva Health Inc. a for-profit HMO
partially owned by the University of Alabama-Birmingham, was
granted a license to operate in three counties. A competing HMO is
challenging the university's ownership in the plan (MCW 1/15/96, p.
4).

        Nashville, Tenn.-based HealthWise of
America, which owns and operates HMOs in four states, has signed a
binding letter of intent to develop and manage Capital Community
Health Plan, a Medicaid HMO in Washington, D.C.

        Healthsource Inc. of Hooksett, N.H.,
has acquired Central Massachusetts Health Care Inc., an
83,000-member nonprofit HMO based in Worcester, Mass., in a deal
valued at $46.5 million (MCW 9/12/94, p. 2). A substantial part of
the proceeds will fund a nonprofit charitable foundation.

        Humana Medical Plan of South
Florida, which had been denied accreditation by the  National
Committee for Quality Assurance in 1994, just received a full
three-year seal of approval (MCW 6/6/94, p. 1).

        A.M. Best Co. assigned an "A+"
financial rating to the Pennsylvania, New York and New Jersey HMOs
of U. S. Healthcare Inc.

        Health care purchasing coalitions
and large employers in several markets are working with CareData
Reports Inc. on what it claims will be the largest employee
satisfaction study of managed care plans to date. For information,
contact Janet Murphy: (212) 883-4087.

        PacifiCare Health Systems Inc.'s
PacifiCare  Behavioral Health subsidiary in Laguna Hills, Calif.,
completed acquisition of Psychology  Systems Inc. Terms weren't
disclosed.

        On behalf of 26 states, Wisconsin
Attorney General James Doyle has asked the U.S. Supreme Court to
review a federal appeals court decision that reversed most of a
trial court's $17 million verdict against the Marshfield Clinic in
an antitrust lawsuit filed by Blue Cross and Blue Shield of
Wisconsin (MCW 9/25/95, p. 2). Doyle is arguing that the decision
poses significant problems for state antitrust law enforcement. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Mortality, Hospital Costs Drop As Managed Care
Spreads 


Hospitals in cities with high managed care penetration report lower
costs, reduced length of stays and decreased mortality rates,
according to a study by KPMG Peat Marwick consultants of Los
Angeles.
The national study of 11.7 million patients at 3,700 acute-care
facilities found that hospital costs in highly penetrated managed
care markets were 11% below the national average and 19% below
hospital costs in low managed care markets.
In markets with high managed care penetration, hospital stays were
6.3% shorter than the national average and almost 12% shorter than
stays in medium managed care markets.
And the risk-adjusted mortality rates in high managed care markets
were 5.25% below the national average.
Although managed care is driving down hospital costs without
negatively affecting patient care, hospital costs were flat or
starting to rise in many highly penetrated managed care markets,
notes Michael Hamilton, national director of KPMG Peat Marwick's
health care group.
For details, call Debbie Dalmand at KPMG: (714) 850-4440.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

24 States Mandate or Regulate Workers' Comp
Managed Care


About 24 states either regulated or mandated the use of managed
care organizations for workers' compensation coverage as of January
1995, according to a study by the Workers Compensation Research
Institute of Cambridge, Mass.
The survey of state workers' compensation officials also revealed
that eight states mandated  managed care to treat injured
workers, 35 states limited a worker's initial choice of provider,
and 38 states limited a worker's ability to switch providers. Other
findings:

o       Some 40 states used fee schedules
for managed care providers;
o       Hospital payments for workers' comp
care were regulated by 35 states;
o       Utilization review for workers' comp
care was mandated by 21 states;
o       Bill review was mandated by 16
states; and
o       About 12 states used treatment
guidelines.

For details, call the institute: (617) 494-1240. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Physician Practices Worth More In High Managed
Care Markets


Physician practices sell for more money in communities with high
managed care penetration, according to the Center for Healthcare
Industry Performance Studies.
High managed care markets were defined as those with at least 52.2%
managed care penetration, while low managed care markets were
defined as those with less than 40% of the population in managed
care plans. 
The median value per physician for practices in high managed care
markets was $106,000 in 1994, but only $95,000 in low managed care
markets. Practices in medium managed care markets were valued at
$134,000 per MD. The study covered 245 physician practice
acquisitions representing more than 650 doctors.
For details on the center's Physician Practice Acquisition Resource
Book, contact Patrick Knott at (614) 457-1777. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Success of IPA, Network HMOs Not Linked to Care
Quality


HMO success isn't strongly linked to quality of care provided, and
plans with relatively bad reputations continue to grow, finds a
Commonwealth Fund study of IPA- and network-model HMOs.
The case studies of six unidentified HMOs in Boston, Los Angeles
and Philadelphia found that the most financially successful HMOs
each had a provider-friendly and physician-focused philosophy;
decentralized medical management; stable management; and a primary
focus on developing IPA/network HMO business.
Size and financial backing, often by large indemnity-based
insurers, wasn't necessarily an advantage. Among the study's other
findings:

o       The HMOs in the three markets
increasingly are shifting risk to providers.
o       Employer demands to contract with
fewer plans that cover broader markets are increasing market
pressures that favor size over past performance.
o       Pressure to grow appears more
motivated by being in a position to exert market power than by
gains in a plan's ability to provide quality care or invest in
internal systems.

As competition intensifies, there is a critical need for readily
available, quality-of-care measures, but consolidating markets will
make it increasingly difficult to rely on meaningful choice to
ensure quality, the study concludes.
For details, call Mary Lou Russell at the foundation: (212)
606-3842. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

State Employees Offered More HMOs in 1995


State-employed workers were offered a total of 375 HMOs last year,
up from 350 in 1991, says a study by the Segal Co. consultants of
New York.
In 1995, 35% of state workers were in HMOs, up from 29% in 1991.
Last year, 11 states enrolled more than 50% of state employees in
HMOs, led by Arizona (88%); California (86%); Missouri (74%);
Wisconsin (72%); and Delaware (66%).
But 12 states had less than 10% of state workers enrolled in HMOs,
and six states had no state employees in HMOs.
The average monthly HMO premium for January 1995 was $170 for
individual state workers and $414 for families. 
As of January 1995, 46 states offered a PPO. In 28 of these states,
the PPO was part of an indemnity plan and was available at the
worker's discretion at the point-of-service. The PPO was separate
in 12 states, and the worker had to choose a primary care physician
at the time of plan enrollment.
For details, call Erin Burns at the Segal Co.: (212) 251-5000.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Oxford Shines, HIP Stumbles, Says New York
Public Advocate


Oxford Health Plans Inc. ranked nearly tops with New York City
consumers while the Health Insurance Plan of Greater New York (HIP)
had the worst overall public complaints record and customer service
phone lines of 12 HMOs studied.
Mark Green, public advocate for New York City, studied HMOs by
Aetna, ChoiceCare, Cigna, Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, HIP,
Oxford, Managed Health Inc., Prudential, Travelers, MetLife, Sanus
and U.S. Healthcare. 
From 1991 through 1994, HIP was the only HMO to rank in the bottom
one-third in public complaints each year. From 1992 to 1994, some
49.5% of complaints against the HMO were upheld by the state, while
only 20% of complaints against ChoiceCare and 25% of those against
Sanus were upheld.
Green also found that HIP by far had the longest delays in
answering phones, with typical delays of 10 minutes.
By contrast, Oxford had the highest percentage of board-certified
physicians, the highest MD renewal rate, and the second-longest
customer service hours. 
Oxford also had the fastest growth rate of all plans studied. From
year-end 1990 through June 1995, Oxford's membership increased from
28,000 to 595,600.
For the first half of 1995, the amount spent on physicians per
member ranged from $30.61 per month at Empire HealthNet to $83.77
at a Travelers HMO. January 1996 monthly premiums for individuals
ranged from $172.50 at Managed Health to $257.59 at ChoiceCare.
For details, call Joe DePlasco at the Public Advocate's office:
(212) 669-4195. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

California's HMOs Show Widely Varying
Utilization


Utilization varies greatly among California HMOs, according to a
study by the Center for Health Care Rights in Los Angeles.
The study focused on the state's 18 HMOs that had Medicaid
contracts. Twelve of the 18 plans failed to include utilization
data for all or some of their membership groups. 
Of plans that reported relevant data, the average number of
physician encounters per member in California's so-called Medi-Cal
program during 1994 ranged from 0.37 in Universal Care's HMO to
5.14 in Kaiser's southern California region.
For the HMOs' commercial members, the average number of MD
encounters per member ranged from 0.21 for Universal Care to 8.53
for FHP's staff-model plan. MD encounters per member for Medicare
beneficiaries ranged from 4.11 for United Health Plan to 26.43 for
FHP's staff-model HMO.
Overall, the weighted average number of physician encounters per
member for plans that reported data was 3.5 for Medi-Cal members,
3.26  for commercial enrollees, and 9.19 for Medicare members.
The average number of non-physician encounters per member, as well
as annual hospital stays per 1,000 enrollees and average length of
stay, also varied widely among HMOs. 
The study concluded that plans appear to collect and report
utilization data inconsistently to the state, and that California's
Department of Corporations apparently fails to check the accuracy
of reported data.
For details, call Jennifer Yang at the Center for Health Care
Rights: (213) 383-4519. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

California's Nonprofit HMOs Have Highest Medical
Loss Ratios 


The five California HMOs with the highest medical loss ratios were
all nonprofit plans, according to a study by the California Medical
Assn.
Of the five HMOs with the lowest loss ratios, four were for-profit
plans.
The California HMOs that spent the largest percentage of premiums
on medical care were:

o       Kaiser Foundation Health Plan
(96.8%); 
o       Santa Barbara Regional Health
Initiative (95.1%);
o       Blue Cross of California (93.4%);
o       Solano Partnership Health Plan
(89.3%); and
o       Contra Costa Health Plan (89.1%).
The California HMOs with the lowest medical loss ratios were:
o       CaliforniaCare Health Plans (73%),
owned by Blue Cross of California;
o       Molina Medical Centers (75.8%);
o       Community Health Group, the only
nonprofit plan with one of the five lowest medical loss ratios
(75.9%);
o       Aetna Health Plans of California
Inc. (77.4%); and
o       Foundation Health Plans Inc.
(77.4%), a publicly traded company.

Nonprofit HMOs generally want high medical loss ratios, while
for-profits want to keep ratios low, some experts note. 
Many industry experts argue that medical loss ratios by themselves
are not an accurate indicator of an HMO's efficiency or performance
(MCW 1/8/96, p. 3).
Among plans with 20,000 or more enrollees, California's for-profit
HMOs had a medical loss ratio averaging 81% and posted profits
amounting to 4.6% of premiums. 
Nonprofits averaged an 86.8% medical loss ratio with profits of
2.9% of revenue. 
For details, contact Danielle Walters at the California Medical
Assn.: (916) 444-5532. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Maternity Stay Lengths Shrink For Women in Twin
Cities 


The percentage of one-day maternity stays in the Twin Cities area
increased nearly seven-fold between 1985 and 1995, according to a
study by the Minnesota Hospital and Healthcare Partnership.
Last year, four states required insurers and managed care plans to
cover 48-hour hospital stays for newborns and their mothers for
regular childbirths, 96 hours for Caesarean sections (MCW's
Perspectives 1/29/96).
The analysis of 360,000 maternity discharges revealed that, for all
vaginal and Caesarean sections, including those with complications,
the average length of stay dropped from 2.94 days in 1985 to 2.17
days in 1995.
 From 1985 to 1995, the average length of stay for women with
uncomplicated vaginal deliveries dropped from 2.42 days to 1.72
days. During that same period, average length of stay for
uncomplicated Caesarean deliveries dropped from 4.57 days to 3.53
days.
In the first quarter of 1995, 42.5% of women with uncomplicated
vaginal deliveries had one-day stays, up from 6.2% in 1985.
Overall, women with private managed care and indemnity coverage had
a higher percentage of one-day stays than did uninsured women or
Medicaid recipients. Over the 10-year period, lengths of stay for
women with commercial indemnity coverage generally tracked that of
women with private managed care coverage.
For details, call Gretchen Musicant at the Partnership: (612)
641-1121. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Medicare HMO Members Satisfied In Southern
California


Some 70% of Medicare beneficiaries enrolled in five Medicare
risk-contract HMOs are highly satisfied with their plan, according
to a study by CareData Reports Inc. of New York.
And 81% of surveyed enrollees intended to re-enroll in their
Medicare HMO.
The 2,673 beneficiaries surveyed were enrolled in Medicare HMOs
offered by FHP, Health Net, Kaiser Foundation Health Plans,
Maxicare and PacifiCare in Southern California. The survey covered
member satisfaction with primary care physicians, specialists,
disease prevention and treatment, administration, pharmacy benefits
and other health plan components.
Dr. Tod Cooperman, president of CareData, says seniors like
Medicare HMOs because:

o       They value the extra benefits, like
prescription drug coverage, that are not covered by
fee-for- service (FFS) Medicare;
o       They find HMOs less administratively
burdensome than the traditional Medicare program; and
o       They believe their health status is
improving under the care provided by HMOs.

Of the five HMOs studied, Kaiser's scored highest for total
satisfaction, with 80% of members reporting they were at least very
satisfied.
Overall, 53% of those surveyed who previously were in FFS Medicare
rated their HMO as better than FFS, 20% rated the two systems
equally, and 27% preferred FFS. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Studies in Brief


o       Little correlation has been found
between a metropolitan area's HMO market penetration and the
utilization of CAT scans, MRIs, cardiac catheterization and nuclear
medicine services, according to a study by the Technology Marketing
Group of Des Plains, Ill. For details, call John Vanden Brink:
(708) 297-1404.
o       Nearly 20% of 620 employers use
centers of excellence to help control health costs, according to a
study by Watson Wyatt Worldwide consultants in Washington, D.C.
Some 29% of employers with 2,500 or more workers used such centers,
while only 8% of companies with less than 500 employees did. For
details, call Bob McKee at Watson Wyatt: (202) 508-4848.
o       The U.S. per capita cost (USPCC) for
Medicare aged beneficiaries increased from $297.33 in 1991 to
$440.90 in 1996, according to a report by Coopers & Lybrand
consulting firm of Washington, D.C. The USPCC is used to calculate
the adjusted average per capita cost amounts that serve as the
basis for paying Medicare risk HMOs. For details, call Susan Palsbo
at Coopers & Lybrand: (202) 822-4000.
o       Liver transplants managed by United
Resource Networks, a subsidiary of United HealthCare Corp. of
Minneapolis, saved purchasers and consumers 33% per transplant
procedure, the company claims. The study also revealed that
United's transplant patients had one and two-year survival rates
that were higher than the national averages. For details, call
Kirsten Simning at United HealthCare: (612) 992-5137.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Medicare Managed Care Update


Type of Contract, Number of Contractors as of 1/22/96 Total Enrollment 
                  (as of 12/13/95),                   as of 1/22/96  
                                                      (as of 12/13/95)

Risk Contract, 189 HMOs and CMPs (182), 3.194 million (3.083 million)
Cost Contract,  27 (32), 168,140 (177,012)
Risk Contract with  Cost Enrollees Remaining, 
                6 (4), 17,672 (5,834)
Health Care Prepayment Plans (HCPPs), 
               54 (56), 341,906 (341,639)
HCPPs Converted to Risk with  Cost Enrollees Remaining, 
               14 (14), 170,788 (180,465)
Demonstrations, 6 (5), 19,186 (18,560)

Source: HCFA monthly reports




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Admar PPO, Hancock POS Test Risk Pools, Bonuses to
Boost Physician Performance


While capitation is the dominant method for HMOs to shift financial
risk to providers, Admar Corp., a PPO company, and John Hancock
Insurance Co.'s point-of-service (POS) plan are testing innovative
provider risk-sharing mechanisms.
Santa Ana, Calif.-based Admar holds providers in its HMO-type
product to overall performance budgets, while John Hancock's
point-of-service (POS) product pays physicians under a negotiated
fee schedule with two bonus incentive pools.
Admar is one of a few cutting-edge PPOs that are forming HMO-type
products and sharing risk with providers (MCW's Stats & Facts
11/13/95, p. 1). Admar's product is available in California and
Arizona.
Admar's fully insured "Exclusive Health" product, which is about
one and one-half years old, uses primary care gatekeepers and is
offered through an insurance carrier partner, says Richard Toral,
CEO-chairman.
 An overall provider performance budget is set by the payer, with
the budget segregated into risk pools for different categories of
providers. The pools are funded by a portion of the payer's
premiums.
Where Admar doesn't capitate providers, it sets up separate risk
pools for primary care physicians, specialty physicians and
hospitals. Where the company capitates only primary care MDs, it
sets up pools for specialists and hospitals. The pools are adjusted
for the payer group's enrollee age and sex.
Actual utilization is measured against each provider risk pool. If
providers stay within the allotted performance budget, they may get
bonuses at year-end.
Admar is scheduled to be acquired this month by Principal Health
Care Inc., the managed care subsidiary of Principal Financial Group
(MCW 11/6/95, p. 4).

Providers Like Bonus Pool Concept

Separately, John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co. uses two bonus
incentive pools for MDs in its "Signature Health Advantage" POS
product. The POS plan is being sold with a July 1 effective date to
self-insured employers in three markets - Dallas, Houston and
Cleveland.
The carrier contracts with physicians under a fee schedule. In
addition, MDs are eligible for bonus pools:

o        One bonus pool for primary care
doctors pays year-end bonuses based on an MD's individual
performance. The performance formula incorporates the MD's actual
claims costs; quality indicators, such as the physician's treatment
patterns and member satisfaction results; and compliance with
overall plan rules, such as utilization review and specialty
referral notifications. The pool is funded by a percentage of the
administrative-services-only fee an employer pays Hancock for the
POS plan.
o        A second provider incentive fund for
all physicians pays year-end bonuses to both primary care MDs and
specialists based on a separate performance formula, such as how
well a specialist meets quality indicators and controls
utilization. The employer funds the pool based on a percentage of
claims paid.

Hancock already has several contracts for the POS product with
PHOs, IPAs and group practices.
Providers have been receptive to Hancock's approach because it
"gives them a real chance to collect on the bonuses," according to
Lyn Rosenstein, Hancock's director of network product management.
Docs view the pools as financial incentives, she adds. Hancock is
not using payment withholds.
In effect, the POS plan aligns incentives for providers and Hancock
through performance guarantees to employers. If an employer's
claims costs exceed the guarantee, some doctors may not get bonuses
and the pool funds go back to the employer, Rosenstein notes.
Bonuses aren't common in PPOs but will grow in popularity, adds
Brant Kelch, president of MedStrategies consulting firm in Vienna,
Va., and co-founder of the American Assn. of Preferred Provider
Organizations. He says other forms of risk-sharing PPOs are trying
include capitation of providers without getting an HMO license, and
global pricing of physician and hospital services.
For details, call Admar at (714) 953-9600 or John Hancock at (617)
572-6390. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

HMO Puts IDS at Full Risk For Plan's Medicare Population


Pittsburgh's HealthAmerica HMO has chosen a newly formed
integrated delivery system (IDS) as the provider for the
plan's fledging Medicare HMO product.
HealthAmerica thus becomes the region's first HMO to put a provider
organization fully at risk.
Under the HMO's new "Advantra" Medicare HMO, Southwest Integrated
Delivery Network will take on the entire medical risk of the new
product offering on a percentage of premium basis.
While most provider groups first experience full risk through a
health plan's commercial members, Southwest Integrated is bucking
the trend by first taking on full risk for Medicare enrollees. The
contract represents the IDS' first venture with HealthAmerica.
Southwest Integrated says it's simply a matter of timing that
Medicare risk is its first fully capitated deal.
Taking on risk for seniors can be tricky for any provider
organization because of the special needs of seniors. To properly
take on such risk, providers must change their focus and
operations, experts say (PCC 7/24/95, p. 3; 6/26/95, p. 3).
Western Pennsylvania has the second-oldest Medicare population in
the nation, and a high percentage of the region's residents are
seniors, says James Fritz, president and CEO of Southwest
Integrated.
As part of the Medicare risk contract with Southwest Integrated,
HealthAmerica is negotiating a similar full-risk contract with the
IDS for the plan's commercial products, which have 250,000 members.
 In fact, Southwest Integrated's Medicare contract with
HealthAmerica dictates that both parties will attempt to strike
such an agreement within 90 days to serve HealthAmerica's
commercial membership.
However, if such a deal is not reached, the Medicare agreement will
stand, says Dan Lebish, executive vice president for the HMO's
medical delivery systems. 
HealthAmerica has held separate per-diem contracts with the five
hospitals that make up Southwest Integrated, according to Lebish.
The HMO also has held individual capitated contracts with most of
the 210 primary care MDs involved in the IDS, as well as fee
schedule-based contracts with the 700 specialists in the Southwest
Integrated group, Fritz and Lebish say.

Details of the Full-Risk Contract

Other provisions in the deal:

o        Southwest Integrated is at risk
for visits by Medicare enrollees to roughly 800 non-Southwest
Integrated specialists in HealthAmerica's overall provider network.
o        The health plan delegated the
medical management piece to the IDS. The ability to control medical
management is key for Southwest Integrated, Fritz says.
o        The HMO will provide on-site
assistance to help Southwest Integrated manage utilization.
o        The contract prevents Southwest
Integrated from starting an HMO. But the IDS can deal with
other plans.
o        Southwest Integrated can access
the HMO's care management programs, which link members to
psychosocial providers. 
o        The parties will collaborate on
clinical studies on conditions that afflict the elderly and
disabled.
Contact Lebish at (412) 577-5401 or Fritz at (412)  937-1396.






<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-20</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B041-54</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh76.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020010 text/html 34878
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:58:15 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:34 GMT
Content-length: 34691
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh76.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNet <BR>
February 16, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>`Gag Clauses' Appear More Frequently In Medicare,&nbsp;Medicaid HMO Contracts</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(494 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>HCFA to MCOs: Complete Your Homework</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(166 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Firms Drop Retiree Benefits As Costs Soar in 1995</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(255 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>Start-Up Medicare Health Plans Target Southern State&nbsp;Markets</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(418 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>Surviving HCFA Site Visits Requires Strong&nbsp;Pre-Audit Role</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(900 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Managed Medicare, Medicaid Grabs Researchers' Focus</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(200 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Florida HMOs Pan for Gold In Long-Term Care Experiment</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(404 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Intergroup Offers Seniors Free Health Club Membership</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(245 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>FEDERAL & STATE BRIEFS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(438 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>INDUSTRY BRIEFS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(655 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>Medicare Risk HMOs with Biggest Monthly Enrollment&nbsp;Growth (For the month ending Jan. 22, 1996)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(150 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>Change of Mindset Required to Manage Dual Eligibles</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(230 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNet
February 16, 1996

`Gag Clauses' Appear More Frequently In Medicare,
Medicaid HMO Contracts


Some HMOs say the clauses prevent physicians from
steering healthier Medicare and Medicaid patients to other health
plans.

Although wide-ranging "gag clauses" are used by few HMOs, managed
care organizations enrolling Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries
are more likely to insert some type of "gag clause" than are
commercials plans, says an attorney who works on Medicare and
Medicaid HMO contracts.
The reason: Unlike commercial HMO members, who are locked into a
plan for up to a year, Medicare beneficiaries and most Medicaid
recipients in HMOs are free to disenroll at any time.
The disenrollment rules give providers a lot more opportunity to
sway a senior's opinion of a health plan or disparage a plan
altogether, says Wendy Krasner, an attorney with McDermott, Will &
Emery's Washington office. "I'm seeing [gag clauses] more often for
plans in Medicare and Medicaid," she says.
Some Medicare and Medicaid health plans fear that physicians with
numerous plan contracts could steer patients from one HMO to
another.
For example, a physician put at risk by a plan may suggest to
sicker patients that they switch to a plan under which the MD is
paid on a fee-for-service basis. Or a physician who contracts with
an HMO but also has ownership interest in another health plan could
encourage healthier seniors into the latter plan.
While provider contracts may include varying degrees of "gag
clauses," some Medicare and Medicaid HMOs have included language to
prohibit physicians from advising enrollees to disenroll or join a
another managed care organization.
Krasner has seen contract clauses enabling the HMO to collect
thousands of dollars in liquidated damages for each member a
physician refers to another plan.
Overall, few health plans use the expansive "gag clauses" that have
drawn backlash from MDs, consumers and legislators, experts say.
Massachusetts just passed an anti-gag clause bill, and legislators
in California, Illinois, Maine and New York are considering similar
bills (MMM 2/5/96, p. 4).
While HMOs say they use such clauses to prevent MDs from ruining a
plan's competitiveness, physicians say "gag clauses" interfere with
the MD-patient relationship by prohibiting physicians from
explaining that treatment decisions are based on an HMO's standards
and rules.
"[Gag clauses] are contractually restricting doctors' professional
judgment," says Latham Williams, an attorney with Sidley & Austin
in Chicago.

Williams' advice to HMOs:

o        Train MDs to understand plan rules
covered under each managed care offering by an organization;
o        Encourage physicians to talk with
the plan's medical director before informing patients about a
course of action if a certain procedure is not covered; and
o        Don't prohibit a determined
physician from talking to a patient about alternative treatment
options if a resolution cannot be reached with the medical
director.

"I think the medical profession will prevail in this," Williams
says, adding that HMOs considering wide-ranging "gag clauses"
should think about the possible cost of defending legal challenges.
Contact Krasner at (202) 778-8064, or Williams at (312) 853-7000.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNet
February 16, 1996

HCFA to MCOs: Complete Your Homework


As scores of managed care organizations consider
entering the hot Medicare HMO market, HCFA has some advice for
would-be applicants: Complete the necessary paperwork.

Bruce Fried, director of HCFA's office of managed care, told the
agency's regional administrators last month to withdraw all 1996
contract or service-area expansion requests that aren't completed
in a 60-day corrective period.
The problem: Numerous HMOs recently submitted incomplete Medicare
applications in order to get in line for HCFA processing.
Normally, HCFA takes 18-24 weeks to process new HMO applications.
Fried told agency officials to process complete applications within
19 weeks, notify organizations within four weeks if an application
is incomplete, address issues raised in site visits in a timely
manner, and complete site-visit reports promptly.
When Fried recently took over HCFA's managed care operations, he
found an unprecedented backlog of 100 applications. As of Feb. 1,
45 applications were pending for new risk plans, and another 40
existing risk HMOs requested service-area expansions, according to
the agency. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNet
February 16, 1996

Firms Drop Retiree Benefits As Costs Soar in 1995


HMOs have missed out on the retiree managed care boom,
says a benefits analyst. The suggested selling point to employers:
lower costs and reduced FAS 106 liability.

The number of employers offering health care coverage to
Medicare-eligible retirees fell last year as big business saw
retiree health costs jump 9.5%, according to Foster Higgins' annual
employee benefits survey.
"I think the HMOs are missing some big opportunities," John Erb,
Foster Higgins principal, told MMM. "The movement of
Medicare-eligible retirees into Medicare risk-contract HMOs"can
reduce an employer's cost and FAS 106 liability to nothing."
Last year, 35% of employers offered health coverage to
Medicare-eligible retirees, down from 40% in 1994. But more
employers, 41%, offered coverage to early retirees - a more
expensive proposition for some firms.
Employers have dealt with 1993 Financial Accounting Standards Board
changes in various ways, including simply discontinuing coverage.
The rules require companies to account for the costs of future
retiree health benefit commitments on financial statements.
However, some companies have turned to HMOs for retiree health
coverage, creating a market niche for Medicare HMOs (MMM 1/19/96,
p. 1, 12/8/95, p. 1).
While just 7% of Medicare-eligible retirees have joined HMOs, the
percentage of large employers offering them has tripled since 1993,
to 21% in 1995.
Drawbacks: In many markets, Medicare risk HMOs haven't set up shop,
and in some places where they exist, retirees resist them.
But 61% of early retirees, as opposed to 31% of Medicare-eligible
retirees, are in managed care.
Contact Erb at (212) 574-9034. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNet
February 16, 1996

Start-Up Medicare Health Plans Target Southern State
Markets


Medicare beneficiaries in Arkansas, South Carolina and
Tennessee get their first oppor- tunity to enroll in Medicare
risk products.

Among managed care organizations that have received recent HCFA
approval to start Medicare risk HMOs, three plans will chart new
territory in Arkansas, South Carolina and Tennessee - states which
have had no Medicare risk HMOs.
In Tennessee, Health123 Platinum has begun  marketing to Medicare
beneficiaries in 18 counties in middle Tennessee. The plan,
majority-owned by Nashville's Vanderbilt Health Plans, is operated
by THG Management Services of Nashville.
THG manages four HMOs and a PPO in Tennessee, including VHP
CommunityCare Medicaid HMO. Health123 officials expect to enroll
3,500 seniors in its new product by year-end through an
"education-based" marketing strategy, says a plan official. The HMO
expects to have the Tennessee Medicare risk market to itself until
the end of the year.
Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Arkansas and Blue Cross and Blue
Shield of South Carolina have started Medipak Advantage and Prime
Companion, respectively. Both senior products are for-profit IPA
models.
Medipak, which expects to enroll 6,500 seniors by year-end, will
operate in four central Arkansas counties. Prime Companion began
marketing in five counties initially and will expand to eight more
counties later this year.
Other Medicare risk HMOs that have begun operation this year
include:

o        Senior Choice, a New Jersey IPA
model, operated by for-profit Aetna Health Plans of (Parsippany)
New  Jersey.
o        Optimum Choice Advantage, an IPA
model being offered in southern Virginia by for-profit Optimum
Choice Inc. of Rockville, Md.
o        Blue Care 65, a Massachusetts IPA
model operated by nonprofit Blue Cross and Blue Shield of (Boston)
Massachusetts.
o        Medicare Blue, an IPA model
operating in New Jersey, offered by for-profit Medigroup Inc. of
Newark.
o        HIP VIP, a New Jersey group model,
offered by nonprofit HIP of (New Brunswick) New Jersey Inc.
o        Gold Plan, an IPA model operating in
Buffalo, N.Y., offered by nonprofit Independent Health Associates
of Buffalo.
o        Medicare Plus, an IPA model
operating in Tampa, offered by for-profit CAC-United HealthCare
Plans of (Tampa) Florida Inc.
o        FHP Senior Plan, an Illinois IPA
model operated by for-profit FHP of (Oakbrook Terrace) Illinois
Inc.
o        Advantage 65, a Louisiana group
model offered by for-profit Advantage Health Plan Inc. of New
Orleans.
o        Group Health, a staff model
operating in western Washington, offered by nonprofit Group Health
Northwest of Spokane, Wash.
o        Advantra, an IPA model operating in
southwestern Pennsylvania, offered by for-profit HealthAmerica of
Pittsburgh. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNet
February 16, 1996

Surviving HCFA Site Visits Requires Strong
Pre-Audit Role


FHP Inc. holds mock audits prior to federal
regulators' biennial visits to its Medicare HMOs. The process
allows the HMO to discover which operational areas need tweaking.

FHP Inc. depends on HCFA for some $2.5 billion in annual revenues.
The Long Beach, Calif.-based company certainly doesn't want to give
its largest payer reason to doubt its ability to operate Medicare
HMOs.
So FHP created a process to prepare for HCFA's on-site monitoring
visit. FHP improved its process after HCFA ordered the HMO in 1991
to revamp the enrollment process for its Senior Plan because agency
auditors said senior disenrollment rates were too high.
Medicare risk HMOs can expect increased federal monitoring as HCFA
plans to increase the frequency of site visits. A HCFA task force
is studying how to turn its biennial site visit process into annual
monitoring visits.
HCFA officials say the monitoring process is straightforward; the
agency publishes a comprehensive guide to the audit process to help
plans prepare for site visits.
FHP, however, dedicates a lot of time and resources toward HCFA
auditors' week-long examination of the Senior Plan. HCFA's central
office handles the fiscal and legal aspects of the audit, while the
regional offices examine utilization, delivery and quality
assurance, and such operational issues as marketing, enrollment,
claims and appeals/grievances.

Set Compliance Measures for Audit

"[A plan must have] compliance measures built into its policies and
procedures," says Steven Tucker, director of FHP's Medicare
programs and former HCFA regulator.
As part of the pre-audit ritual, FHP conducts a mock audit before
the auditors visit. "We sort of act as the plan's regulatory
conscience," Tucker says. "We do this so we shine a little bit
better in the HCFA audit."
HCFA looks at time-measured data, such as how a plan handled the
appeals process. The plan has 60 days to resolve grievances, and
HCFA expects a 95% compliance rate in this area, Tucker says.
About eight weeks before the audit, HCFA asks for the universe of
data, such as records on enrollment, disenrollment, appeals, claims
and utilization reviews. Two weeks before the visit, HCFA lets the
plan know which claims and data auditors will review further.
"The last thing you want is to have HCFA identify a problem, and
you look surprised," Tucker says. A plan wants to address problems
before HCFA officials arrive. As part of the pre-audit, FHP
randomly pulls its own data to spot problem areas.
Caution: Start the pre-audit cycle four to six months prior to the
site visit. A late start won't enable the plan to fix problems, and
a plan can lose momentum going into the audit with an earlier
start, Tucker advises.
During the pre-audit phase Tucker taps staff members to represent
the plan to auditors. Technical types more often are better than
executives because they know the operational side better.

Tips for Surviving an Audit

At the time of the site visit, the HMO should assemble the key
people across departments that fixed any problems that arose during
the mock audit.
For example, if there's been a denial of service, a plan wants to
ensure it has been turned over to appeals before HCFA comes in.

Tucker's audit and post-audit maxims:

o        Being neat counts. FHP color-codes
files, labels file boxes, and ensures the files contain enough
information so HCFA can measure against the standard.
o        Prepare good space with windows and
phones. Don't throw your auditors into a cubicle. Meet their basic
needs.
o        Ensure the plan's top officials
attend entrance and exit conferences with auditors. There's nothing
more important happening that week for them.
o        Have your technical people waiting
in the wings to assist auditors. This is not a good vacation week.
o        Prepare your delegated or contracted
provider groups. HCFA will visit some of a plan's contracted MD
groups.
o        Take advantage of the exit
interview. Much of what will be contained in HCFA's corrective
action plan will be mentioned here. Get a head start.
o        Implement policy changes in other
Medicare HMOs. A plan should have affiliated plans operating in
other regions adopt any policy changes that arise from the audit.

Although HCFA regional officials continue to work with plans to
ensure they make suggested corrections, plans that continue to fall
out of compliance could be subject to fines or an investigation.
"That's amazingly easy to overlook," as key officials leave a plan
and take with them its institutional memory, Tucker says.
Tucker warns plans about the three hot spots:
(1) Interdepartmental coordination. HCFA auditors have a keen eye
for identifying problems and seeing how problems can affect other
operational areas. Proper policies will enable personnel in one
department understand how other departments are affected.
(2) Service denials and appeals. It's the hot issue. HCFA is
reacting to reports and stories in the general media about
beneficiaries' bad HMO experiences. HCFA doesn't want to be seen as
lackadaisical. Make sure delegated groups, claims staff, and member
services are up to speed on policies. HCFA's looking at those
areas.
(3) HMO oversight of delegated functions. HMOs need to add value as
they spread the risk. There's increasing scrutiny in this area. A
plan has to prove it has an oversight function in its delegated
contracts. Ensure the plan has case management, utilization review,
claims and credentialing oversight of contracted groups.
Contact Tucker at (310) 809-5399. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
MANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNet
February 16, 1996

Managed Medicare, Medicaid Grabs Researchers' Focus


The projects may help managed care organi- zations and
policymakers better serve Medi- care and Medicaid populations.

Researchers backed by The Commonwealth Fund will examine the
effects of a rapid move to managed care by the Medicare and
Medicaid programs.

The organization has awarded grants totaling $2.1 million to
projects including:
o        Analysis of the effects of enacted
or proposed Medicare changes. Researchers will identify ways to
improve quality and consumer satisfaction in Medicare managed care,
medical savings accounts and other new delivery options; and
analyze solutions to Medicare's long-range financing problems.
o        Identification of major high-cost
illnesses in Medicare populations. Researchers will explore
concerns raised by such populations, such as barriers to
specialized care, and will examine financial incentives plans use
to discourage enrollment of high-cost patients.
o        Examination of the impact of managed
care on providers serving minority communities. Researchers will
explore how providers respond to the challenges of managed care and
the impact on delivery in minority communities.
o        Evaluation of how the rapid growth
of Medicaid managed care affects the organization and delivery of
health services in New York City.

Contact Mary Lou Russell of the Commonwealth Fund at (212)
606-3842. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
MANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNet
February 16, 1996

Florida HMOs Pan for Gold In Long-Term Care Experiment


As states seek to hold down Medicaid long-term care costs,
a handful of MCOs experiment with caring for the expensive
dual-eligible population.

PacifiCare of Florida and CAC-United HealthCare, as part of a
three-county experiment in South Florida, claim to hold down
Medicaid costs for long-term care recipients.
The HMOs combined care for 2,900 Medicaid long-term care recipients
in Broward, Dade and Palm Beach counties. About 80% of recipients
are Medicare-eligible.
Managing care for dual eligibles does not appeal to most HMOs,
which would rather enroll healthy adults.
"We're doing exactly the opposite [in this program]," says Mary
Guthrie, director of PacifiCare Independence Plan. Program
participants must be SSI/Medicaid recipients and have a condition
that prevents them from performing daily living activities.
"It's where most of the money is," says JoAnne Dutcher, director of
CAC-United ElderCare. Long-term care related costs make up the bulk
of Medicaid expenditures.
Both plans hope the state, which is developing a long-term care
policy, will expand the program.
A handful of managed care organizations around the nation do
long-term care management, including social HMOs, the Program for
All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE), and a variety of state
initiatives.
How Florida's program works: The voluntary program allows
Medicare-eligible Medicaid long-term care enrollees to retain their
out-of-network physicians and providers. PacifiCare and CAC-United
operate as supplemental insurers, covering Medicare copayments and
deductibles.
Medicaid-only recipients must seek care from in- network doctors
for primary and specialty coverage.
The plans receive a capitated fee from Medicaid for providing
standard benefits, plus an array of additional home- and
community-based services including personal care assistance,
homemaking/chore, home-delivered meals, adult day care, respite
care and skilled home care.
The plans assign a care manager to each enrollee for monthly
assessment, care planning and monitoring.
The plans say they save the state money by maintaining enrollees in
a community setting as long as it's medically acceptable and
economically feasible. When an enrollee can't be maintained in the
community, the plans cover nursing home care costs for the contract
period.
PacifiCare's Independence Plan last year received an average $1,133
per member, per month from the state. In Dade County, Medicaid paid
nursing homes an average $2,765 a month last year.
Florida Medicaid has not done an analysis on the program so it
could not verify or refute the savings claims, according to a
Medicaid spokesperson.
Contact Guthrie at (305) 569-2221, or Dutcher at (305) 948-4064.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
MANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNet
February 16, 1996

Intergroup Offers Seniors Free Health Club Membership


An Arizona Medicare HMO says its unique benefit will help
improve members' health status and the plan's competitiveness in a
tight market.

Intergroup Prepaid Health Services of Arizona Inc. gives many of
its 35,300 SeniorCare enrollees free health club memberships, a
benefit offered more often by commercial plans.
Intergroup officials cite studies showing seniors benefit from
light weight-training and aerobic workouts. Officials of the

Tucson-based HMO say encouraging Medicare beneficiaries to belong
to a club will:

o        Help prevent illness and injury;
o        Assist the plan in managing medical
conditions, including high blood pressure, diabetes and other
chronic conditions; and
o        Offer seniors a positive environment
for socializing, which is particularly important for the well-being
of seniors who have recently relocated or lost a family member.

HCFA approved the benefit last month. Intergroup may be one of the
only Medicare HMOs offering such a benefit, according to Intergroup
and HCFA officials.
The HMO provides health club memberships free to enrollees of its
zero-premium SeniorCare plan and SeniorCare high-option plan, in
Phoenix and Tucson.
HealthCare Dimensions Inc. of Tempe, which will manage the program
and conduct evaluations and satisfaction surveys of SeniorCare
enrollees, customizes its "provider networks of health clubs" to
serve managed care organizations. The health club management
company performs third party administration, design and quality
assurance of the benefit for HMOs.
Contact Sally Allison of Intergroup at (520) 751-5801, or Lynn
Lejcher of HealthCare Dimensions at ((602) 966-5412.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
MANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNet
February 16, 1996

FEDERAL & STATE BRIEFS


       HCFA is soliciting organizations for
a capitated managed care pilot project to treat Medicare
beneficiaries with end-stage renal disease. Applicants will
integrate acute and chronic care services through expanded
community care management and meet state requirements for bearing
financial risk. For the three-year demo, HCFA will pay participants
a capitated rate, adjusted for beneficiaries' treatment status. The
agency plans to give $175,000 to each participant, and expects to
choose up to four participants. HCFA could announce participants
this summer. Contact Bonnie Edington at (410) 786-6617.

       Watch for HCFA to announce this
month a Medicare "centers-of-excellence" program for cardiac and/or
orthopaedic care, according to HCFA Administrator Bruce Vladeck.
The program currently bundles payments to designated coronary
artery bypass graft and cataract surgery facilities and gives
seniors who choose such facilities a rebate.

       Federal lawmakers attempting to
salvage Medicare reform want to delay implementation of a minimum
Medicare capitation rate. A bipartisan House group is crafting a
new proposal that would set a $300 payment floor in 1997 and $350
in 1998, a year later than under the vetoed GOP budget bill. GOP
leaders also circulated a draft proposal that would let Medicare
capitated plans charge beneficiaries extra premiums if plan costs
exceeded the capitation rate.

       The nation's governors this month
unanimously approved a Medicaid reform outline that would let
states move to managed care without federal permission.
Congressional leaders are putting the proposal in legislative form
and have planned committee action for late February. House Speaker
Newt Gingrich (R-Ga) predicts Medicaid reform, which could move
forward without Medicare, could pass in March, but patient
advocates already are fighting the effort.

       HCFA officials are wrapping up
analysis of abstracted chart reviews at 23 HMOs in five states. The
reviews are part of the agency's effort to improve the quality
measurement system that peer review organizations (PROs) use to
evaluate Medicare HMOs. The agency will share the analysis with the
HMOs and PROs so they can to improve measurements of care for
Medicare beneficiaries with diabetes.

       Tennessee adopted a rule Jan. 31
that requires all managed care plans, including those in the
TennCare program, to cover high-dose chemotherapy with stem cell
transplants for certain breast cancer patients.

       Medi-Cal HMOs vary widely in the
amount of care they provide low-income enrollees, according to a
recent study by the Los Angeles-based Center for Health Care
Rights. The average number of physician encounters per Medi-Cal
enrollee in 1994 ranged from 0.37 for Universal Care to 5.14 for
Kaiser Permanente Southern California. The average for all 18 HMOs
studied was 3.5. Contact Jennifer Yang at (213) 383-4519.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
MANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNet
February 16, 1996

INDUSTRY BRIEFS


       United HealthCare Corp. of
Minneapolis signed a definitive agreement to acquire
Nashville-based HealthWise of America Inc. HealthWise owns HMOs in
Maryland, Kentucky, Tennessee and Arkansas, and has received
approval to expand its operations into Virginia and Washington.
United says the agreement will provide United with the opportunity
to expand services to Medicare beneficiaries through HealthWise's
existing Medicare HMO in Maryland. HealthWise also submitted an
application to HCFA to operate a Medicare HMO in Tennessee,
according to a HealthWise official. Contact Bernard McDonagh of
United at (612) 936-7214.

       Just a few days later, HealthWise of
America Inc. signed a letter of intent to develop and manage a
Medicaid HMO in the District of Columbia to be known as Capital
Community Health Plan. Capital is owned by five district hospitals.
Contact HealthWise's Harold Simpson at (615) 385-4666.

       All financial planning relating to
Medicare HMO capitation rates should be based on projections of the
local adjusted average per capita costs, not the U.S. per capita
cost of treating Medicare beneficiaries, says a new Coopers &
Lybrand report. Contact Sue Palsbo at (202) 822-4000.

       The American Managed Behavioral
Healthcare Assn. and a number of other groups are developing
standards for use by public agencies when writing RFPs for managed
behavioral health care services. The groups want to limit problems
associated with sometimes unclear program guidelines put out by
states and other public entities. The effort is designed to help
agencies clarify requirements. Contact the association's Clarke
Ross at (202) 434-4565.

       PHP Healthcare Corp. of Reston, Va.,
completed the sale of interest in its subsidiary, Chartered Health
Plan of Virginia, to University Health Services, which is an
affiliate of Medical College of Virginia. University will invest $3
million in Chartered of Virginia in exchange for a 30% equity
interest. Chartered, modeled on D.C. Chartered Health Plan Inc.
Medicaid HMO, operates in the Richmond and Tidewater areas of
Virginia. Unlike the D.C. plan, Chartered of Virginia will have a
Medicare product as well. Contact PHP President Jack Mazur at (703)
758-3600.

       CareAmerica Health Plans, Group
Health Cooperative of Puget Sound, Medica Health Plans, Oxford
Health Plans and Sentara Health System on Feb. 8 received grants
from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to develop innovative
volunteer programs for their elderly members. Awards totalled
$616,246 for the three-year project. The service credit-banking
programs will allow the HMOs to better respond to Medicare
beneficiaries' needs for non-medical services, such as
transportation and shopping (MMM 2/5/96, p. 2). Contact Marc Kaplan
of the foundation at (609) 243-5937.

       National Prescription Administrators
Inc., an East Hanover-N.J.-based prescription drug management firm,
launched a program to support retiree/geriatric services, called
SILVERx CARE. The program aims to improve current physician
prescribing practices and offer information services to geriatric
patients, who often suffer from more than one disease state. The
firm's program expands its clinical arm to assist physicians in
maximizing efficacy. Contact Patricia Kearns, public relations
manager, at (201) 503-1000.

       Omnia Inc., a Blue Bell, Pa.-based
women's healthcare network firm, has launched a regional network of
physicians specializing in obstetrics and gynecology in New Jersey.
Omnia, which has contracts with managed Medicare and Medicaid
organizations, assembled a similar network last summer in the
five-county Philadelphia area. On Jan. 26 the firm sent
applications to 1,300 ob/gyn specialists in New Jersey to join the
newly formed network. Contact John Reiff at (215) 567-4551.

       Correction: The Recuperation Skills
Training Center at Kaiser Permanente Medical Center in Sacramento
helped the health plan reduce its average length-of-stay for a
radical retropubic prostatectomy from seven days to four. An
article in the Jan. 19, 1996, issue reported the length-of-stay for
a different procedure.

       Correction: Florida Medicaid's move
to reflect age bands in its fee structure to Medicaid managed care
plans is expected to save the state $65 million this fiscal year.
An article in the Jan. 5, 1996 issue reported an incorrect savings
amount.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
MANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNet
February 16, 1996

Medicare Risk HMOs with Biggest Monthly Enrollment
Growth (For the month ending Jan. 22, 1996)

Source: HCFA

Plan,  Location, Enrollment for Latest Month, Contract Date, Total Enrollment

Share Health Plan of Ill., Chicago,     8,049, 7/1/84, 44,586
Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Oakland, 7,097, 4/1/94, 121,918
Rochester Area HMO, Rochester,, N.Y.,   5,680, 11/1/85, 14,739
Keystone Health Plan East, Philadelphia,5,471, 1/1/93, 50,651
Oxford Health Plans, New York,          4,255, 10/1/91, 66,399
Keystone Health Plan West, Pittsburgh,  3,723, 3/1/95, 23,359
U.S. Healthcare Systems of Pa., Blue Bell,, Pa., 
                                        3,323, 11/1/85, 50,838
Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Ohio, Cleveland, 
                                        2,890, 1/1/97, 19,349
HMO of New Jersey (South), Moorestown,, N.J., 
                                        2,735, 9/1/93, 22,724
Group Health Plan, St. Louis,           2,538, 11/1/95, 2,538
PacifiCare of Calif., Los Angeles,      2,328, 6/1/85, 280,663
Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Los Angeles, 
                                        2,127, 8/1/87, 157,702
PacifiCare of Calif., Northern Calif.,  2,096, 2/1/92, 75,080
HIP of New Jersey, North Brunswick,, N.J., 
                                        1,968, 1/1/96, 1,968
Aetna Health Plans of Central/East Pa., Eastern and Central Pa.,
                                        1,810, 6/1/94, 6,352




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
MANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNet
February 16, 1996

Change of Mindset Required to Manage Dual Eligibles


Operators of PacifiCare of Florida's Independ- ence Plan have had
to change their mindset and  operations in managing care for
Medicare/Medicaid dual eligibles.

Independence Plan Director Mary Guthrie advises HMOs eyeing
long-term care management to:

o        Work and educate out-of-network
providers in addition to network providers. In Florida, most
eligibles can see non-network physicians.
o        Contract with social service
providers. Commercial HMOs and even traditional Medicaid managed
care models don't contract with non-health care entities, but meals
and adult day care providers are essential to dual eligibles.
o        Rewrite marketing materials. The HMO
had to rewrite promotion materials at a 4th grade level and produce
materials in both Spanish and English.
o        Case manage differently.
Independence Plan case managers develop long-term relationships
with enrollees. They also must use social service providers and
networks.
o        Take more time to enroll
individuals. Forget mass-marketing this population.
o        Change mindset regarding utilization
management. This population becomes very tied to providers. While
traditional utilization management would not allow a provider to
refer patients to non-network providers, a plan for dual eligibles
may not want to be as vigilant. The extra step may keep dual
eligibles enrolled.

Guthrie says to get good economies of scale, a plan needs to be a
risk for both Medicare and Medicaid. Under the Florida program, the
plan is put at risk for only Medicaid.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-21</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B041-72</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh24.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020100 text/html 36486
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:58:32 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:44 GMT
Content-length: 36299
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh24.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 18, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>New Jersey Releases Hospital-Specific C-Section Rates</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(338 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>AMA Delegates Defeat Mandatory Point-of-Service Proposal</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(150 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Colorado Coronary Care Consortium Has its Plug Pulled</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(332 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Critical Pathways:  Perhaps Ineffective, But Here to Stay </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(284 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>HMO Medical Director Faces Felony Charge Because Not Licensed in Florida</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(334 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Patients May Also Be at Risk When Docs Are Paid Capitated Rates</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(316 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>HMO Opens Health Centers In Medically Underserved Neighborhoods</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(322 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>HMOs Mislead Medicaid and Medicare Patients, Says NYC Official</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(273 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>DEVELOPMENTS IN BRIEF</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(962 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>REPORT FROM THE FIELD:  Consulting Firm Produces Health Plan "Report Cards"&nbsp;for Employers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1864 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY 18, 1996

New Jersey Releases Hospital-Specific C-Section Rates


The primary, or first-time, cesarean section rate for New Jersey hospitals was
17.67 percent in 1994, down from 18.23 percent in 1993, according to a
hospital-specific report released by the New Jersey Hospital Assn.  that
covers 67 acute care hospitals.  This is the first release of
hospital-specific clinical data in NJHA's 77-year history.

The 17.67 rate (see chart, next page) is down from 18.23 percent in 1993, but
is higher than the national average of 15 percent and higher than the 17.02
percent for the rest of the Northeast, says NJHA.  The c-section rate ranged
from a 1994 high of 28.12 percent (LHS-Meadowlands Hospital) to a low of 9.73
percent (Memorial Hospital of Salem).

The results are particularly meaningful, says NJHA, because primary c-sections
most accurately reflect medical indications and not patient preference.  In
addition, the NJHA report provides a variance rate for each hospital, which
shows the difference between the hospital's predicted rate - based on such
risk-adjustment factors as socioeconomic conditions and demographics and the
medical condition of the mother and baby - and its actual rate.  The report
then indicates whether each hospital performed fewer or more first-time
c-sections than predicted.  Nonetheless, the study "is not flawless,"
acknowledges NJHA.  Rates are based on code information submitted by hospitals
as part of the Uniform Billing data, but not every hospital codes the same
way.  A task force of New Jersey obstetricians is currently developing
consistent definitions for diagnoses and guidelines for when such coding
should be used.  New Jersey hospitals, says the Association, will work with
physicians and the public to lower the number of c-sections by:

* endorsing active labor management; * increasing peer reviews; and *
encouraging physicians to turn babies while still in utero.

NJHA will also initiate an educational program for consumers, particularly
those many women who have had previous c-sections and refuse to try a VBAC
(vaginal birth after cesarean) delivery.  Brochures on c-sections will be
distributed to obstetricians and hospitals across the state.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY 18, 1996

AMA Delegates Defeat Mandatory Point-of-Service Proposal


The American Medical Assn.  will not use its influence to try and force all
managed care plans to provide a point-of-service (POS) feature for all
enrollees at all times.  A move to do so was voted down by the AMA House of
Delegates in a contentious battle.

Favoring access to providers outside a plan at any time were many specialty
societies whose members have seen their practices eroding and who feel that
such access for a reasonable additional copayment benefits patients.  Among
those against mandatory out-of-network access were physicians who have formed
their own health plans in competition with HMOs.  Others felt that mandatory
POS plans would greatly increase plan expenses.

Existing AMA policy, affirmed by the House of Delegates, endorses the
proposition that patients be given the option to elect or reject a POS option
when joining a plan and during annual open enrollment.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY 18, 1996

Colorado Coronary Care Consortium Has its Plug Pulled


The Rocky Mountain Heart Consortium, which has been collecting data relating
to heart disease from Colorado hospitals in order to determine and compare
quality of care, closed its doors December 31 because of lack of funding for
continued operations.

The nonprofit Consortium, made up of Colorado hospitals, physician groups, and
community members, was founded in 1991 to maintain a high level of quality and
to keep costs down.  This past year, when contributions were asked of 14
Colorado hospitals, only eight signed up.  When it became evident that there
would be financial problems and lack of wide support, the Consortium's board
of directors decided to end its mission.

During the Consortium's existence it was instrumental in decreasing the number
of open heart surgeries in the state.  It also restrained hospitals from
purchasing potentially profitable - but unnecessary - equipment.  One
researcher for the Consortium told UM that the major reason the Consortium
went out of business is a change in climate in Colorado since the Consortium's
inception; namely, hospital mergers and the emergence of managed care.  "The
bottom line is cost," she said.  "Perhaps we'll come around to quality again -
but it's not happening right now."  Managed care isn't interested in seeing
data, she adds, because they "know" they are giving good care.

The demise of the Consortium and its data collection capabilities coincides
with the Colorado Health Data Commission being voted out of existence by the
state legislature.  Soon it will only be hospitals gathering their own data -
and there will be no mechanism for comparisons, says a spokesperson for the
defunct Consortium.

A Denver Post editorial places a lot of blame on the Colorado Hospital Assn.
for contributing to the deaths of the Health Data Commission and the
Consortium.  "The death of the Heart Consortium, a casualty of parsimony and
fear in the health care sector, is but an early warning sign of even more
troubled times ahead," the editorial says.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY 18, 1996

Critical Pathways:  Perhaps Ineffective, But Here to Stay 


While critical pathway programs being used by the nation's health care
organizations affect the care of thousands of patients daily, there is no hard
evidence of their effectiveness, according to an analysis that appears in the
Dec.  15 issue of the Annals of Internal Medicine.

The authors of the Annals study, who practice at Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, and Partners Community Health Care in Boston,
believe that critical pathways hold promise for reducing costs and improving
quality.  And managed care organizations are increasingly pressuring hospitals
to use pathways to deal with unexplained variations in medical practice and to
improve care.

Despite the growing popularity of pathways, "no controlled study has shown a
critical pathway to reduce the duration of hospital stay or to decrease
resource use, nor has any study shown critical pathways to improve patient
satisfaction or outcomes," the researchers say.  In addition, they point out
that many physicians view critical pathways as "cookbook medicine."

Uncertainties aside, pathways are a tool that is here to stay.  Therefore, the
researchers offer some ideas on how best to implement them.  If critical
pathways are to live up to their promise, "full and informed participation of
physicians" in the development of critical pathways is necessary.  The
researchers suggest that a "physician-expert" lead the multidisciplinary team
that develops a critical pathway.  Such a physician, they say, lends
credibility and "builds a foundation of support among all clinicians."

The researchers also explain their approach to critical steps in the pathway
development process, including evaluating current care processes, evaluating
medical evidence and the practices of other providers, and structuring the
critical pathway in a way that is "user friendly."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY 18, 1996

HMO Medical Director Faces Felony Charge Because Not Licensed in Florida


The medical director of a Florida-based HMO responsible for overseeing the
plan's UM decisions got into big trouble because he wasn't licensed to
practice medicine in the state.

Roger Strube, MD, the former medical director of AV-Med Health Plan, who is
licensed in Indiana and Wisconsin, is charged with approving and/or
recommending courses of medical care and treatment in violation of a Florida
law prohibiting the unlicensed practice of medicine.  He is also charged with
violating a requirement of the state's HMO regulatory body, the Agency for
Health Care Administration, that prepaid Medicaid health plan medical
directors hold a valid state license to practice medicine.

Strube is pleading not guilty to the felony charges in what GHAA/AMCRA calls
"perhaps the first case of its kind in the country."

Strube is not in violation of any law, insists Richard Dorff, executive
director of the Florida Assn.  of HMOs.  He tells UM that under the relevant
state statute, the professional judgment of a physician licensed in Florida
concerning the proper course of treatment of a health plan member "should not
be subject to modification by the [managed care] plan or its board of
directors or administrators .  .  ."  However, it goes on, the statute "shall
not be considered to restrict a utilization management program established by
an organization."  And that's all that Strube was doing, says Dorff -
utilization management.  He adds that the attending physician has the sole
responsibility for attending the patient, but that the statute doesn't
preclude a medical director from reviewing clinical criteria with the
physician.

Subsequent to the charges being brought against Strube, and because of the
case, Medicaid contracts have to stipulate that the chief medical director of
a commercial HMO must be licensed in the state.  Another law requires that
doctors using telemedicine must be licensed in Florida.

Is there a movement in Florida to thwart the benefits of managed care?  "It
certainly could be interpreted as such," says Dorff.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY 18, 1996

Patients May Also Be at Risk When Docs Are Paid Capitated Rates


Physician groups that have capitated payment arrangements directly with HMOs
enjoy practicing medicine without payers' interventions in their medical
decisions.  These arrangements, though, raise eyebrows in some quarters about
utilization and quality of care.

Six California medical groups paid by capitation are subjects of a study
appearing in the Dec.  21 New England Journal of Medicine.  Researchers found
that the groups have relatively low rates of hospital utilization and
physicians per enrollee.  The study also notes that managing utilization
through the groups' own medical directors and physician committees creates a
cooperative rather than an adversarial approach to utilization management.

The same issue of NEJM presents results of a telephone survey of 138 managed
care plans from 20 metropolitan areas nationwide.  Among the findings:  "Fifty
percent of the group or staff HMOs and 74 percent of the network or IPA HMOs
adjusted payments [to physicians] according to utilization and cost patterns."

In an accompanying editorial, Steffie Woolhandler, MD, and David Himmelstein,
MD, oft-quoted critics of the health care system, look at risk-sharing
arrangements and acknowledge the attractiveness of doctors, not insurance
executives, managing medical care.  They bemoan the idea, though, that some
doctors will boost their incomes by suppressing the use of services.  "If we
shun the sick or withhold information to benefit ourselves, we conspire in the
demise of our profession," they note.  "Let us not end up like tobacco-company
executives, who, repenting their sins, find that their contracts forbid
confessing them."

Himmelstein, a single-payer health plan advocate, was relieved of his duties
at U.S.  Healthcare effective February 26 because, he says, he violated a
confidentiality clause prohibiting member physicians from saying anything that
could undermine confidence in the plan.  The editorial he co-wrote includes
some disparaging statements about his soon-to-be former employer's gag rules,
profits, chief executive salary, and percentage of income that is spent on
health care.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY 18, 1996

HMO Opens Health Centers In Medically Underserved Neighborhoods


Oxford Health Plans is opening two community-based health centers in New York
City, the managed care organization announced last week..  Each will be
staffed with at least five board-certified physicians who will serve all
Oxford members, "but particularly those members living in the two low-income
communities currently underserved by physicians and other quality health
professionals," says David Snow, the managed care company's executive vice
president.

One center is scheduled to open this March in the Mott Haven section of the
Bronx, an area with only 42 primary care physicians, or one doctor for every
5,525 people.  Five new physicians, who are members of a professional
corporation under contract to Oxford, increases the number of doctors by 12
percent.  The site, which once housed a supermarket, is being renovated at a
cost of about $1.8 million, according to Oxford.

The other center, to open in June in the Brownsville/East New York section of
Brooklyn, a former furniture building, will be renovated at a cost of about
$1.5 million.  In addition to professional staffing, both centers will have
onsite lab drawing stations and dental and radiology facilities.  They will
maintain a community room and help organize outreach programs to improve the
quality of life in the neighborhoods.

Oxford went the health center route because there is a potential for clients
in the neighborhoods, but no network in place serving the Medicare and
Medicaid population.  "We thought it would be advantageous to the community to
actually put a facility there with doctors who meet our standards," says Bill
Ricco, director of all Oxford Health centers.

Oxford is making a large investment in the centers, and "we hope to at least
break even on it," says Ricco.  He adds that several other areas have been
identified in the New York metropolitan area for similar centers.  "Progress
will depend, to some extent, on what happens in Brooklyn and the Bronx."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY 18, 1996

HMOs Mislead Medicaid and Medicare Patients, Says NYC Official


A New York City politician doesn't like the advertising generated by HMOs.  A
study of marketing material from six Medicaid or Medicare HMOs led Public
Advocate Mark Green to refer several of the ads "that appear the most
misleading" to the state's attorney general for possible action.

"Our investigation showed that for some HMOs, the letters stand for 'Hyping
Medicine to the Old,'" says Green.  Examples of misleading ads, according to
Green, include "we are #1" data from one plan's survey being used to advertise
another of its plans.  Still other plans promise "something for nothing,"
ignoring the fact that to qualify for the Medicare managed care plans,
"recipients still have to pay their Medicare Part B premiums - a fact
conveniently buried in their marketing materials."

Oxford Health Plan of New York, one of the accused HMOs, retorts that every
advertisement and marketing brochure is reviewed and approved by city and
federal regulators.

In a separate Public Advocate report, Oxford did indeed come out Number One
with regard to the greatest number of primary care doctors and the largest
proportion who are board certified.  Not faring as well was the only nonprofit
HMO in the report, the Health Insurance Plan of Greater New York, which had
the greatest number of valid complaints from patients.  Almost all the HMOs
did not provide accurate basic information over the phone, says the report.
For example, patients had been told by two HMOs that they have 48 hours to
call for approval when admitted to a hospital emergency room, when in fact the
plan requires a call within 24 hours.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY 18, 1996

DEVELOPMENTS IN BRIEF


A physician profiling bill that would provide $335,000 for the state medical
board to compile information for consumers about physicians, including their
malpractice history, passed the Massachusetts Senate in December.  The House
is expected to pass the legislation in about a month, prior to its expected
signing by Gov.  William Weld (R).

Case management guidelines to reduce medical costs, enhance health care
quality, and increase provider and patient satisfaction have been developed by
Aetna Health Plans in collaboration with the Individual Case Management
Association.  Aetna started with generic guidelines applicable to all cases
and then created specific ones for high-cost, catastrophic cases, such as
AIDS, high-risk pregnancy, organ transplants, brain injury, and spinal cord
injury.  There are separate guidelines for workers' compensation cases.
Copies of the case management practice guidelines may be obtained from Mosby,
Inc.  by calling 800/633-6699.

HEDIS should provide a mechanism for companies to track their own quality
improvement rather than compare individual plans in a way that implies one's
superiority over another, according to USQA, the research arm of the managed
care company U.S.  Healthcare.  An article in USQA Quality Monitor shows how
U.S.  Healthcare used HEDIS to improve its rate of giving retinal exams to
diabetics.  After consecutive years with rates of only 35.1 percent and 35.9
percent, letters were sent to physicians and to diabetic patients reminding
them of recommendations for yearly exams.  The percentage for 1994 jumped to
41.6 percent, even though the quality improvement program was not implemented
until mid-year.

Boston's Beth Israel Hospital and Harvard Medical School have formed a
foundation for research and medicine in order to avoid overlapping of the
academic and clinical missions of both institutions.  The restructuring of the
longstanding relationship between the two institutions was deemed necessary
because of declining financial support for medical education and the changing
methods of delivering and paying for health care.  Cost-cutting and clinical
treatment beyond the usual bounds of the teaching hospital are making some of
the traditional strategies for training doctors obsolete, say hospital and
school spokespersons.

Female heart attack patients received clot-busting drugs nearly one-half hour
later than their male counterparts, according to a two-year study conducted at
two suburban Michigan hospitals, which is reported in the January issue of
Annals of Emergency Medicine.  In addition, more than half the men received an
ECG within 15 minutes of arrival to the emergency department, while less than
40 percent of women were tested during this time.

Maternity stay legislation is expected to be considered in the 1996
legislatures of the following states:  California, Connecticut, Delaware,
Florida, Hawaii, Iowa, Maine, Minnesota, New Hampshire, New York, Ohio, Rhode
Island, Virginia, Washington, and Wisconsin.  Meanwhile, on its own, George
Washington University Hospital in Washington DC plans to permit women who have
normal deliveries to remain hospitalized for as long as two days - a day
longer than most managed care plans pay for.  "We felt it was time for the
clinicians to be ahead of the legislators, and not necessarily have something
mandated," says Keith Ghezzi, the hospital's medical director.

Increasingly, medical resources are being used on patients with somatic
symptoms that have no pathophysiological explanation.  The reasons include
little financial disincentive to seek treatment because of enrollment in a
prepaid health plan and lower tolerance of mild symptoms and benign
infirmities.  A report in the Dec.  27 Journal of the American Medical Assn.
says that a gatekeeper primary care physician could make it easier to detect
and control physician shopping and to prevent fragmented care, excessive
testing, and the overuse of specialty consultations.  "Medical personnel need
to remind both their patients and the public that not every symptom denotes
disease, and despite modern biomedicine's stunning advances, there remains a
great deal it cannot cure," say the researchers.

There is evidence that competitive pricing among HMOs brings rewards to their
customers, according to a just-released market report by InterStudy.  For
example:  It appears that family premiums are lower in markets with high
enrollment growth.  And, on average, medical expense ratios tend to be lower
in markets with low industry penetration but with a greater number of HMOs.

Regardless of the budget debate outcome, the growth of Medicare managed care
is expected to continue, says a spokesperson for The Managed Care Information
Center.  Currently, the largest managed care provider for a Medicare
population is PacifiCare with 481,365 subscribers in the West, Northwest, and
Southwest, according to an enrollment study by the Center.  Next in order of
size are FHP with 369,305 subscribers; Kaiser Foundation HP, with 353,455
covered lives; Humana Group Health Plan, with 307,155 members; and U.S.
Healthcare, with 72,192 subscribers.

Managed care tends to prevent people with rare diseases from being referred to
university-affiliated hospitals, the institutions most likely to have
physicians familiar with such diseases, says the National Organization for
Rare Disorders.  The consequences, according to NORD, are denial of access to
specialists, young doctors not being trained to recognize rare disorders and
their treatment, and the severe economic problems of teaching hospitals which
may force many of them to close.

Disease management techniques (UM 12/21/95) are now being used with organ
transplants.  Sandoz, a pharmaceutical company that manufactures a drug that
helps prevent organ rejection, and Value Health, a provider of specialty
managed care benefit programs, have joined forces to design and offer
programs, products, and services that will help health care providers enhance
patient care, further improve organ survival rates, promote organ donation,
and manage costs.

The National Institutes of Health have turned out to be a winner in the budget
battle with a 5.8 percent increase in funding for a full fiscal year.  In an
about face, Republicans determined that biomedical research fosters economic
growth.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
JANUARY 18, 1996

REPORT FROM THE FIELD:  Consulting Firm Produces Health Plan "Report Cards"
for Employers


Taking advantage of employers' hunger for information on health plans'
performance, the employee benefits consulting firm Hewitt Associates recently
launched its own health plan "report card" involving plans in 75 markets and a
proprietary set of performance indicators.

To date, 130 large national employers have signed on for Hewitt's Health Value
Initiative (HVI), which was rolled out in early December.  Participants
include such Fortune 500 companies as Marriott International, IBM, and United
Airlines.  The fee depends on what a company wants in how many markets, but is
less than if the regional reports had to be customized, says a Hewitt
spokesperson.

HVI has been designed to simplify the plan evaluation process by providing
participating employers with regional cost and quality of care scores for each
plan offered in a region.  Results will be available in late March (see figure
1, next page), but if an employer wants additional updates, Hewitt will work
with it on an individual basis.

Financial Index

For the HVI, Hewitt is using its own performance indicator sets, dubbed the
"Financial Index" and "Quality Index."  The Financial Index is an actuarial
study that determines the economic value of each plan.  It is based on
premiums adjusted for location, enrollee demographics, dependent coverage,
plan design, and managed care efficiency.  ("Managed care efficiency" refers
to the efficiency of the mix of plans a large employer offers - typically HMO,
point-of-service (POS), and indemnity.  An employer who knows relative
efficiencies may want to look at the direction in which it should be steering
employees.)

With the Financial Index, the employer is able to determine whether a plan
provides good economic value, says Tom Beauregard, principal in Hewitt's
Rowayton CT office and chief architect of the HVI.  "We are testing the value
of a plan's cost relative to the population enrolled in that plan.  So we look
at the age of the population, male/female distribution, number of dependents,
and geographic location of enrollees.  We are basically coming back to the
employer to say whether this is good or bad economic value based on this
actuarial study.  It's not a simple survey; it's a refined analysis of the
economic value of health plans being offered to employers."

"Employers," says Beauregard, "will also be able to see the range of economic
value that each of their health plans is offering other participating
employers.  We may say to a company that a health plan is offering a good
value in actuarial terms, but it's not the best value out there.  We can show
the range of economic values from the 30 or so companies within our study that
use this health plan.  In other words, two employers with the same health plan
can in fact be paying different amounts, depending on a number of factors,
including negotiating skill."

Quality Index

The Quality Index is based on a Request for Information (RFI) to the health
plans in the 75 markets, along with a scoring process.  The RFI asks for
measures of clinical quality (clinical processes, physician/hospital
management, and quality improvement and utilization), administrative
effectiveness (member services, access, ID card issuance, and post-65
coverage), and organizational effectiveness (provider compensation, financial
stability, membership, and National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA)
accreditation status).  An RFI will be sent out annually, but a health plan
has the opportunity to update its information at any time for inclusion in
Hewitt's ongoing database, says Beauregard.

An RFI was sent in mid-December to over 1,000 HMOs, POS plans, PPOs, and
indemnity plans in the 75 markets, and the results will be sent to employers
at the end of March.  The health plans are expected to answer all questions
because they have done so before on behalf of individual Hewitt clients and
because the questions are based largely on the familiar Health Plan Employer
Data and Information Set (HEDIS 2.5) developed by NCQA, the HMO accrediting
group.  Beauregard says that there are about 40 questions asked, half of which
are HEDIS.  If a plan has filed HEDIS information, it can just attach it to
the questionnaire rather than reanswer the questions for Hewitt.

Regarding authentication of responses relating to a plan's quality, Beauregard
says the RFI is very specific.  "In terms of utilization measures, we ask the
health plans to use the HEDIS 2.5 methodology for calculating rates.  If they
haven't used it, we ask them for their methodology - for kind of a paper audit
of the methodology."

The health benefits consultant doesn't expect to do onsite procedural audits
as part of the HVI.  But, he says, "we have gone through the study many times
with employers on their larger plans and frequently have gone onsite for
operational, procedural, and clinical audits.  But those audits for individual
employers tend to be for their largest plans that through a scorecard process
have a high variant compared to other plans.  So the Quality Index that is
part of the HVI is a great way for employers to trigger the plans for which
they want onsite audits.  The triggers typically are a large enrolled
population in that plan and how that plan did relative to other plans in the
same community."

Hewitt vs.  HEDIS

Beauregard insists that Hewitt in no way means to supplant, or compete with,
HEDIS.  He says that even though the HVI is new, Hewitt - which according to
NCQA, is a member of a HEDIS users' group - has been offering financial
scorecards to its clients for the past five years, and quality scorecards for
three.  A spokesperson for NCQA finds no fault with Hewitt's use of HEDIS
questions.

Beauregard adds that while HEDIS questions focus on utilization rates, such as
a child's immunization rate within the first two years of life, the Hewitt RFI
goes beyond that by asking questions about administrative effectiveness,
organizational stability, member services, products available, service area
information, provider compensation, and financial ratios of the health plan.
Data, Not Decisions

"We've found that on average 45 percent of each employer's plans cost more
than the community average," says Beauregard.  "If all of those plans achieve
average cost efficiency, employers could save 3 percent to 5 percent of their
total health care costs.  We've also found an average 18 percent difference
between the most efficient and least efficient health plans, making the
potential for savings even greater."

These figures obviously are not from the recently-initiated HVI.  "We've done
these kinds of studies in individual cases across the country for the last
several years," says Beauregard.  "This is the information we have extracted
from our database."

"We provide data findings and advice, but ultimately it's the employer that
makes the decision," says the Hewitt principal.  "An employer, for example,
may look at a plan and note that in his marketplace the plan has the highest
quality score and provides the highest economic value - but that he has a very
small part of his population in that plan.  The employer at that point may try
to encourage migration into that plan from other plans in that same
marketplace.  It comes down to the employers' objectives.

"What's customized about HVI is the employers' application of the findings.
There is no one answer for what employers do with the data.  The data provide
a regional description of the value of each health plan the employer is
offering.  What the employer does with that information is going to vary
across the board."

Whether cost or quality receives more attention depends on the employer, says
Beauregard.  He says that many large employers focus almost entirely on the
quality of care that's being delivered.  Others focus almost all their energy
on the economic efficiency of the plan.  Most employers fall somewhere
between.

An Employer's Perspective

Rohm & Haas, a global specialty chemical company headquartered in
Philadelphia, has signed on to Hewitt's Health Value Initiative and will
receive reports on about 30 health plans for all its U.S.  locations.  In
addition, the company is having Hewitt conduct onsite audits of health plans
at its three major locations:  U.S.  Healthcare for the Philadelphia area,
Sanus for Houston, and Humana for Louisville.  "It just gets too expensive to
audit everyone," says Lois Morris, BSN, manager of health care and disability
programs.

Morris says that U.S.  Healthcare is a natural for an audit because it is the
company's biggest health plan provider and will be used as a benchmark.  It is
also the plan with which employees are most satisfied.  On the other hand,
Sanus is also a natural because a Hewitt analysis and a satisfaction survey
have indicated problem areas.  "We work with Hewitt by building on previous
analyses," explains Morris.

Quality analyses weren't available not so many years ago under the old
indemnity system, says the company benefits administrator.  "We had to assume
that doctors practiced high quality medicine.  There was no attempt, unless
state by state, such as Pennsylvania's Health Care Cost Containment Council,
to measure quality."

"Primarily," says Morris, "we want to be comfortable that these very
profitable companies, such as U.S.  Healthcare, are delivering cost-efficient
and quality plans.  We look at the Health Value Initiative as an opportunity
to partner with the HMOs for improvement.  In other words, we are not
interested in saying an HMO's immunization rates or mammogram rates are low
for this area, and therefore we want money back.  We want the HMO to tell us
what they plan to do to increase that rate so that it exceeds local standards.
And then we want to relay this information back to employees in order to make
them comfortable with the choices that we are offering.  The unions are also
interested in that because neither do they want to hear complaints about
HMOs."

We also want to say to the health plan that we've given it ample opportunity
to improve, says Morris.  "We certainly would consider eliminating a plan that
shows no interest in improving the quality of health care delivery."

"The services of Hewitt do not come cheaply," adds Pat Coyle, director of
benefits and workforce strategies.  "But we feel it's money well spent when we
see an increase in quality.  The Health Value Initiative also lets us know how
our costs compare with the costs of other companies, and this puts us in a
good bargaining position."

HEDIS information, says Coyle, is only part of the basis for a clinical
assessment.  "Hewitt fine-tunes HEDIS information and takes it to another
level, adding what is important to our employee population."

Overall health care costs have been pretty flat over the past couple of years,
says Coyle, largely because 80 percent of the company's employees, thanks to
incentives, have enrolled in HMOs.  "We have to be able to go back to those
employees to assure them that we are working to improve the health benefit
program.

"And even though costs are flat, it's still a $50 million expenditure for the
company.  We can't continue to shell out that kind of money without some
quality indicators that give us confidence in our plans."  -KM




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-22</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B041-97</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh21.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020120 text/html 40790
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:59:25 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:45 GMT
Content-length: 40603
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh21.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Budget Negotiators Push On, But Actuaries Say Plans Could Backfire</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(420 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>FTC Reviews 'Light' Cigarette Rules</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(123 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Some HMOs Shortchange Patient Care, But Field Pays Lots To Its Executives</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(346 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Pew Urges Start Of Interdisciplinary Evaluations And End To 'Monopolies'</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(243 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Not All Whistleblowers' Tunes Unhappy</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(210 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>'Gag' Rule Gets Himmelstein, He Says</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(208 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Double-Digit Indemnity Hikes Predicted</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(136 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Hospitals Happier With JCAHO Surveys</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(139 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>Approval Fails To Quell Controversy Over 'Sensor Pad' Breast Lump Device</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(139 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>VT Hospitals Decry Scaled-Back Reform</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(144 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>Briefly This Week...</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(447 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>People Coming & Going...</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(222 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>Year In Review:  Ghost of Reform Returns to Haunt GOP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1484 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>In Other Business...</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(931 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>Medicine & Health's 8th Annual Health People of the Year Awards</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(356 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Budget Negotiators Push On, But Actuaries Say Plans Could Backfire


Budget negotiators meeting Dec.  29 vowed to work through the holiday if
necessary.  "We all know what the differences are.  The key now is to keep
working" on a balanced budget, says White House Chief of Staff Leon Panetta.
The greatest concern is to get federal workers, "innocent victims being hurt,"
back to work, he said.  "We want to get this done as quickly as we can to get
federal workers back to work, and get back to normal as soon as possible,"
agreed Senate Budget Committee Chair Pete Domenici (R-NM).

Meanwhile the American Academy of Actuaries sees "major defects" in Medicare
reform plans at both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue.  Its Medicare Work Group
says both White House and congressional proposals rely too heavily on curbing
provider pay growth when there's no evidence it reduces overall spending.  "In
fact, in many cases, the rate of growth in volume and intensity of services
increases when unit payments are lowered," says a report released Dec.  21.
It criticizes both plans for having capitation rates set "arbitrarily" by
government rather than the market.  That will cause providers to choose
payment mechanisms to maximize revenues, it says.  Hiking rates where they are
currently low, plus "favorable selection" of capitated plans by healthy
seniors, also make it "far more likely" that overall costs will rise, say the
actuaries.  Provider-sponsored networks in particular "will allow for
significant increases in favorable selection."  Providers who make up such
plans "have detailed knowledge of their own patients and, on that basis, will
be able to steer these patients to the program that will yield the most
favorable payments" for such plans, say the actuaries.  The report slams as
"fiscal sleight-of-hand" an Administration proposal to transfer home health
pay from the Part A Trust Fund to the Part B Trust Fund without a
corresponding increase in Part B premiums.  It "gives the appearance of having
solved a problem" by meeting short-range solvency standards, says the report,
but "undermines" fiscal discipline.  The report also blasts the Republicans'
"failsafe" mechanism that would cut provider pay further if expected savings
from capitation don't materialize.  Such cuts could decrease access and
quality in the Medicare fee-for-service program.  Where capitation rates are
also cut, that could mean access to quality care is "significantly impaired,"
says the report.  Still, says Medicare Working Group Chair Guy King, it would
only take a handful of changes, such as adding beneficiary cost-sharing to the
failsafe and increasing competitive bidding, to make "a pretty good plan."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

FTC Reviews 'Light' Cigarette Rules


The Federal Trade Commission is reconsidering cigarette tar and nicotine
descriptions.  "Light" cigarettes are defined as those with less than 15
milligrams of tar.  But tobacco foes say the smoking machines used to
determine cigarette content underestimate how much smokers inhale.  They cite
surveys showing most people think "light" cigarettes are safer.  But
scientific studies show that "light" cigarette smokers can often ingest as
many harmful substances as regular cigarette smokers.  They either cover
airholes or suck harder, longer, or more often.  The Commission is thinking
about having cigarette manufacturers list a range of tar and nicotine levels
rather than a set number, or include a statement saying that actual inhaled
amounts vary.  And deceptive advertising suits are another possibility.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Some HMOs Shortchange Patient Care, But Field Pays Lots To Its Executives


Some HMOs are taking much more off the top than others, says a Weiss Ratings
study released Dec.  19.  The average plan spends 83 cents of every premium
dollar on patient care.  But CaliforniaCare Health Plan, with more than 2
million enrollees, spends 74.8 cents, Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Georgia
spends 72.4 cents, and CIGNA Healthcare of Virginia spends 71.5 cents.  At the
other end, Aetna Health Plans of New York spend 94.6 cents of every premium
dollar on patient care, and the Scott & White Health Plan in Texas and the 4.8
million member Kaiser Foundation Health Plan in California both spend 98.3
cents.  Meanwhile another study shows HMOs are paying their CEOs more than any
other industry.  The Crystal Report says total annual pay to Foundation Health
Corp.'s Daniel Crowley is $6,147,000 - that's 277 percent above the average
for executives in companies of similar size and financial performance.  U.S.
Healthcare's Leonard Abramson gets $3,992,000 a year - 107 percent above size
and performance peers.  Healthcare Compare's James Smith gets $1,756,000 - 88
percent above average pay at similar firms.  The report, which analyzed
compensation packages of 896 CEOs who had held their jobs for at least 3
years, found that health insurance industry CEOs as a group earn 80 percent
above average pay.  Pharmaceutical and biotech firms also pay executives well
above average rates.

Yet another study suggests costs under capitation are cut most by
physician-owned groups.  A study in the Dec.  21 New England Journal of
Medicine of six physician-owned medical groups paid primarily under capitation
found that, for non-Medicare patients in 1994, hospital days per 1,000 ranged
from 120 to 140, vs.  a 1993 average of 232 for commercial health maintenance
plans in California and 297 nationally.  Rates of physician visits were also
lower than at HMOs; one group averaged 6.8 days per Medicare enrollee in 1994
vs.  a 9.1 average for the state.  The authors caution that the data were not
controlled for case-mix, and could mean merely that the groups had relatively
healthy patients.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Pew Urges Start Of Interdisciplinary Evaluations And End To 'Monopolies'


Physicians should no longer be evaluated only by their own kind, says the Pew
Health Professions Commission.  Interdisciplinary oversight is among
recommendations for health provider regulatory reforms released Dec.  22 by
the Commission's Task Force on Health Care Workforce Regulation.  Nurses,
physicians' assistants, and consumers should be included in physician
evaluation because managed care increasingly involves interdisciplinary teams
of providers, says the Task Force.  Director Leonard Finocchio says
hospital-based, fee-for-service practice skills "are about to be obsolete.  We
must instead use new strategies for ensuring that physicians, nurses, and
other [providers] understand the health care of tomorrow - community-based
managed care that emphasizes prevention and primary care solutions."  The Task
Force also calls for an overhaul of scopes-of-practice rules that have
"created monopolies" by erecting "unreasonable access barriers."  Dental
hygienists should be "free from a financial leash" to dentists, nurses and
midwives should be free to manage uncomplicated pregnancies and deliveries,
and nurse practitioners and physicians' assistants should be able to bill for
their services "without requiring the consumer to make an overhead payment to
physicians," says Commission Chair Richard Lamm.  The Task Force says there
should be periodic competency testing to ensure that providers are current
with the newest information.  And it wants disciplinary files opened to the
public.  The medical establishment is criticizing the report.  The Federation
of State Medical Boards' James Winn says consumers are already on most boards,
but no physicians were on the Task Force.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Not All Whistleblowers' Tunes Unhappy


Most people who blow the whistle on scientific misconduct say the negative
effects are not so bad.  A survey of such whistleblowers by the Department of
Health & Human Services' Office of Research Integrity finds that fears of
retaliation are not always borne out.  Almost a third (31 percent) of
respondents say they had no negative repercussions, and almost as many (28
percent) say they only experienced one.  However, 12 percent say they were
fired, jobs were not renewed, or pay hikes were denied.  Fully 43 percent say
they were pressured to drop allegations, 40 percent say they were victims of
counter-allegations, 25 percent report ostracism, 20 percent say research
support was reduced, 15 percent say they were threatened with lawsuits, 10
percent say travel funds were cut, 10 percent say desirable work assignments
were lost, 10 percent say staff support was reduced, 9 percent say manuscript
reviews were delayed, 9 percent say they were denied tenure, and 7 percent say
they lost promotions.  In most cases, the accused initiated retaliation.  But
institutional officials like administrators, deans, and department chairs were
involved in 88 percent of serious, career-threatening actions.  The report
concludes that, to prevent the most serious consequences, regulations and
enforcement must "primarily" target institutional officials.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
MEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

'Gag' Rule Gets Himmelstein, He Says


Prominent single-payer health plan advocate David Himmelstein says he's being
ousted from an HMO for violating its 'gag' rule.  The Physicians for a
National Health Program co-founder contends that U.S.  Healthcare is dropping
him for comments he made at a National Managed Healthcare Congress.  He showed
a slide of the confidentiality or 'gag' clause prohibiting member physicians
from saying anything that could "undermine confidence" in the plan.  He also
complained about referral disincentives and the CEO's multimillion dollar
salary, and made similar comments on the "Donahue" show.  "It is not illegal
for them to fire me," he concedes.  "We need a law outlawing" gag rules and to
throw firms that use them out of health care, he says.  U.S.  Healthcare says
it is dropping Himmelstein because it has too many doctors in his area, but
Himmelstein says the plan is hiring.  The HMO industry says confidentiality
clauses aren't designed to curtail patient advocacy, and merely protect
proprietary information.  But gag rules were repeatedly attacked at last
month's American Medical Association meeting.  The AMA has many of its own
employees sign confidentiality agreements.  Nonetheless, its Council on
Ethical & Judicial Affairs is drafting policy on the issue that may be ready
for the Association's June meeting.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
MEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Double-Digit Indemnity Hikes Predicted


Only loosely-managed indemnity plans will see costs rise by more than 10
percent in 1996, predicts the Alexander & Alexander Consulting group.  Its
survey of self-funded, employer-sponsored medical plans suggests that
preferred provider organizations will see increases of 9 percent to 10
percent.  Point-of-service HMOs that let members see out-of-plan physicians
will cost 5 percent to 7 percent more.  And closed-panel HMOs will see costs
rise by at most 4 percent, if at all, says the survey.  It found little
difference among regions, except for higher indemnity plan increases of 15
percent in California.  Meanwhile Interstudy predicts Boston, Nassau-Suffolk
NY, Philadelphia, Tampa-St.  Petersburg, and St.  Louis will lead large
markets' HMO growth in 1996.  Fastest-growing medium size markets include West
Palm Beach-Boca Raton FL, Albany-Schenectady NY, Springfield MA, Worcester MA,
and Knoxville TN.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
MEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Hospitals Happier With JCAHO Surveys


Hospital are more satisfied with Joint Commission on Accreditation of
Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) onsite surveys, according to an American
Hospital Association (AHA) survey.  The survey, conducted in November, found
that 64 percent of hospitals "strongly" agree that they are satisfied, up from
48 percent last August.  Just one year ago relations between JCAHO and
hospitals were so bad AHA was talking about withdrawing its support from the
accrediting body.  Hospitals are unhappy with delays in getting written
accreditation reports after onsite surveys.  Only 63 percent said reports were
delivered within a reasonable time, down from 76 percent in August.  JCAHO
says a computer system caused delays.  The number of hospitals who feel the
JCAHO survey was of value stayed at about 80 percent.  But the number who feel
it's worth the fees charged is up slightly.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
MEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Approval Fails To Quell Controversy Over 'Sensor Pad' Breast Lump Device


Foes and fans dislike the Dec.  22 Food & Drug Administration (FDA) approval
of the Sensor Pad.  The 10-year tussle over the purported breast lump
detection aide is one of FDA critics' favorite examples of alleged agency
arrogance and intransigence.  The FDA says it granted approval now because
data submitted in November show that the product, two sheets of plastic
sliding over a silicone filling, does not decrease detection of lumps.  An FDA
advisory panel asked the manufacturer, Inventive Products Inc., for such
evidence earlier in the year.  But Pad critics say there's still no proof that
it improves lump detection.  And Pad supporters say the approval, allowing
sales only in clinics and physicians' offices, is too narrow.  Both camps
claim the action was political.  Advocates of legislation to allow
over-the-counter sales plan to push ahead.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
MEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

VT Hospitals Decry Scaled-Back Reform


The exclusion of inpatient coverage from sharply curtailed health reform plans
in Vermont has hospitals crying foul.  Legislation was passed last spring to
enroll everyone below 150 percent of the poverty level in managed care.  But
only one out-of-state, for-profit plan successfully bid, and it didn't have
the infrastructure to meet the Jan.  1 target startup date.  Providers say the
contract it offered was not for true managed care but "discount
fee-for-service" that indemnified the plan against any decisions it made.  The
state is going ahead with enrollments in a "limited fee-for-service" plan,
albeit only for people below 100 percent of the poverty level.  The governor's
office says inpatient coverage won't be provided until at least two managed
care plans are participating.  But hospitals feel cheated.  The whole package
wouldn't have passed without their support, says hospital association
President Norm Wright.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
MEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Briefly This Week...


The largest provider of insurance to cover gaps in Medicare coverage is
increasing premium costs 30 percent on average.  The 3.1 million seniors with
American Association of Retired Persons "Medigap" policies will be charged on
average $51 per month for the most basic and $151.75 for the most complete
plan.  Growth of outpatient claims is being blamed.

Hospitals can now check the Internet to see if they're getting a good deal on
disposable products.  PriceGuide, from the nonprofit research agency ECRI,
provides both national and geographic average price and lowest price paid by
hospitals for brandname disposables.  A test of the system for cardiac
catherization labs found average potential savings of $243,000 per hospital,
says ECRI.

The Food & Drug Administration may allow more flexibility for food label
health claims.  A proposed rule in the Dec.  21 Federal Register would allow
synonymous nutrient content claims next to the required standard text, permit
health claims for certain foods that don't contain at least 10 percent of
required nutrients, eliminate some requirements for health claims, and make
other refinements in regulations issued two years ago.

Malpractice awards are back up to 1993's record setting $500,000 median, says
a Jury Verdict Research report.  The 1995 figure is a 40 percent jump from
1994's $365,000.  Since 1990, says a Tillinghast-Towers Perrin study,
malpractice costs rose 48.6 percent, vs.  16.6 percent for overall tort costs.

University of California/San Francisco has the greatest percentage of
underrepresented minority graduates among non-historically black medical
schools, according to Association of American Medical Colleges statistics.
From 1990 to 1994, 21 percent of UCSF graduates were Native-, African-,
Mexican-American, or Puerto Rican.  Saint Louis University ranks last with
0.57 percent.

The drug AZT given after needle sticks cuts HIV infection rates by 79 percent,
says the Centers for Disease Control & Prevention.  The agency plans to hold a
meeting on possible new needle stick injury guidelines.

Prozac is more cost-effective than other selective serotonin re-uptake
inhibitors used to treat depression, says a report in the November/December
Journal of International Medical Research.  Annual mean health care costs are
$442 for patients taking Prozac, $744 for those on Paxil, and $756 for those
on Zoloft.  More frequent dose changes on the last two explain much of the
difference.

The American Jewish Congress is protesting a Health Care Financing
Administration decision to not require nursing homes to take account of
residents' religious dietary restrictions.  The Congress is upset by a letter
from a HCFA staffer saying that the government "does not impose any" religious
practices, and that patients with religious dietary needs "should choose a
home that adheres to those" rules.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
MEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

People Coming & Going...


Dean Metcalfe will head the National Institutes of Allergy & Infectious
Diseases' new allergic diseases lab and direct the Allergy & Immunology
Training Program.  He has been head of NIAID's Asthma, Allergic & Immunologic
Diseases Cooperative Intermural Research Center.  .  .  Brian Atchinson is the
new National Association of Insurance Commissioners president.  He's Maine's
Superintendent of Insurance.  Josephine Musser of Wisconsin is now VP.  .  .
David Altman is now Health Care Organizations Practice VP at Lewin-VHI,
working out of Sausalito CA.  He was head of the Association of American
Medical Colleges' Generalist Physician Initiative, and before that was a
University of California/San Francisco associate dean and professor.  .  .
Lynnette Moten is now a VP in the Powell Tate health care policy group.  She
was press secretary in Sen.  Arlen Specter's (R-PA) presidential campaign.  . .
Mike Rust, a Florida Hospital Association senior VP and head of the FHA
Management Corp., is leaving to become Kentucky Hospital Association
president.  Pat Haines, another FHA senior VP, has just retired after 22 years
there.  .  .  David Wexler, a Beverly Hills attorney, is the new AIDS Action
Council board chair.  .  .  Correction:  James Kingsbury and William Mance are
chair and chair-elect of the American Hospital Association Committee on
Governance, not its Board of Trustees as reported here Dec.  18.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
MEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Year In Review:  Ghost of Reform Returns to Haunt GOP


A poignant and ironic spectacle unfolded in 1995 as victorious Republicans in
Congress lifted the burden of leadership in health care reform from the
shoulders of a battered Democratic Administration - and then staggered under
the load just as the Democrats had.

Initially, the collapse of universal coverage and comprehensive federal
reforms in the 103rd Congress appeared to leave in its wake an agenda of
incremental policy measures for the states and the new Congress to take up.
But the budgetary goals of the new Republican majority soon put systemwide
reform of Medicare and Medicaid back at the top of the national agenda.

The Republicans had no more choice than Clinton but to shape policy in the
image of the breathtaking changes taking place in the private market.  Despite
all the partisan rhetoric and rancor, the Republicans wanted to do for
Medicare and Medicaid what Clinton tried to do for the system as a whole -
facilitate a minimally-disruptive transition to the new order.

"The events of 1993 and 1994 may have put proposals for government-guaranteed
universal coverage and cost control in the deep freeze, but they assuredly did
not cool political interest in health care policy," writes Henry Aaron, a
senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, in a new book.

Federal budget pressures, combined with the aging of the population and
continuing technological advances, ensure that "health care financing as a
national political issue will not go away," according to Aaron.  But the terms
of the debate will change.  "Public and private policy in the United States
are combining to transform the health care financing system in ways that were
not widely foreseen when the Clinton administration made health care reform
its number one domestic priority."

Incrementalism Deferred

In the states and the Congress, incremental change was the order of the day as
1995 began.  Most of the states were implementing insurance-market reforms.
Organized medicine and the managed care industry were fighting a
state-by-state war over any-willing-provider laws, the latest in a long series
of state reform issues clouded by the formidable influence of the Employee
Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA).  But the most urgent issue for the
states was the uncontrolled growth of Medicaid costs.

Consolidation of payers and providers continued in the marketplace, with
physician practices and practice management companies contributing
increasingly to the trend.  Despite the eclipse of health purchasing alliances
in the national policy sphere, several states were sponsoring alliances, and
business buyer coalitions continued to form.  For the second consecutive year
health plan premiums were under control - growing at or below the general
inflation rate, or down.

In May, details of the Republican plan for Medicare began to emerge.  The
hallmark of the proposal was the opening of the Medicare market to a
relatively unrestricted variety of competing health plans, with special
treatment for those sponsored by providers.  Medical savings accounts (MSAs)
would be an option for those who preferred to receive their benefit in cash.
Increased cost-sharing was dropped as a penalty for beneficiaries who wanted
to stay in the traditional Medicare fee-for-service system, but retrospective
cuts in reimbursement would penalize fee-for-service providers if budget
targets were not met.

As expected, the Republicans proposed abolishing Medicaid as an entitlement
for the poor and disabled and converting the program to block grants for the
states.  The puissant National Governors' Association hailed the block grant
concept, but was handcuffed by divisions - across party lines - over proposed
allocation formulas.

Obstacles to the Medicare plan seemed to melt away in the face of the
Republicans' tight party discipline and focus on budget goals.  Sen.  Alan
Simpson's (R-WY) attacks on the tax-exempt status of the American Association
of Retired Persons (AARP) helped distract the seniors' strongest lobbying arm
and forestall frontal resistance to Medicare budget reductions per se.  House
Speaker Newt Gingrich (R-GA) worked assiduously to maintain the AARP's
relative quiescence.  The American Hospital Association apparently succumbed
to implicit threats that there would be no seat at the table for stakeholders
who went negative in public.

The coup de grace came in September when the American Medical Association
announced its support for the GOP Medicare plan.  As Aaron suggests, the
ground had shifted under the policymakers' feet.  Out-and-out warfare between
organized medicine and the managed care industry had been a major distraction
during the fight over the Clinton plan.  Now, many in the AMA believed that
provider-sponsored plans would be their salvation.

Republican unity and finesse in neutralizing potential opposition did not work
as well on Medicaid.  The nation's governors were offering their acquiescence
to tight constraints on federal Medicaid spending in exchange for freedom to
run the program without federal interference.  Republican moderates in the
Senate, however, led by Maine's William Cohen, refused to accept repeal of
federal nursing home standards, and the Republicans lost their grip on a
veto-proof strategy for this mother of all step-child programs.

Stab In the Dark

With passage of the Republican budget bill and the ensuing Presidential veto,
the policy debate moves out of the subjunctive mode.  The questions are no
longer:  "What if we do this?"  or "What if we do that?"  They become:
"What's going to happen when we do this?"  and "What if it turns out to be a
disaster?"

But even changes that are near at hand are difficult to visualize.
Provider-sponsored organizations (PSOs), for example, are an unknown quantity
in Medicare and the marketplace generally.  They will be subject to varying
state licensure requirements and solvency standards overseen by the Secretary
of Health & Human Services.  PSOs may provide a sort of haven for doctors.
But if their sickest patients follow them, the doctors are in for some jolting
lessons in risk selection.

The pace of Medicare enrollment in managed care is another crucial variable
that is impossible to forecast, according to Guy King, who was chief actuary
at the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) for 16 years and is
currently chair of a working group on Medicare in the American Academy of
Actuaries (AAA).

"Any estimate there is really a stab in the dark, because you've got two
offsetting things going on," King says.  Opening the Medicare choice market to
all comers will facilitate expansion of enrollment, but lowering capitation
rates will have a constricting effect, he says.  An additional downward
adjustment of rates will be made in areas that currently have relatively high
capitation payments, slowing growth where it is now most vigorous, King warns.

The AAA workgroup faulted both the Republican MediPlus plan and President
Clinton's proposal for maintaining a system of capitation payments "determined
arbitrarily by the government, rather than the market."  (See this week's M&H,
p.  2.)  King suggests that the Republican plan could be fixed with a system
of blind price-and-product bidding by plans, against fixed per capita payments
then set by HCFA; and by increases in cost sharing for beneficiaries who
choose expensive coverages.

To preempt Democratic criticism and mobilization of the seniors' lobby, the
Republicans dropped beneficiary cost sharing from the retrospective failsafe
mechanism on the fee-for-service side of the program, which still accounts for
90 percent of all enrollment.  By inflicting on providers all of the pain from
the lookback mechanism, the Republicans risk driving doctors and hospitals out
of Medicare and pinching off access for many beneficiaries, according to King
and others.

Greater access problems could result from curtailment of Medicaid growth to
4.8 percent per year, combined with a continuing erosion of employment-based
coverage, according to a recent analysis by Harvard University health
economist Kenneth Thorpe - a former Clinton advisor - and others.

Recent data indicate that the percentage of the population covered through the
workplace fell from 61 percent four years ago to less than 57 percent in 1994.
Reductions in Medicaid coverage by the states could freeze out growing numbers
of workers who lose job-based coverage in the future, pushing the number of
uninsured as high as 66 million in 2002 in a worst-case scenario, Thorpe and
his colleagues estimated.  Lewin-VHI expects 45.9 million to be uninsured in
2002.

Dramatic growth in the number of uninsured would lead to public discontent and
"pressures for a revived and heightened role of government," Aaron predicts.
And according to King, "You and I both know that what's really going to happen
is that if access to care and quality of care start suffering in the
[traditional] Medicare program, that something's going to be done."

The Medicare Preservation Act calls for a national MedicarePlus Health Fair in
October 1996 "which would provide for a nationally coordinated educational and
publicity campaign to inform MedicarePlus eligible persons about MedicarePlus
plans, and the election [choice] process, including the upcoming annual,
coordinated election periods that would begin in October 1997."

Candidates, start your engines.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
MEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

In Other Business...


Academic health centers (AHCs) survived the storm of deficit reduction without
catastrophic losses to their shrinking revenue base.  Medicare-based subsidies
were largely salvaged by creation of a trust fund for graduate medical
education.  Plans to slash funding for the National Institutes of Health were
blocked.  But with cross subsidies for research and teaching drying up on all
sides, AHCs were looking increasingly to partner with managed care systems to
broaden their financial and patient base.

The Agency for Health Care Policy & Research (AHCPR) was targeted for
extinction by Republican budget hawks, then resurrected after an impressive
show of support from its friends, including influential voices in the
corporate community who value medical effectiveness research.  In its ongoing
work, AHCPR placed increasing emphasis on efforts to implement practice
guidelines as well as develop them, and to renegotiate the roles of
specialists in managed care.

The Business Health Care Action Group in Minnesota turned heads among the
managed care elite with plans to solicit direct bids from competing provider
groups within the big integrated health plans that dominate the
Minneapolis/St.  Paul market.

Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp.  acquired more than 40 new hospitals during the
year, most of them former nonprofits.  The Nashville TN powerhouse put a
notable new jewel in its crown in December with the announcement of a joint
venture with the respected Sharp HealthCare in San Diego.  Consumer advocates
vowed to make sure Sharp's nonprofit status is not subverted.

Cost shifting by providers resulting from the Republican Medicare and Medicaid
budget rollbacks will add more than $84 billion to private insurance bills
over the next seven years, Lewin-VHI estimates.

Dying in the hospital is often prolonged against patients' wishes, according
to a massive study sponsored by the R.  W.  Johnson Foundation.  A controlled
intervention aimed at improving communication of patients' preferences to
physicians was largely ineffective, researchers found.

Depression, because of its prevalence and impact, is the focus of a new,
AHCPR-sponsored Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT) project that will seek
to identify more effective approaches to treatment in primary care settings.

Fraud and abuse in Medicare and Medicaid were not as big a political focus in
the legislation-making process as some expected.  Differences between the two
parties were largely rhetorical.  Republicans could not play tough on the
issue if they were also shrinking enforcement budgets.

Golden Rule Insurance Co.  earned a reputation for super-clout with its heavy
donations to Republican candidates, the friendship between chair Patrick
Rooney and Speaker Gingrich, and success in helping to place medical savings
accounts - which Golden Rule sells - high on the Republican agenda.

The Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) shrugged off relentless
maligning while attempting to balance fiscal and program accountability
against the states' desire for quick and easy Medicaid managed care waivers.
Haste had made waste in large scale programs in Arizona and Tennessee.  But
waiver applicants like New York City chafed at delays and dreamed fondly of
block grants.

Jackson Hole WY became a vacation spot again.

Kaiser Permanente, losing market share, undertook restructuring and became a
target of California's feisty Health Care Workers' Local 250, whose 13,700
Kaiser workers rejected a 3-year wage freeze proposed by the archetype HMO.

MedPartners and Mullikin Medical Enterprises announced merger plans creating
the largest company yet in the booming physician practice management field,
with projected revenues of $1 billion in 1996.  Growth continued with the
merged giant's planned acquisition of Pacific Physician Services.

The federal Office of Technology Assessment was put out of business by
Congress.  Blue Cross and Blue Shield's Technology Evaluation Center stepped
in soon after to serve one former OTA client, the Civilian Health and Medical
Program of the Uniformed Services (CHAMPUS), under a long term contract.

Point-of-service (POS) health plans are the fastest-growing managed care
hybrids on the market.  While HMOs and PPOs each held a stable 25 percent
market share in 1993-1994, Foster Higgins reported that POS plans absorbed
most of the 10-point drop in indemnity coverage, climbing from 9 percent to 17
percent of the market.  HCFA worked overtime preparing new rules to allow POS
plans to enter the Medicare market, where they were expected to have
substantial appeal as a door-opener, or transitional product.

The Ryan White CARE Act received overwhelming support in the Senate's
five-year reauthorization vote on the program, which grants money to cities
and states for care for AIDS patients.

Strokes due to atrial fibrillation could be cut in half with proper
anti-coagulation therapy with warfarin, according to the AHCPR's stroke PORT.

Telemedicine experiments advanced in many rural areas.  Further development of
the fledgling technology will depend on the effects of deregulation of
telecommunications and the buildup of a multipurpose information
infrastructure that will allow costs to be spread among government, education,
and health users.

The tobacco industry stayed on the defensive, as internal memos discovered in
litigation characterized cigarettes as "nicotine delivery systems" and likened
nicotine to cocaine.  The AMA and the Clinton Administration kept up their
push for regulating tobacco as a drug.

The President's Vaccines for Children program was targeted for defunding by
Congress after being undercut by a government report that said outreach to
socially-isolated children was a bigger obstacle to immunization goals than
the cost of vaccines.

WellPoint Health Networks Inc.  and Health Systems International Inc.  dropped
plans for what would have been the biggest HMO merger ever, after a long
wrangle.  Power-sharing by CEOs Leonard Schaeffer and Malik Hasan appeared to
be a major hangup.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
MEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Medicine & Health's 8th Annual Health People of the Year Awards


Winner:  Newt Gingrich

The Speaker of the House displayed disarming naivete when he blithely asserted
to the AMA House of Delegates in December that after physicians set up PSOs,
"you're going to be able to offer dramatically better services at lower costs.
Within a very short time the customer's going to figure out where to go, and
at that point you're going to see a very dramatic drop in the profit margin of
the insurance company."

But Gingrich was nothing short of brilliant in marshalling his assets and
neutralizing his opposition during the crafting of the Republican Medicare and
Medicaid legislation.  Squabbling among stakeholders helped paralyze reform
the previous year.  Gingrich refused to let it happen again.  The Speaker made
time for meetings over details with the trade and consumer lobbies.  He coaxed
and cajoled the American Association of Retired Persons and the American
Hospital Association out of frontal resistance.  He wooed the American Medical
Association with the promise of freedom to run their own managed care plans
and reap the rewards.

Revolutionaries don't often take the AMA by storm.  We think Gingrich probably
overstates the promise of the free market, and that his rhetoric and ideology
get in the way of smart health policy.  But in 1995, Newt Gingrich set the
agenda.

Runner-up:  Nancy Kassebaum

The retiring icon of incrementalism from Kansas might have been our winner in
many other years.  Few can match the scope and persistence of her efforts to
make the system work better.  She engineered a message vote in the Senate on
the Ryan White CARE Act; worked unstintingly on Food and Drug Administration
reform; co-sponsored action on drive-through deliveries; labored patiently on
incremental insurance reforms; and even held a Senate committee overtime to
conduct an impromptu civics lesson for a group of students after wrapping up
action on national organ transplantation legislation.

Sen.  Kassebaum has been one of the anchors of a group of moderate Republicans
in the Senate who stopped attempts to completely dismantle the Medicaid
program and represent the voice of reason in current budget negotiations.  She
will be missed.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-23</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B041-117</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh34.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020145 text/html 47194
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:59:44 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:43 GMT
Content-length: 47007
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh34.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
PHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet <BR>
January 24, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>FEDERAL CIRCUIT FINDS&nbsp;PTO ERRED IN REJECTING&nbsp;PATENT FOR OBVIOUSNESS.TEXT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(567 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>CLASS ACTION FILED&nbsp;AGAINST AHF MAKERS BY&nbsp;COLORADO HEMOPHILIACS.TEXT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(517 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>U.S. SUP. CT. LETS STAND&nbsp;FINDING NIH SCIENTISTS&nbsp;ARE NOT CO-INVENTORS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(701 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>BRIEF FILED SUPPORTING&nbsp;MERRELL'S APPLICATION&nbsp;FOR WRIT OF ERROR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(971 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>MI CT. GRANTS SUMMARY&nbsp;JUDGMENT TO MERRELL&nbsp;IN BENDECTIN SUIT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(689 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>$1.5 MILLION AWARDED IN&nbsp;NEGLIGENCE SUIT AGAINST&nbsp;NEW YORK BLOOD CENTER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(550 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>WIDOW TELLS IL SUP. CT.&nbsp;$2.14 MILLION NEGLIGENCE&nbsp;RULING SHOULD BE AFFIRMED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(990 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>ARIZONA JUDGE CERTIFIES&nbsp;PARTIAL HIV/BLOOD CLASS&nbsp;ACTION ON TIME ISSUE.TEXT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(798 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>CIBA ARGUES THAT NEGLIGENCE&nbsp;CLAIMS BY CA WOMAN ARE&nbsp;PREEMPTED BY FEDERAL LAW.TEXT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(844 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>2ND CIRCUIT AFFIRMS&nbsp;INJUNCTION AGAINST&nbsp;NASAL NUTRIENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(126 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
PHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

FEDERAL CIRCUIT FINDS
PTO ERRED IN REJECTING
PATENT FOR OBVIOUSNESS.TEXT

     Both a Patent and Trademark Office patent examiner and the
PTO's Board of Patent Appeals and Interferences erred when they
ruled that "similar" elements of a chemical compound are
"identical" elements and, therefore, that a patent application
should be rejected as being obvious in light of the prior art,
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit ruled Dec. 11.
In re Ochiai et al., No. 92-1446 (Fed. Cir.).

     In 1992, the Patent and Trademark Office's Board of Patent
Appeals and Interferences upheld a patent examiner's rejection of
claims 6-10 of Michihiko Ochiai's patent application Serial
No. 07/462,492 for a method of making "a cephem compound having
antibiotic properties" for obviousness in view of the combined
teachings of six prior art references.

     The principal claim, claim 6, describes the use of a new,
non-obvious acid to make a new, non-obvious cephem, but the
examiner ruled that it actually describes a "standard,
conventional" process starting with an acylation agent (amino
acid) that is only "slightly different" from the prior art to
result in a final product that is only "slightly different."

     On appeal, the board upheld the rejection, agreeing with the
examiner that there was nothing non-obvious in the particular
process chosen and claimed by the appellants.

     The Federal Circuit reversed that finding, however, finding
that the PTO failed to apply the required statutory test of
obviousness under federal patent law, 35 U.S.C. sec. 103, which
requires that one compare the claim's subject matter as a whole
with the prior art to which it pertains.

     In this case, the process that Ochiai recites in claim 6
requires the use of a new, non-obvious acid as one of the
starting materials and, therefore, that claim cannot be obvious,
the circuit court ruled.

     "One having no knowledge of this acid could hardly find it
obvious to make any cephem using this acid as an acylating agent,
much less the particular cephem recited in claim 6.  In other
words, it would not have been obvious to those of ordinary skill
in the art to choose the particular acid of claim 6 as the
acylating agent for the known amine for the simple reason that
the particular acid was unknown but for Ochiai's disclosure in
the 429 application," the court said.

     The examiner incorrectly drew from case law a general
obviousness rule, that a process claim is obvious if the prior
art references disclose the same general process using similar
starting materials, the Federal Circuit found.  However, the
court said, "similarity is...not necessarily obviousness," and
the PTO cannot make up any such per se rules of obviousness for
its own convenience in violation of the fact-intensive
requirement of sec. 103 of the federal patent law.

     "Per se rules that eliminate the need for fact-specific
analysis of claims and prior art may be administratively
convenient for PTO examiners and the Board.  Indeed, they have
been sanctioned by the Board as well.  But reliance on per se
rules of obviousness is legally incorrect and must cease," the
appellate panel declared.

     Ochiai was represented by Harold C. Wegner, Herbert I.
Cantor and Douglas P. Mueller of Foley & Lardner, Washington, DC.
The PTO was represented by Fred E. McKelvey, Nancy J. Linck, Lee
E. Barrett, John W. Dewhirst, Albin F. Drost and Richard E.
Schafer of the Solicitor's Office of the PTO, Arlington, VA.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
PHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

CLASS ACTION FILED
AGAINST AHF MAKERS BY
COLORADO HEMOPHILIACS.TEXT

     A multi-count Colorado District Court negligence and breach
of warranty class action was filed Oct. 5 by a seven-member group
seeking to represent individuals with " or survivors of persons
who contracted " HIV through tainted antihemophilic factor (AHF)
concentrate in the early 1980s.  Morabito et al. v. Rhone-Poulenc
Rorer et al., No. 95-CV-4409 (CO Dist. Ct., Denver Cty.).

     Targeting Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, Inc., Armour Pharmaceutical
Co, Inc., Miles Inc., Baxter Healthcare Corp., Alpha Therapeutic
Corp., and the National Hemophilia Foundation (NHF), the suit
alleges that the defendants failed to warn hemophiliacs of the
risk of using AHF or employ available processing measures that
would have reduced the incidence of tainted blood.  It also
accuses the pharmaceutical companies of distributing knowingly
HIV-tainted AHF while working to enact infection control measures
and telling hemophiliacs the products were safe.

     The NHF, according to the suit, acted in a "willful and
malicious" manner by presenting itself as an impartial watchdog
for the welfare of hemophiliacs while failing to disclose to its
membership that it was funded "almost entirely from contributions
and other financial support given by the defendant manufacturers
and other affiliated organizations."  NHF's Medical and
Scientific Advisory Committee, according to the suit, was stacked
with physicians who "had received and were continuing to receive
monetary payments from the defendant manufacturers to carry out
their scientific research and, in some cases, to fund clinical
trials for the testing of products manufactured by the defendant
manufacturers."

     The suit asserts claims of negligence, strict liability,
breach of implied warranty, and outrageous conduct against the
pharmaceutical companies and includes a separate liability claim
against NHF.

     "By December 1982, the manufacturers were belatedly
developing new manufacturing techniques to reduce the viral
contamination of AHF products but, in the interim, continued to
aggressively promote and sell their existing AHF products knowing
or having reason to know that said products were defective and
harmful," says the suit.  "Notwithstanding the mounting body of
medical and scientific information in 1982, that AIDS was likely
of viral etiology and the certain knowledge at that stage that it
was blood-borne, the defendants, without any serious basis on
which to dispute such inferences, represented or caused to be
represented that the risk to persons with hemophilia associated
with the use of AHF products was remote and that the likelihood
of a person with hemophilia developing AIDS as a result of AHF
use was insignificant."

     Further, the complaint says, "[d]uring the time frame that
such information was given and produced, it was known that the
hemophilia community and their medical treaters would reasonably
rely on such information and representations coming as they did
from organizations they supposed were in a position of a higher
level of knowledge on the subject matter.  The hemophilia
community supposed that defendants would be acting in accordance
with the best and most conservative state of the medical and
scientific art and be faithful to their legal, ethical and moral
obligations to the thousands of persons with hemophilia."

     The suit was filed by Denver attorneys William E. Brayshaw
and Larry F. Hobbs.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
PHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

U.S. SUP. CT. LETS STAND
FINDING NIH SCIENTISTS
ARE NOT CO-INVENTORS

     The U.S. Supreme Court on Jan. 16 let stand a ruling by the
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, finding that two
National Institutes of Health scientists merely helped Burroughs
Wellcome Co. reduce its patented invention of the AIDS drug AZT
to practice and are not its co-inventors.  Barr Laboratories Inc.
v. Burroughs Wellcome Co., No. 94-1527 (U.S.); Novopharm Inc. et
al v. Burroughs Wellcome Co., No. 94-1531 (U.S.); see
Pharmaceutical LR, May 1995.

     The Federal Circuit ruling affirmed that Burroughs Wellcome
(BW) is the sole owner of five of six patents for the drug and
that two companies seeking to market generic versions of it are
liable for infringement.  The issue involved hundreds of millions
of dollars in revenues for the rival companies because AZT is one
of the few drugs approved for treatment of AIDS and is prescribed
to nearly all AIDS patients.

     BW began experimenting with different compounds to determine
their effectiveness for treating AIDS in the early 1980s.  At the
same time, scientists at the NIH had developed a test that could
demonstrate a compound's effectiveness against HIV, the
retrovirus that causes AIDS.

     On Feb. 6, 1985, BW's five inventors had prepared a draft
patent application for filing in the United Kingdom.  Two days
earlier, it had sent samples of AZT and other compounds to NIH
for blind testing against its HIV cell line.  When the NIH tests
showed that the compound was active against HIV, BW filed its
patent application in the United Kingdom on March 16, 1985.

     BW subsequently applied for and received the six U.S.
patents for AZT.  After receiving Food and Drug Administration
approval, it began marketing the drug in 1987 under the trademark
Retrovir.

     Barr Laboratories, and then Novopharm Ltd. of Canada, sought
to manufacture generic versions of AZT.  BW filed complaints of
patent infringement against the two companies in the U.S.
District Court for the Eastern District of North Carolina.  Both
companies admitted that their generic versions would infringe on
BW's patents, but they claimed BW's patents are invalid and
unenforceable for inequitable conduct because BW failed to name
the two NIH researchers, Drs. Samuel Broder and Hiroaki Mitsuya,
as co-inventors.

     In July 1993, more than three weeks into what appeared would
be a lengthy trial, U.S. District Judge Malcolm J. Howard issued
a directed verdict for BW, finding the company the sole inventor
of the six patents.

     Barr and Novopharm then appealed to the Federal Circuit,
which affirmed Judge Howard's ruling for five of the patents but
found a significant material fact in dispute on the sixth patent.
According to the circuit court opinion, the central issue of the
case was the question of when the BW inventors conceived their
invention.

     Barr and Novopharm had contended that an inventor's idea
must include a reasonable expectation that an invention will work
for its intended purpose before conception is complete.  In this
case, they argued, conception was not completed until the two NIH
scientists proved that AZT is effective against HIV.  Therefore,
they said, the NIH researchers should have been named as co-
inventors.

     However, the Federal Circuit found that an inventor does not
need to prove that his invention will work for its conception to
be complete.  It is enough for the inventor to prove that he had
a definite and permanent idea that someone skilled in the art
could understand, the panel said.  In this case, BW had in fact
fully conceived the AZT invention by the time it prepared the
draft application for the United Kingdom patent, which was
prepared before the NIH test results were known, the panel found.

     Barr was represented by Dan Webb, Eric L. Hirschhorn, George
C. Lombardi, James F. Hurst and Monique M. Vasilchik of Winston &
Strawn in Chicago.  Novopharm was represented by Robert F. Green,
Bruce M. Gagala and Jeffrey S. Ward of Leydig, Voit & Mayer, also
in Chicago.

     Burroughs Wellcome was represented by E. Anthony Figg of
Rothwell, Figg, Ernst & Kurz, Washington, DC; and Thomas F.
Curnin, Laura Mezey, Daniel L. Cantor and Michael B. Weiss of
Cahill, Gorgon & Reindel of New York City.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
PHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

BRIEF FILED SUPPORTING
MERRELL'S APPLICATION
FOR WRIT OF ERROR

     Amici curiae The Chemical Manufacturers Association, The
Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America and The Texas
Chemical Council on Dec. 14 filed with the Texas Supreme Court a
brief in support of Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals Inc.'s
application for writ of error in Ernest and Marilyn Havner's suit
alleging that the drug Bendectin caused their daughter's
limb-reduction defect.  Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals Inc. v.
Havner, No. 95-1036 (TX Sup. Ct.); see Pharmaceutical LR, October
1995.

     Merrell contended in its application for writ of error that
the appellate court's decision in this case not only does
injustice between the parties, it eviscerates the standard of the
admissibility of scientific expert testimony that the Texas
Supreme Court recently articulated in E.I. duPont de Nemours and
Co., Inc. v. Robinson, 38 Sup.Ct.J. 852 (June 15, 1995).

     "Indeed, the expert testimony in this case amounts to no
more than guesswork and surmise disguised in a deceptive mantle
of scientific certainty.  As this Court held in Robinson, such
unreliable evidence is inadmissible under Rule 702, and as this
Court concluded in Parker [v. Employers Mutual Liability Ins. Co.
of Wisconsin, 440 S.W.2d 43,47 (Tex, 1969)], evidence of a mere
possibility, even if properly admitted, is insufficient to
sustain a jury verdict," Merrell claimed.
               Merrell's Nov. 16 application pointed to three specific
points of error:

     " "The court of appeals erred in affirming the trial court's
     submission to the jury of unreliable and irrelevant
     causation evidence";

     " "The Havners' expert testimony was legally insufficient to
     establish causation"; and

     " "Merrell was denied due process of law as guaranteed by
     the United States and Texas Constitutions."

     Merrell asked the state's high court to grant writ of error,
reverse the appellate court and render judgment that the Havners
take nothing.

     In their brief in support, the amici offered three central
arguments:

     " "The en banc opinion accepts expert testimony contrary to
     the scientific consensus that Bendectin does not cause birth
     defects";

     " "The en banc opinion contradicts overwhelming precedent
     rejecting respondents' expert testimony"; and

     " "The en banc opinion ignores Robinson's requirement that
     expert scientific testimony be derived by scientific methods
     and reflect 'scientific knowledge.'"

     The brief concluded, "In Robinson, this Court reiterated
that expert testimony must satisfy a threshold standard of
reliability and relevancy before reaching a jury.  Regardless of
how that threshold is articulated, the expert testimony offered
by Respondents cannot pass muster.  This is particularly true
given the uniform body of case law reaching the same conclusion
in other Bendectin cases.  For these reasons, the Court should
grant Petitioner's application for writ of error and reverse the
judgment of the trial court."

     In their suit, the Havners alleged that the prescription
anti-nausea medicine Bendectin, used by Mrs. Havner during her
pregnancy, caused a limb-reduction defect of their daughter's
right hand.  On Oct. 4, 1991, a state court jury in Corpus
Christi, TX, awarded the Havners $30 million in punitive damages
and $3.75 million in compensatory damages; punitive damages were
later reduced to $20 million.  In March 1994, the court threw out
the jury verdict in favor of the Havners, finding that they had
failed to present anything more than suspicion on the essential
element of causation.  The court then granted rehearing en banc,
heard oral argument before the entire court and, in August 1995,
affirmed the judgment below with regard to liability and actual
damages, but reversed that part of the jury verdict awarding
punitive damages.

     The court held that, in reviewing the factual sufficiency of
evidence, a court could only exercise its jurisdiction over
factual sufficiency to prevent a manifestly unjust result; it
could not reweigh the evidence and set aside a jury verdict
merely because the judges feel that a different result is more
reasonable.  It said a jury is the sole judge of the credibility
of the witnesses and the weight to be given their testimony.
Here, it said, each of the witnesses was extensively cross-
examined; flaws in their credentials, methodological
disagreements and errors of omission in their testimony were
explored by opposing counsel; and each of the experts' work was
criticized by an expert for the opposing party.  After reweighing
the evidence to determine if the jury's verdict is so contrary to
the greater weight of the evidence so as to be manifestly unjust,
the court concluded that the verdict as to causation is supported
by sufficient evidence.

     As for punitive damages, the court concluded that the
evidence "is too weak to support the conclusion that Merrell Dow
was consciously indifferent to an extreme risk that Bendectin
could cause limb reduction defects if taken during the critical
period of pregnancy."

     Merrell's application for writ of error was filed by Robert
L. Dickson, Hall R. Marston and George E. Berry with Dickson,
Carlson & Campillo of Santa Monica, CA; by John L. Hill Jr., Rob
L. Wiley and James E. Essig with Liddell, Sapp, Zivley, Hill &
LaBoon, L.L.P. of Houston; by Steven Goode of Austin, TX; and by
Gene M. Williams with Mehaffy & Weber of Beaumont, TX.

     The amici brief was filed by Clifton T. Hutchinson and Danny
S. Ashby of Hughes & Luce, L.L.P. in Dallas; with Bert Black of
Weinberg & Green LLC in Baltimore; David F. Zoll and Donald D.
Evans of The Chemical Manufacturers Association in Washington,
DC; and Stephen A. Bokat and Robin S. Conrad of the National
Chamber Litigation Center, Inc. in Washington, DC, of counsel.

     The Havners are represented by Barry J. Nace with Paulson,
Nace & Norwind of Washington, DC; by Guy H. Allison and Rebecca
E. Hamilton with Allison & Huerta of Corpus Christi, TX; and by
Robert C. Hilliard and Kevin W. Grillo with Hilliard & Grillo of
Corpus Christi, TX.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
PHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

MI CT. GRANTS SUMMARY
JUDGMENT TO MERRELL
IN BENDECTIN SUIT

     Finding that the testimony of the plaintiffs' experts was
inadmissible because their methodology was not generally accepted
by teratologists, the Wayne County, MI, Circuit Court on Nov. 27
granted summary judgment to Bendectin manufacturer Merrell Dow
Pharmaceuticals, Inc.  DePyper et al. v. Navarro et al., No. 83-
303467-NM (MI Cir. Ct., Wayne Cty.).

     "Given the otherwise unexplained incidence of birth defects,
scientific uncertainty as to their origin, and widespread
scientific recognition that Bendectin is not a human teratogen,
it is necessary that there be expert scientific testimony which
demonstrates that more probably than not Bendectin is a human
teratogen and a cause of the injury, and further, that such an
opinion be grounded in generally accepted scientific
methodology," the court said.  The court conducted a Davis/Frye
inquiry, and said it was not concerned with what plaintiffs'
experts finally concluded, but rather the methodology or process
or basis for their conclusions, and whether it is generally
accepted or recognized.

     In determining whether the methodology used by plaintiffs'
experts to establish causation is generally recognized by
teratologists, the court made note of factors established by
Michigan case law, including:  Have the results been published?
Has there been independent or objective verification?  Has there
been independent testing and what are the rates of error?  And
has there been criticism of the method or technique within the
scientific community?

     The court said that, among other factors, "at least two high
quality epidemiological studies showing a strong association
between the substance and the occurrence of a birth defect" are
required to show that a substance is a human teratogen.  In
reaching this conclusion, the court did not reject out of hand
the assertion that in vitro studies, animal studies or structure
activity data have a role in determining whether a substance is a
human teratogen.  But it said these types of data have their own
limitations that inherently limit their usefulness or
applicability, and reliance on such data to form an opinion on
human teratogenicity would basically amount to no more than
speculation.

     "Given the lack of any epidemiological studies that show any
meaningful statistical positive association, this Court finds
that teratologists using generally accepted methodology, could
not conclude that Bendectin can more probably than not cause limb
reduction birth defects in any given case," the court said.  It
accordingly found that the opinions of the plaintiffs' experts
are not supported by a methodology generally accepted by
teratologists, so the opinions of those experts that Bendectin is
a human teratogen are inadmissible because they fail the
Davis/Frye test.  In a footnote, the court said its conclusion
would be the same under Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals,
Inc., 113 S. Ct. 2786 (1993) (see Pharmaceutical LR, November
1995, P. 10,790), another Bendectin case.  The Daubert test has
not been adopted in Michigan; the Davis/Frye rule is Michigan's
standard governing the admissibility of scientific evidence.  The
court, therefore, granted Merrell's summary judgment motion.
               Lawrence R. DePyper Sr. and Jane N. DePyper filed suit on
behalf of their son and themselves, claiming that Lawrence R.
DePyper Jr.'s limb reduction birth defects were caused by in
utero exposure to Bendectin, which Jane DePyper ingested while
pregnant.  The court granted Merrell's summary judgment motion,
citing two earlier published federal cases.

     However, on appeal, the Michigan Court of Appeals reversed
and remanded, stating it was satisfied that the evidentiary rule
in those cases did not comport with Michigan jurisprudence.  The
appellate court said the trial court should conduct a Davis/Frye
inquiry into the question:  "Do impartial and disinterested
experts in the field of teratology generally accept the
methodology employed by plaintiffs' expert in assessing the
impact of in vivo, in vitro, chemical structure and animal
studies in determining teratogenicity?"

     The DePypers were represented by Barry J. Nace with Paulson,
Nace, Norwind & Sellinger of Washington, DC; and by Robert A.
Tyler with Sommers, Schwartz, Silver & Schwartz of Southfield,
MI.  Merrell was represented by Frank C. Woodside III and Fred
Erny with Dinsmore & Shohl of Cincinnati; and by Lamont E.
Buffington with Garan, Lucow, Miller, Seward, Cooper & Becker,
P.C. of Detroit.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
PHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

$1.5 MILLION AWARDED IN
NEGLIGENCE SUIT AGAINST
NEW YORK BLOOD CENTER

     A New York Supreme Court jury in Manhattan on Dec. 19
awarded $1.5 million to a 16-year-old Staten Island resident who
said New York Blood Center's (NYBC) failure to employ surrogate
marker or Hepatitis B-core antibody tests led to his receipt of
HIV-tainted blood during a 1984 heart operation.  DiPaolo et al.
v. Greater New York Blood Center et al., No. 2751/91, (NY Sup.
Ct., New York Cty.); see Pharmaceutical LR, January 1996.

     Attorneys for both sides disagree, however, whether the
amount will be set off by settlements already obtained by
plaintiff Joseph "Joey" DiPaolo.

     Capping six days of deliberation, the panel, however, ruled
for co-defendant Dr. Richard Golinko, the pediatric cardiologist
who recommended that DiPaolo undergo surgery.  DiPaolo said the
doctor failed to obtain informed consent before allowing the
operation to proceed and accused him of failing to reveal the
existence of a then-pending test to identify HIV antibodies.
Dr. Golinko said such duties were those of DiPaolo's surgeons.

     DiPaolo was operated on at Downstate Medical Center in
Brooklyn, NY, on May 23, 1984.  During the procedure to correct
an atrial septal heart defect, he received some 16 units of NYBC-
supplied blood components.  One of those units was tainted with
the AIDS virus.

     DiPaolo, who tested HIV-positive at age eight, alleged in
his suit that NYBC neglected to "aggressively institute" a
directed donations policy, educate doctors about the risk of
transmitting HIV via blood and blood components, or directly
interrogate donors about any high-risk behaviors.

     In 1993, the surgeons settled with DiPaolo and his family
for $1.2 million.  The hospital entered a separate $400,000
settlement.

     Both sides are expected to file various post-trial motions
before the end of January, including a plaintiff's request for a
new trial on the damages issue.  Plaintiff co-counsel Robert
Jenner says he expects to appeal the jury's charge on the
standard of care question and to ask the court whether the
aggregate $1.6 million settlement DiPaolo received from the
surgeons and hospital is considered, under New York law, a set-
off against the $1.5 million jury verdict.

     NYBC attorney Roger K. Solymosy of Brody & Fabiani in New
York City expressed little concern over the jury's award, saying
that under a recent state appellate court ruling, there is
clearly a set-off against the amounts the plaintiff already
received.  Solymosy says he expects to file several pro forma
post-trial motions on behalf of his client before expiration of a
30-day deadline.

     Jenner says although the jury entered a "very compromised
verdict on damages," DiPaolo is "very pleased that NYBC was held
responsible after avoiding such responsibility in so many cases
to date.  My client, however, still has AIDS whether the award
was $1.5 million or $1.5 billion."  Although Jenner did not seek
a specific amount in damages, during the nine-week trial he
frequently cited an internal NYBC memo stating that the blood
bank stood to save some $10 million by avoiding core-antibody
tests.

     DiPaolo is represented by Jenner and by Martin Freeman of
Freeman & Jenner in Bethesda, MD; and by Dennis Drasco of Lum,
Danzis, Drasco, Positan & Kleinberg in Roseland, NJ.  Golinko is
represented by Jay Rappaport and Nancy A. Steptoe of Aaronson,
Rappaport, Feinstein & Deutsch, LLP in New York City.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
PHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

WIDOW TELLS IL SUP. CT.
$2.14 MILLION NEGLIGENCE
RULING SHOULD BE AFFIRMED

     The widow of a man who died of AIDS as the result of
receiving HIV-tainted blood during a February 1984 heart
operation urged the Illinois Supreme Court on Dec. 11 to second a
state Appellate Court's affirmation of a $2.14 million jury
verdict against United Blood Services (UBS), the supplier of the
bad blood.  Advincula v. United Blood Services, No. 79653 (IL
Sup. Ct.); see Pharmaceutical LR, January 1996.

     Marietta Advincula told the high court the rulings below
should stand and that it should reject the blood bank's assertion
that the trial court misapplied the Illinois Blood Shield Law
(745 ILCS 40/3 [1994]) in judging the case under a "due care"
rather than a "professional liability" standard based on
adherence to industry practice.  The 75-page brief says that even
if UBS were judged under the latter test, the verdict would stand
by virtue of its failure to follow internal procedures at the
1984 blood drive during which the implicated "John Donor"
provided the tainted blood.  UBS barred him from giving blood
once a 1986 donation proved HIV-positive.

     "UBS' fundamental position is that 'only a failure to adhere
to [professional] standards can give rise to liability' [emphasis
added]," says the Advincula brief.  "Both the circuit court and
the appellate court were correct in rejecting this
argument...because it conflicts with the plain language of the
Blood Shield Law and violates fundamental principles of statutory
interpretation....  The Blood Shield Law states that a blood bank
warrants that it has 'exercised due care and followed
professional standards of care in providing the service according
to the current state of the medical arts [emphasis added].  This
language, and in particular, the conjunctive 'and,' plainly
imposes two requirements " a blood bank must exercise due care
and follow professional standards of care."

     Advincula says the court should reject the asserted UBS
interpretation of sec. 40/3, that blood banks are "to exercise
due care in following professional standards of care."  Because
neither that interpretation, nor those offered in amicus
petitions by the American Red Cross, the American Association of
Blood Banks and Abbott Laboratories, says the plaintiff, "adheres
to the language the Legislature did adopt, they all should be
rejected."

     Adds Advincula, "[T]he phrases 'exercised due care' and
'followed professional standard of care' describes the means by
which a blood bank is to fulfill this responsibility.
Accordingly, compliance with professional standards of care is
not necessarily conclusive evidence that a blood bank has
satisfied its duty of care.  If such standards do not incorporate
currently known and available safeguards at the time of the blood
donation at issue, then compliance with them is not enough."

     The brief says that despite knowledge held by UBS in early
1983 that homosexual men should be barred from donating blood and
that any of several surrogate marker tests would have almost
eliminated the threat of HIV in the blood supply, UBS took no
such action.  Surrogate tests, it adds, were rejected on a
business basis because of their cost.  The suit over the AIDS
death of Ronaldo Advincula, says the brief, is not grounded on
medical malpractice claims as intimated by UBS, because the final
authority over whether to implement surrogate tests rested with
then-UBS Chief Executive Officer Hayle Rudolph.

     Responding to the claim UBS made in its Illinois Supreme
Court brief, Advincula says she is not required to show that her
late husband would have avoided HIV infection if any of five
discussed surrogate tests were in effect in February 1984.
Testimony from her experts, she says, indicated that any of the
tests would have been effective in disqualifying HIV-positive
donors.  The Hepatitis B Core Antibody test, said plaintiff
expert Dr. Thomas Asher, was the most thorough test available,
while another plaintiff expert estimated there was a 100%
probability that the test would have excluded John Donor's blood
in 1984.

     The Advincula brief states that even if UBS were to be
judged under a professional standard, as it wishes, the jury's
verdict would still stand, based on the blood bank's failure to
adhere to its own operating procedures.  "UBS argues that nothing
UBS could have done would have kept John Donor from donating
because he did not think he was at risk for AIDS," argues the
plaintiff.  "The evidence, however, showed that John Donor was a
gay man...; that gay men were at highest risk for AIDS...; and
that UBS did not adequately educate John Donor before and during
the blood drive about those who were at risk for AIDS and should
not donate blood....  The evidence also showed that had UBS used
proper screening methods at a properly conducted blood drive,
John Donor would have excluded himself or been deferred.  It was
undisputed that UBS did nothing to educate John Donor before or
after he arrived at the blood drive."

     Concluded the brief, "Additionally, contrary to UBS' claim,
John Donor testified that he never received any 'disqualifying
information' in any of the years he donated blood from 1983 to
1986....  Thus, UBS' argument that better screening in 1984 would
have made no difference because John Donor donated in 1985 and
1986 when UBS gave more specific information to donors...is
without merit.  Further, the jury could well have concluded that
had UBS educated John Donor properly in 1984, he would not have
donated then."  Because UBS failed to obtain written
acknowledgment from the donor in 1984 that he had read and
understood the blood bank's "Important Message" notice on AIDS,
adds Advincula, "UBS' negligence in this regard violated the
industry practices and UBS' own policy."

     Advincula is represented by Judith Fors and Margaret Byrne
of Chicago; and by Maureen Witt, Elizabeth Phelan and Carlos
Samour of Holland & Hart in Denver.  UBS is represented by
Michael Brody, Jerold Solovy, Barry Levanstam and Jeralyn Baran
of Jenner & Block in Chicago, and by Foster Robberson of Lewis
and Roca in Phoenix.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
PHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

ARIZONA JUDGE CERTIFIES
PARTIAL HIV/BLOOD CLASS
ACTION ON TIME ISSUE.TEXT

     Although rejecting class proceedings on negligence,
liability and failure to warn claims, a U.S. District Court judge
in Tucson on Dec. 4 granted partial class action status to all
Arizonans infected with HIV via blood transfusions between July
1982 and March 1985.  Doe et al. v. American Red Cross et al.,
No. CV 94-521 TUC RMB (D AZ).

     Judge Richard M. Bilby ruled that lead plaintiff Jane Doe,
the widow of an AIDS-infected blood recipient, failed to show the
case met the class certification requirements of FRCP 23(b)(1)(A)
because there are too many individual variables for class
members, including time and medical factors.  A  partial class
action, however, is appropriate for class determination of
another issue under FRCP 23(b)(3), said the judge.  That issue
is:

     At that point in time, if ever, between 1982 and 1985
     was sufficient information available to cause a reasonable
     blood components provider to adopt screening and testing
     procedures to protect Arizona transfusion recipients from
     the transmission of HIV.

     Because "individual questions of fact predominate over
common questions of law or fact," said Judge Bilby, the class
action device is not a "superior means of adjudicating this
entire controversy."  Even if a class were certified on the
liability, negligence and failure to warn claims, the judge noted
that "a great deal of time and expense would be involved in the
conduct of individual trials necessary to determine liability as
to each potential member, creating great difficulties in the
management of the litigation."

     On the certified issue, however, the order held, "What a
jury will determine on a class-wide basis is whether, and if so
when, the defendants had the knowledge needed to eliminate or
reduce the risk of HIV-tainted blood being used for transfusion."
The jury, noted Judge Bilby, "will not reach the question of
ultimate liability of any defendant to any particular plaintiff."

     The judge said class certification of the time issue
satisfies the requirements of Rule 23(b)(3) because it aids in
efficient case management.  "The time that the knowledge was
available is the same in each individual case although each
plaintiff may have been affected differently," said the
certification order.  "The class issue of available knowledge at
a particular time is much more narrow than negligence.  If the
jury determines a date at which time sufficient knowledge was
available that a reasonable blood provider would have implemented
donor screening and blood testing measures, that date serves to
include and exclude plaintiffs.  This will greatly aid in the
fair and speedy adjudication of this controversy by deciding a
key issue that is common to each claim and will not need to be
relitigated."

     Added Judge Bilby, "...[T]his is not the type of issue that
an individual plaintiff would have a strong interest in
controlling.  The availability of knowledge at a certain point in
time is not particular to any plaintiff and does not require a
venture into her lifestyle and personal circumstances.  The
determination of knowledge availability is distinct from its
impact on any one person."

     In addition to lead defendant American Red Cross, other
named defendants include United Blood Services (UBS), a division
of Blood Systems, Inc., the American Association of Blood Banks
(AABB), Council of Community Blood Centers (CCBC), and the
University of Arizona.

     In an Oct. 16 opposition brief, the Red Cross said there are
no common issues which would lend to class resolution and that
Doe's suit fails to meet the requirements of either FRCP
23(b)(1)(A) or 23(b)(3).  "[E]ven if plaintiff's issues were
certified for class action treatment, not only damages, but even
the defendants' liability to each individual class member would
still have to be litigated separately," said the Red Cross.
"Thus, the class certification plaintiff requests will result in
mere advisory opinions on certain abstract issues.  Moreover,
those advisory will not meaningfully advance the litigation, or
even save time in the individual class member trials that must
follow the class issue trial, because the bulk of the evidence
will have to be presented and considered again in the individual
class member trials."

     The plaintiffs are represented by Rose Marie Ibanez of
Ibanez and Wilkinson, and J. Patrick Butler of Dickerson, Butler,
Rabb & Rodriguez, P.C., both in Tucson.  The Red Cross is
represented by Joseph E. Mais and Samuel A. Thumma of Brown &
Bain in Phoenix; and Tracy L. Merritt, William H. Forman and
Jacqueline R. Denning (of counsel) of Arnold & Porter in
Washington, DC.  Foster Robberson of Lewis & Roca in Phoenix
represents UBS.  CCBC is represented by Ellen Wheeler of Tucson.
The AABB is represented by Tom Manning of O'Connor, Cohn, Dillon
& Barr in San Francisco.  Michael W. Capp of Weyl, Guyer, MacBan
& Olson in Tucson represents the University of Arizona.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
PHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

CIBA ARGUES THAT NEGLIGENCE
CLAIMS BY CA WOMAN ARE
PREEMPTED BY FEDERAL LAW.TEXT

     Approved labels and warnings on medical devices are
"specific requirements" of federal law that preempt causes of
action brought under state law, respondent Ciba Vision Corp.
argued in its answer to a petition filed by a California woman
asking the state Supreme Court to overturn a lower court's ruling
that all of her claims against Ciba are preempted by the Medical
Devices Amendments (MDA).  Scott v. Ciba Vision Corp.,
No. S049608 (CA Sup. Ct.); see Pharmaceutical LR, January 1996.

     In its Nov. 15 answer, Ciba contended that the California
Court of Appeal, Sixth District, was aligned with a majority of
jurisdictions that have held that federal law preempts causes of
action brought under state law.

     Appellant Leslie Scott brought suit in California state
court against Ciba, alleging claims of strict liability,
negligence, failure to provide adequate warnings and breach of
implied warranty.  Scott claimed she had difficulty in
distinguishing Ciba's AOSEPT solution, which contains hydrogen
peroxide, from its saline solution.  She claimed that as a result
of her failure to distinguish between the bottles, she suffered
chemical burns to her eyes when she rinsed her contacts in the
AOSEPT solution instead of the saline solution.

     Scott argued that, around the time of her injury, Ciba had
begun to market its AOSEPT solution with a red cap, but also
continued to market it in the old bottle, knowing that persons
not wearing their contacts would have difficulty in
distinguishing the two.

     The Santa Clara County Superior Court granted Ciba's motion
for summary judgment, finding Scott's claims preempted by the
MDA.  On appeal, the California Court of Appeal, Sixth District,
affirmed the trial court.

     The Court of Appeal cited to Evraets v. Intermedics
Intraocular, Inc., 29 Cal.App.4th 786, and 21 C.F.R. sec.
808.1(b), in holding that the "requirement" the Food and Drug
Administration refers to in sec. 360k includes "any requirement
having the force and effect of law 'whether established by
statute, ordinance, regulation, or court decision.'"

     Examining Scott's argument that the MDA contains no specific
counterpart regulations regarding AOSEPT, the Court of Appeal
held that all Class III medical devices are subject to the
requirements of the MDA, which include the FDA's stringent
premarket approval (PMA) process.

     In her petition to the California Supreme Court, Scott
argued that the only other state Supreme Court that has addressed
the issue of federal preemption concerning Class III devices
found that the plaintiff's claims were not preempted (Larsen v.
Pacesetter Systems, Inc. [Hawaii 1992], 837 P.2d 1273, 1281).

     Some of the leading cases that have expounded on the issue
of preemption have recently been criticized, Scott said.  For
example, the Eighth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals' 1984 ruling in
Martello v. Ciba Vision Corp. gave sec. 360k(a), the MDA's
preemption provision, an expansive reading, but was criticized in
the Ninth Circuit's ruling in Kennedy, Scott said.  "The...Ninth
Circuit in Kennedy...stated that the language of [sec.] 360k(a)
does not create the broad, sweeping preemption found by the
'strained reading of the statute' by the court in Martello,"
Scott argued.

     And, Scott said, state actions that attempt to enforce
federal standards are not preempted.  Citing to Evraets, the
appellant said, regarding a claim of negligence per se, since the
state requirements are equal to the federal requirements because
they adopt the federal standards, they are not preempted.

     On the other hand, Ciba argued in its answer that a
consistent line of cases holds that state law tort and warranty
causes of action are preempted because the pre-market approval
process envelopes the approved product in specific requirements
of federal law.

     "Scott makes no claim of any defect in the design or
manufacture of AOSEPT," Ciba said.  "Rather, she contends that
California tort and warranty law required that Ciba Vision
package and label AOSEPT differently in order to warn users
against accidental placement of deneutralized solution in the
eye."

     Ciba argued that this is a "strong case for MDA preemption"
because of AOSEPT's premarket approval and Scott's singular focus
on warning deficiencies in the product.

     The respondent said that the court's decision in Evraets,
which Scott cited in her petition, does not warrant review by the
state Supreme Court.  Ciba said Evraets does not deal with a
device that received FDA premarket approval.

     "Evraets contains a discussion of the preemption of state
law claims for breach of warranty that is consistent with the
decision in Scott," Ciba said.  "Evraets only reaches the issue
of preemption in relation to a claim of breach of an express
warranty."

     Ciba concluded that by enacting the MDA, Congress interposed
the FDA as an expert watchdog and preempted certain state law
causes of action.  A jury ought not be allowed to rethink the
sufficiency of labels and packaging that the FDA endorsed, said
Ciba.

     Scott is represented by Jonathan D. Gordon of the Law
Offices of Jonathan D. Gordon in Denver.  Ciba is represented by
Thomas M. Peterson and Diane S. Rice of Brobeck, Phleger &
Harrison in San Francisco.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
PHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

2ND CIRCUIT AFFIRMS
INJUNCTION AGAINST
NASAL NUTRIENT

     Finding that the Food and Drug Administratiusand
persons reached.

     Legal advertisers should be aware that negotiated placement
costs from media vehicles may be used to avoid the full media
commission charged by advertising agencies.

(Copyright 1995, Hilsoft, Inc.  Reprinted with permission.)

Todd B. Hilsee is the President of Hilsoft, Inc., a Souderton,
PA, firm that provides class action media services and analysis.
His class action media planning and testimony experience has
included the Airlines Antitrust Litigation, 900 Number Class
Actions, Generic Drugs, Defective Polybutylene Pipe Litigation
and Castano Tobacco Litigation.  Mr. Hilsee spent the majority of
his advertising career with Foote, Cone & Belding, the largest
U.S. advertising firm, where, as Account Director, he won an
Effectiveness Award from the American Marketing Association.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-24</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B041-138</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh59.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020200 text/html 37205
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:00:06 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:37 GMT
Content-length: 37018
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh59.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
PHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNet <BR>
February 23, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>Hospital Overhauls Information System To Adopt&nbsp;Client-Server Environment</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(223 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Hospital Slashes Patient Admission Time Using&nbsp;`Administrative Partner' Program</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(383 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Plans Target Accessible MDs For Contracts, Rewards</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(217 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Hospital Restructures Triage To Speed Interventions</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(220 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>HMOs Held Financially Liable For Meeting Quality Goals</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(239 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Blues Group Implements Appropriateness Rules</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(215 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Problems with Provider Risk Outlined in Safe Harbors</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(222 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Group Tackles Pregnancy Care In First Report Card Effort</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(250 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>Telephone Survey Comments Influence Outcomes Initiatives</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(226 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>Nurse Quality Initiative Garners `Magnet Hospital' Rank</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(257 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>Hospital Cuts Paper Chase Out of System Buy Process</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(193 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>Contract `Gag Clauses' Rare, Seldom Used on MDs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(244 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>Clinic Tracks Utilization Through Electronic Record</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(284 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>Compliance Plans Crucial As Whistleblower Cases Grow</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(232 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>Firm Tweaks Report Card To Pinpoint CQI Initiatives</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(273 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>Hospital Cuts CABG Costs By $7 Million, LOS by 23%</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(134 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>Telemedicine Web Site Offers Product Reviews</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(199 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>HCFA Merging Quality Rules For Medicare, Medicaid Plans</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(199 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>Multiprovider Networks Eyed As 1996 Antitrust Target</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(339 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
PHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

Hospital Overhauls Information System To Adopt
Client-Server Environment


Tired of the lack of communication between and duplication of
effort among components of its budding integrated delivery system,
one Texas hospital decided to rework the entire information system.
Hermann Hospital of Houston embarked on a three-year initiative to
phase in a system to create an electronic medical record accessible
from all parts of the network, says CIO David Tucker.
The first phase involves pilot tests at five or six University of
Texas clinics associated with the hospital. After phase one is
complete, the hospital will focus on integrating other departments,
such as nursing, into the network.
The hospital currently operates in a mainframe environment, but is
now moving to a client-server environment that makes information
more accessible to the end-user, Tucker says.
The paperless, client-server system will eliminate the need for
duplicate medical records scattered around the network.
For example, if a patient goes into a clinic in the morning, then
goes to the Hermann emergency room that night, physicians in the ER
have no way of knowing about the encounter that morning and will
draw up a new chart, Tucker says.
When implemented, the system will link about 2,000 devices,
including workstations and printers, located at about 60 clinics in
the area. Hermann hopes to have the first pilot systems in place by
September.
Contact Tucker at (713) 704-3367. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
PHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

Hospital Slashes Patient Admission Time Using
`Administrative Partner' Program


Physician managers at a Southern California hospital credit
first-phase implementation of a patient-focused quality care model
- the use of "administrative partners" - with shorter patient
waits, increased cash collections and other process improvements.
"Our overall goal is to bring services closer to the patient, to
eliminate wait times, the redundancy of people asking the same
questions of the patient"to rework the entire patient flow process
so it is simpler and easier from a patient's perspective," says
Kari Cornicelli, director of financial operations at 109-bed
Pomerado Hospital in Poway, Calif.
Called Patient First, Pomerado's four-stage program began in April
1994 with implementation of the administrative partners phase.
"Service partners" was implemented in March 1995, and the hospital
plans to begin "clinical care partners" (training direct-care staff
for multiple tasks and improved case management) and "family
partners" (working with families to improve care for discharged
patients) by the end of 1996.
Pomerado's sister hospital, 353-bed Palomar Medical Center in
Escondido, Calif., runs a similar patient-focused care program.
Administrative partners, which combine the roles of unit secretary
and admitting clerk, surpassed some stated goals:

o       Average admission time fell to 3.07
minutes by December 1995, down from 15 minutes in February 1994.
The 1995 goal: not to exceed 5 minutes.
o       Monthly cash collections rose to
$86,752 by December 1995, up from $15,270 in February 1994. The
1995 goal: $53,000.

From February 1994 to year-end 1995, officials also cite the
following process improvement indicators for administrative
partners: 
(1) Completed account files for patient billing rose to
86% from 50% (below a 1995 goal of 95% completion); 
(2) Advanced directive acknowledgments on patient charts
climbed to 92% from 61.8% (above a 90% goal);
(3) Signed requests for extension of hospital stay for Medi-Cal
patients increased to 92% from 83% (below a 98% goal).

Pomerado then re-designed the role of the environmental service
worker/housekeeper. Housekeeper  duties were limited to some
cleaning chores. But Pomerado trained 11 FTEs as "service partners"
to clean an entire floor and to ambulate patients and perform basic
comfort duties, such as getting blankets and water.
Registered nurse Lori Burnell, assistant administrator and nurse
executive, says Pomerado saved $173,800 in its service partners
phase through staff consolidation and the elimination of 4.2 FTEs.
Contact Burnell at (619) 485-6511. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
PHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

Plans Target Accessible MDs For Contracts, Rewards


An increasing number of managed care plans are rewarding primary
care physicians based on their ability to take on new patients.
The trend started a few years ago and has taken root in mature East
and West Coast markets and in  the Twin Cities, says Bill
Townsend, a consultant in Towers Perrin's integrated health systems
group in Minneapolis.
The move toward rewarding MDs for seeing more patients is part of
a broader strategy among employers and managed care plans to
increase access to services. To meet this objective, a plan or
employer must first make sure it contracts with doctors who offer
easy access to patients.
According to Townsend, plans and employers use a variety of methods
to reward MDs who maintain their access for patients, including:

o       Paying an MD a flat bonus for
keeping his or her practice open to new patients; or
o       Tying the MD's share of any surplus
pool to the percentage of plan enrollees that physician sees.

Generally, plans and employers don't set "growth targets" that
specifically reward MDs for increasing the number of patients they
see over a period of time, Keyes says. That's because allocating
the risk pool based on the number of enrollees an MD sees
encourages doctors to add new patients, he explains.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
PHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

Hospital Restructures Triage To Speed Interventions


Finding its emergency room triage system redundant and frustrating
to patients, Fairfax (Va.) Hospital's continuous quality
improvement team empowered nurses to intervene in certain patient
cases.
The result: a 40% reduction in turnaround time for intervention in
extreme-trauma cases. The same triage method was used to conduct
septic workups on children, stomach pain, and urinary tract
infections.
The 700-bed, level-one trauma center receives about 62,000
emergency room visits annually and admits 23% of its patients.
That's a significant number compared to most emergency departments,
which admit an average 12% to 15% cases.
Most emergency departments have four vertical care "silos" that
patients encounter, says Dr. Thom Mayer, chairman of the department
of emergency medicine. Those silos: (1) physicians; (2) nurses;
(3) essential service providers such as lab and X-ray
technicians; and (4) registration personnel.
But each silo operates independently, leading to redundancies and
patient frustration.
Applying continuous quality improvement methods, Fairfax emergency
department representatives held monthly quality council meetings to
determine how to improve services.
The team examined the amount of time it took to get a patient into
an X-ray or to the lab and the number of steps involved in the
process.
One result: a key staffer intervenes in patient cases and guides
cases through the emergency room.
For more information, contact Mayer at (703)  698-3195.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
PHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

HMOs Held Financially Liable For Meeting Quality Goals


A Denver small-business alliance has launched a "performance
program" of quality indicators - complete with financial incentives
and disincentives - for health plans in its Cooperative for Health
Insurance Purchasing (CHIP).
Founded in 1988, the Colorado Health Care Purchasing Alliance
offers two products to its 370-odd members, which represent 85,000
covered lives: a PPO for self-insured companies and the CHIP. About
228 companies, representing 5,000 covered lives, use the purchasing
alliance.
The "performance program" covers the four CHIP HMOs with which the
alliance contracts for standard benefit plans. The program sets
seven indicators, with common objectives for each.
Financial incentives and disincentives were a part of the plan from
the beginning, says LaDon Kessler, alliance information manager. At
the end of the year, the best-performing health plan in each
indicator gets 50% of the pool accumulating over the year from
plans not meeting the goal.
Service indicators are reported monthly and financially assessed
quarterly; other indicators, including provider access and member
satisfaction, are reported annually and financially assessed
annually. Clinical indicators have no financial adjustment.
Assessments run 0.333% of total quarterly premium for service
indicators, and 0.333% of total annual premium for satisfaction and
provider access indicators.
Close to the fall open enrollment period, the alliance will release
a "report card" that shows plans'  performance against the seven
indicators' common  objectives. The alliance may attach some
HEDIS results to the report card.
Contact Kessler at (303) 333-6767. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
PHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

Blues Group Implements Appropriateness Rules


The National Account Consortium, a group of nine Blue Cross and
Blue Shield plans with national employer accounts, has adopted
nationwide standards for treatment appropriateness for all
participating caregivers.
The standards, developed by the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Assn.'s
Technology Evaluation Center, are outcomes- and protocol-based.
Other health plans, including Cigna, Prudential, Kaiser and HCFA,
use the system as well.
The consortium is implementing the standards as part of its managed
care strategy, says Dr. Alex Rodriguez, medical director of the
Stamford, Ct.-based consortium. The standards apply to HMO, PPO,
point-of-service (POS) and indemnity plans.
Consortium members use the standards to determine payment for
services. If physicians don't follow the standards, they could be
denied payment, may not receive authorization for treatment, and,
if inappropriate utilization persists, risk exclusion from provider
panels.
The standards systematize more than 200 medical evaluations and
treatments that involve complicated diagnoses, including
controversial, high-risk and high-cost treatments. They also
provide a summary of appropriate and inappropriate care with
references to scientific evidence, and include the appropriate
procedure and diagnosis codes for treatments such as routine Pap
smears for women.
The consortium plans to automate the standards to allow for more
rapid payment of claims. Blues plans in California, Connecticut,
Illinois, Massachusetts, Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Texas
participate. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
PHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

Problems with Provider Risk Outlined in Safe Harbors


The final managed care "safe harbor" regulations raise the specter
of false claims accusations for providers who participate in
non-contract managed care plans that use withholds, lawyers say.
Issued Jan. 25 by the HHS inspector general, safe harbors protect
certain deals from prosecution under the Medicare-Medicaid
anti-kickback law (61 FR 2122).
The preamble to the regulations state the IG has "declined to
provide specific safe harbor protection to withhold pools, risk
incentive pools or other types of incentive programs offered by
non-contract managed care plans" (PM 2/9/96, p. 8).
The safe harbors expand the definition of "health plan" to protect
a wider variety of managed care arrangements, including (1) PPOs
that act as intermediaries between providers and payers and (2)
self-insured employers or union welfare funds that contract
directly with providers or insurance companies.
The rules also protect provider fee-for-service discounts to
managed care plans, as well as some capitated arrangements that
plans make with providers. But they don't protect other forms of
provider risk assumption, such as payment withholds and risk pools.
The safe harbors only protect the waiver of Medicare coinsurance
and deductibles in Medicare risk and cost-contract HMOs and the
waiver of inpatient hospital coinsurance and deductibles in
Medicare Select PPOs and HMOs. The rules don't protect waivers of
coinsurance and deductibles in other types of plans.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
PHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

Group Tackles Pregnancy Care In First Report Card Effort


Dallas/Forth Worth employers, hospitals and physicians have joined
forces in an ambitious first-time effort to measure health care
quality and value - and thus improve health communitywide.
Called the Health Care Value Initiative, the collaboration by the
DFW Business Group on Health, Dallas-Forth Worth Hospital Council,
5,900-member Dallas County Medical Society, and 2,000-member
Tarrant County Medical Society in Fort Worth seeks to design a
quality report card with uniform standards for health providers to
disseminate to the business community by March 1997.
While the initial focus is on measuring quality during pregnancy
and childbirth, which employers cite as a top concern, the group
also plans to examine cardiology, orthopedics, oncology and
psychiatry, says John Gavras, president of the 82-member hospital
council.
Pregnancy and childbirth indicators include maternal mortality
rate; neonatal mortality rate; post-operative mortality rate;
C-section rates (primary, secondary, total and vaginal birth after
C-section); post-operative surgical site infection; uterine rupture
rate; infection rate (metritis only); and unplanned neonatal
readmission. All are risk-adjusted.
The group also will examine indicators that are not risk-adjusted,
including complications due to anesthetic/sedation.
The coalition will follow up with health risk assessment and
patient satisfaction surveys.
The hospital council anticipates statewide comparison of hospital
data and perhaps comparison with cities such as Seattle and Kansas
City, Mo.
Participating hospitals will sign a confidentiality statement so
data will not be used for marketing; the council will sign a
confidentiality statement with members underscoring an
understanding that data are hospital-owned.
Contact Gavras at (214) 719-4900. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
PHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

Telephone Survey Comments Influence Outcomes Initiatives


Using qualitative comments gleaned from post-discharge patient
satisfaction surveys, a children's hospital tries to pull parents
into pediatric care decisions and influence patient outcomes.
The hospital gleans qualitative comments from 20-minute telephone
surveys of parents conducted 10 days after patient discharge. Those
comments - positive and negative - show up on a large bulletin
board in the waiting room of the hospital's outpatient center for
cancer and blood disorders.
HealthCare Research Systems of Columbus, Ohio, conducts the
telephone surveys - about 400 twice a year for the outpatient
center, in addition to mail and other surveys performed for the
facility over the past four years.
If the comment is negative, the hospital lists the action it took
to fix the problem.
Comments generally deal with how a physician listened to the
parents, how much time the physician spent with the parents, and
whether the physician involved the parents in decisions made about
a child's medical care.
Although some quantitative scores are posted, they don't interest
parents as much as the qualitative scores, contends Charlie Hauser,
vice president of the provider division for HealthCare Research
Systems.
The goal: encourage parental involvement by breaking down the
intimidating and often mysterious barriers surrounding medical
care. By encouraging family participation, the bulletin board has
a positive effect on the patient's outcomes, Hauser says.
Contact Hauser at (614) 487-6333. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
PHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

Nurse Quality Initiative Garners `Magnet Hospital' Rank


An Atlanta hospital's initiative to give nurses more
decision-making authority at the patient bedside and in turn boost
quality of care nabbed the facility "magnet hospital" status.
Saint Joseph's Hospital of Atlanta became the third hospital
nationwide to earn recognition by the American Nurses Credentialing
Center as a magnet hospital for nursing care.
The center reviews documentation and conducts site visits to
evaluate whether a hospital meets nursing standards in nine areas,
including quality assurance. More than 200 criteria are used.
The voluntary, four-year magnet hospital designation allows
hospitals to go beyond the Joint Commission on Accreditation of
Healthcare Organizations' overview to a closer examination of
nursing programs, says Mary Tilbury, consultant to the magnet
program.
Noting that Atlanta's highly competitive health market includes
50-odd hospitals and a recent influx of managed care, Kim Sharkey,
the hospital's director of nursing business planning and support
services, says Saint Joseph's sought magnet status to get
recognition of ongoing positive feedback from physicians, patients
and families on a shared governance professional practice model.
Implemented in 1981, the practice model allows the nurse at bedside
greater decision-making autonomy. The model includes nurse quality
assurance, management, and practice and education councils.
Saint Joseph's uses a top-down, multidisciplinary approach to
continuous quality improvement. The hospital also uses national
databases to compare performance on quality measures. "Our feeling
is if we can validate outcomes that are positive, payers ultimately
will realize cost is important but outcomes are even more
important," Sharkey says.
Contact Sharkey at (404) 851-7296, and Tilbury at (202) 651-7000.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
PHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

Hospital Cuts Paper Chase Out of System Buy Process


In its search for a new information system, a New York hospital
found an alternative to the usual paper-intensive process of
submitting a request for proposal (RFP) to vendors.
Brooks Memorial Hospital of Dunkirk, N.Y., first sent out a request
for information to 13 vendors and narrowed the choice to seven.
But an RFP involves a great deal of paperwork on both sides and
often is not filled with information that prospective buyers can
really use. So hospital CFO Ralph Webdale chaired a 13-member
committee that included physicians and representatives from
nursing, billing, accounting and pharmacy departments.
For one day a week, each of the seven vendors did on-site demos in
each department. Committee members independently rated each
vendor's software package, then discussed the systems' strengths
and weaknesses as a group.
A vital element of the review process was the telephone reference,
Webdale says. Each committee member spoke to their counterparts at
hospitals that had installed the vendors' products, then rated and
discussed each product based on the conversations.
The final step: rate the documentation of the top six vendors based
on criteria such as ease-of-use.
Contact Webdale at (716) 366-1111. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
PHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

Contract `Gag Clauses' Rare, Seldom Used on MDs


Like it or not, physicians generally have little choice but to
agree to the "gag clauses" included in HMO provider contracts.
However, few HMOs use the wide-ranging clauses that lately have
drawn backlash from physicians, consumers and legislators, say
experts.
HMOs say the clauses, when used, prevent MDs from (1) disclosing
proprietary information, (2) spoiling a patient's opinion of the
health plan, or (3) enticing the patient to enroll in a competing
plan.
But physicians say the "gag clauses" distort the  doctor-patient
relationship because they prohibit physicians from explaining to
thier patients that treatment decisions are based on a health
plan's appropriateness standards, treatment guidelines or payment
rules.

"Gag clauses" can range from:

o       A simple clause that says a
physician faces termination for interfering with the plan's
relations with employer groups and business contacts; to
o       A dictum that MDs can't undermine
the confidence of enrollees, potential enrollees, employers, plan
sponsors or others in the plan's quality of care; to
o       A prohibition on physicians
discussing the HMO-provider compensation arrangement, advising
patients to disenroll, or recommending to patients services and
treatments not covered by the plan.

But HMOs have found any "gag clause" hard to  enforce. The only
means of identifying violations:  (1) anomalies in members'
disenrollment patterns;  (2) patient complaints; and (3) comments
on member disenrollment forms.
Industry observers say most HMOs using "gag clauses" will define
allowable physician-patient communications, or get rid of the
clauses altogether. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
PHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

Clinic Tracks Utilization Through Electronic Record


To track patient utilization and improve allocation of resources,
a multisite Iowa provider group decided to use a computerized
medical record system.
The Iowa Physicians Clinic Medical Foundation will install
computerized medical record systems in about 15 sites around the
state, according to Dr. Mark Purtle, director of internal medicine.
The group has patient record systems up and running, although only
in partial installation, in about half of its sites.
Patient demographics data is collected at registration on a
workstation linked to the central database. The system
automatically updates the patient record. Billing information is
fowarded in daily batches to the database.
Instead of entering encounter notes directly into the record,
physicians record notes, which are then transcribed and entered
into the record.
All clinic sites can access records stored in the central database.
However, each site maintains a server with its own records.
Workstations are located at all physician offices, nurse stations
and registration desks. When the system is fully installed, there
will be workstations in every exam room.
Because the electronic medical record has not yet eliminated the
need for a paper record, the group may use a scanner to create
electronic images of the paper records.
The group hopes to build a complete database of codes and
demographics that tracks encounters by provider and clinic site.
Being able to track seasonal variations in utilization would enable
the group to better plan the number of physicians it needs during
certain periods of the year or the type of physician it would need
in a certain  community.
The group hopes to have the system fully implemented at all its
sites by the end of the year.
Contact Purtle at (515) 241-4000. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
PHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

Compliance Plans Crucial As Whistleblower Cases Grow


Given several false-claims cases sparked by whistleblowers pending
against major companies, physician managers should take voluntary
disclosure and compliance plans very seriously, a top government
attorney says.
"Health care enterprises, especially bigger ones, need aggressive
compliance policies in place to self-correct [billing problems] and
voluntarily disclose these problems"while they're still small,"
says HHS Inspector General Chief Counsel D. McCarty Thornton.
Thornton says if your company's compliance plan turns up serious
liability, you can take advantage of the feds' voluntary disclosure
program regardless of where you're in business - even though the
program is technically operational only in the five states where
the government is piloting its anti-fraud initiative.

For compliance plans to be meaningful, Thornton says they should:
o       Be "quite elaborate," not a slim
code of conduct that's just "window dressing."
o       Include a hotline so people can
report suspected fraud and other wrongdoing.
o       Track complaints that come over the
hotline, which means assigning them to someone to handle, recording
them and following up.
o       Protect tipsters so they don't fail
to report misconduct because they fear losing their jobs.
o       Assign at least one full-time person
to handle  implementation of the plan.
o       Continually educate all employees on
the ethics of dealing with federal health plans.
o       Require periodic, independent audits
of billing and other practices.
       Have "commitment and attention from
senior level managers," Thornton says. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
PHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

Firm Tweaks Report Card To Pinpoint CQI Initiatives


An Indianapolis-based home care company this spring will release a
second-generation report card on the satisfaction rates of severely
chronically ill patients.
"Even though we were the first [home care] company to come out with
a [patient satisfaction] report card, there were certain
improvements we could make in methodology and our treatment of data
for the continuous quality improvement process," says Sandra Kretz,
vice president of standards and outcomes for Quantum Health
Resources Inc.
Quantum in 1993 piloted a clinician-developed  patient
satisfaction survey instrument, used in the for-profit company's 40
branches nationwide the following year. Using results from the
spring 1994 national survey of 1,000-plus patients, Quantum
published its first report card in January 1995, outlining patient
satisfaction rates (95.3% overall), and a composite patient
retention rate of 96.1% from 1989 to mid-1994.
Quantum's 1994 survey could not discern old patients from new. But
its 1995 survey targets last year's more than 900 new patients.
Kretz says this ensured a good picture of new patients, with whom
one expects more glitches in satisfaction to occur.
In its effort to reinforce better service patterns companywide,
Quantum feeds survey information back to clinicians, customer
service representatives and its sales force.
Kretz says the 1994 survey identified issues for  improvement,
such as access to an after-hours company contact. 
Although Quantum puts its 24-hour, toll-free number on all patient
material, the company faces a continuing dilemma in alerting
patients on how to contact the company after hours. 
Various interventions include using customer service
representatives to follow up with patients and putting the
telephone number on notepads in patients' medication packets.
Contact Kretz at (317) 580-6830. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
PHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

Hospital Cuts CABG Costs By $7 Million, LOS by 23%


Saint Joseph's Hospital of Atlanta's involvement in a HCFA national
demonstration project on coronary artery bypass graft (CABG)
surgery highlights its multidisciplinary quality improvement
approach.
The project combines efforts of nurses, surgeons, respiratory
therapists, pharmacists, rehabilitation therapists and others to
cut costs and improve outcomes for post-surgical patients.
Saint Joseph's has performed more than 1,300 CABG surgeries,
decreasing length of stay by 23% without compromising quality, and
saving HCFA more than $7 million since the project's implementation
in July 1993.
CABG patients rank satisfaction at 2.94 on a three-point scale,
above the national average; their mortality rate is 4%, below the
national average; they leave the ICU within 24 hours of surgery
rather than three to four days; and they are discharged in five to
seven days, not seven to 10 days. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
PHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

Telemedicine Web Site Offers Product Reviews


The Telemedicine Information Exchange World Wide Web site,
maintained by the Telemedicine Research Center of Portland, Ore.,
links users to a telemedicine products and services directory that
catalogs articles on equipment reviews, evaluations or technical
specs.
After selecting a browser, physician managers will have a selection
of three menus: (1) starters; (2) hot items; and (3) searchable
databases.
From the starter menu, users can get the history and definition of
telemedicine, or read case studies on telemedicine in action and
the latest news, including legislative issues and success stories.
Users can also offer feedback on the site.
Under the hot items menu, users can explore the  legal and
ethical issues surrounding telemedicine through the text of current
state legislation, peer- reviewed articles and hypertext links to
other Internet resources.
The searchable databases include information on funding for
telemedicine projects, active projects, and upcoming meetings and
conferences.
The site also offers information on the Telemedicine Research
Center's Clinical Telemedicine Cooperative Group that brings
together researchers nationwide.
The site's home page lets users choose a text-only or a graphic
browser, enabling users to sacrifice aesthetics for the sake of
speed.
The site is located at http://tie.telemed.org/ on  the Web.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
PHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

HCFA Merging Quality Rules For Medicare, Medicaid Plans


HCFA is working on devising one set of quality standards for both
Medicare and Medicaid managed care plans.
The agency also is considering giving credit to plans that
recently were accredited by private bodies such as National
Committee for Quality Assurance,  according to Jeffrey Kang,
chief medical officer at HCFA's office of managed care.
For example, HCFA would look to see where its standards and NCQA's
overlap, Kang told a recent conference of the Academy of Managed
Care Pharmacy. For these areas, the agency would recognize NCQA's
seal of approval.
But HCFA is concerned that applying a broad set of NCQA measures
"could lose its meaning for Medicare," Kang said. The agency might
identify a subset of measures suitable for Medicare managed care
plans.
NCQA likely won't have Medicare performance measures until HEDIS
3.0 launches in early 1997, says Bruce Fried, director of HCFA's
office of managed care.
As part of that effort, HCFA wants the new quality standards to
replace the 50-50 commercial enrollment composition rule. The
Medicare law and regulations require Medicare HMOs to enroll at
least 50% commercial members. Fried says he hopes to have the new
quality standards in place by July 1997. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
PHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNet
February 23, 1996

Multiprovider Networks Eyed As 1996 Antitrust Target


As health care dealmakers continue to travel uncharted territory,
government regulators and enforcers are watching closely to
determine whether cutting-edge health delivery systems,
collaborations and compensation arrangements comply with the law.
Experts tell physician managers that 1996 will be a year in which
antitrust enforcers will focus on multiprovider networks,
payer-provider collaboration, and most-favored nation clauses. 
Multiprovider networks will be a big focus of Justice's antitrust
enforcement this year, says Gail Kursh, chief of the health care
task force. "We have a number of investigations of multiprovider
arrangements underway," Kursh says.
Last year, in two separate cases, Justice settled antitrust charges
with two PHOs formed with most of the doctors in one-hospital
towns. Those settlements provided the industry with a blueprint for
doing such deals without antitrust violations.
This year, Justice will look at PHOs in multihospital markets and
may strike deals that provide guidance, Kursh says. The kind of
conduct scrutinized includes: (1) hospitals buying too many
physician practices;  (2) hospitals with market power locking up
all referrals in town; and (3) hospitals keeping out competitors by
inducing MDs not to hook up with a new hospital.
Kursh emphasizes, though, that Justice doesn't want to "chill"
deals that spur competition. "Our goal is not to deter
efficiency-enhancing arrangements where they're appropriate," she
says.

Merger-Like Deals to Get More Scrutiny

Observers also predict the FTC and Justice Department will back
away from hospital merger challenges and focus more on integrated
delivery systems, HMOs and physician practice acquisitions.
While traditional hospital mergers may be less of a focus, other
incarnations of hospital collaborations will get more scrutiny.
Justice's Kursh notes that "we're attuned to partnerships or
alliances between hospitals that aren't necessarily mergers."
Her staff is exploring the competitive implications of deals that
look like mergers but aren't, she says. "The question is how do we
analyze them? Are they illegal? Are they joint ventures? Or are
they enough like mergers they should be treated like a merger?
We'll be looking very closely at this area." 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-25</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B042-7</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh31.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020215 text/html 40454
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:00:21 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:43 GMT
Content-length: 40267
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh31.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
THE PPO LETTER via NewsNet <BR>
November 2, 1992<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>PPO NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>First Choice PPO, Group Health HMO to Bid Jointly on CHAMPUS Pact</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(920 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>22 Companies Offer New Medicare SELECT Plans, HCFA Survey Shows</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(691 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>SouthCare Adds 11 Hospitals to Establish Statewide PPO Network</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(445 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>New York Life Chooses PHC to Provide Mental Health Networks</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(454 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Admar Acquires Two TPAs As Part of EPO "Evolution" Move</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(344 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>CHAMPUS Northern Region Rebidding Offers New Market for PPOs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(602 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Spiegel Looks to Add Physician, POS Networks to Successful PPO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(355 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PPO TRENDS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>PHCS Uses Quality-Based Ranking System to Evaluate PPO Providers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(681 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>Letter to the Editor</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(161 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>Specialized Needs of Retirees Said to Create PPO Opportunities</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(556 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>PPOs Expected to Participate in New AMCRA Healthcare Database</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(586 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
THE PPO LETTER via NewsNet
November 2, 1992

First Choice PPO, Group Health HMO to Bid Jointly on CHAMPUS Pact


In an action that could set an industry precedent, PPO First
Choice Health Network and HMO Group Health Cooperative of Puget
Sound are teaming up to bid on the giant CHAMPUS contract for
Washington state and Oregon, THE PPO LETTER has learned.

"We think we complement each other far more than we compete,"
says First Choice President and CEO Clayton Field. And Field
suggests that such joint marketing efforts may become common in
the future as "part of the maturity of the industry."

It is possible, he says, that First Choice, Washington's largest
PPO with about 300,000 covered lives, and Group Health Coopera-
tive, the state's largest HMO with 470,000 enrollees, might
cooperate in bidding for other public and private pacts later.

To date, joint ventures involving PPOs and HMOs have been ex-
tremely rare. The only one involving large organizations recently
occurred in Minneapolis, where PPO Preferred One agreed in 1991
to lease its provider network to HMO GroupCare, a unit of Group
Health, to offer clients more flexible benefit options (THE PPO
LETTER, 9/2/91, p. 4).

It was a similar need - in the form of the new federal
mandate to offer a "triple option (i.e., HMO, PPO, and indemnity)
- in managed-care programs for the Civilian Health and
Medical Program of the Uniformed Services (CHAMPUS) that helped
bring together First Choice and Group Health Cooperative.

The Washington-Oregon CHAMPUS Reform Initiative (CRI) contract,
for which bids are due in mid-January 1993, covers a whopping
250,000 military dependents and retirees. The current pact does
not contain managed-care features and expires in early 1994.

Given the "mega-big" nature of the contract and the fact that
"one vendor would be responsible for the risk and care," Group
Health Cooperative decided "no one plan can absorb that," ex-
plains Peter Brumleve, vice president of marketing for the HMO.

While many of the requirements of the contract were "right up our
alley," include utilization management, quality assurance, cost
containment, and a large number of network providers, Brumleve
says, one wasn't. "We're not a PPO," he notes, and since the
contract specifications mandate a PPO option, the HMO decided "we
need a PPO."

He says Group Health Cooperative looked at the PPOs available and
soon focused on First Choice. Like First Choice, the 45-year-old
staff-model HMO is not for profit. Moreover, the two Seattle-
based organizations and their CEOs, Field and Phil Nudelman, had
longstanding relationships "that facilitated negotiations," says
Brumleve.

The HMO went on to fill another contract requirement, claims
processing, by recruiting as a bid partner Blue Cross and Blue
Shield of South Carolina. That organization, the CHAMPUS fiscal
intermediary for the mid-Atlantic region, is well regarded for
CHAMPUS claims administration (THE PPO LETTER, 8/10/92, p. 2).

Brumleve says the group also will have other partners, but he
won't identify them yet since arrangements haven't been final-
ized. He acknowledges that the partners expect to face consider-
able competition for the one-year pact (with four one-year
renewal options) slated to start February 1994, based on atten-
dance at the bidders' meeting held this year.

But regardless of whether the group wins the contract, the
cooperative effort has major implications for the future. Terming
the relationship "synergistic" and "good and getting better,"
Brumleve says it is "definitely possible" that Group Health
Cooperative and First Choice could team up for other pacts,
although it's "too early to tell."

The chances of such arrangements are growing especially since CRI
contracts are like other large ones increasingly being discussed
at both public and private levels that involve risk and account-
ability for cost and quality, he says. He cites as examples the
purchasing cooperatives in Minnesota that are awarding single
contracts covering several customers.

Teamwork between PPOs and HMOs hasn't occurred much before, he
asserts, because there haven't been opportunities - or needs
- to do this previously. The joint bid on the CHAMPUS pact
"will be a learning experience for our organization and for the
industry," adds Brumleve.

"This is the right way to go," agrees Field. It's clear now, he
says, that HMOs are trying to loosen up (e.g., allowing more
flexibility) at the same time that PPOs are trying to tighten up
in areas such as medical management. Thus, there's a need for
change, but "we're in an era where it seems foolish to invent a
new HMO or PPO," he maintains.

"If you have them out there, why not go together?" he asks. He
argues that the public is better served in this way, and PPOs and
HMOs have increased "buying power" if they collaborate to assure
doctors significantly more patients. It also eases administrative
problems, Field says, since, for instance, a Taft-Hartley entity
has to deal with only one managed care firm.

Such cooperation hasn't occurred often before since "there's been
a perception that PPOs and HMOs compete," Field notes. This is
partly true, he says, since they each may solicit the same
company for contracts. But there invariably are some employees
who want only an HMO or only a PPO, so "it's an advantage" to be
able to offer both.

The trend, says Field, is toward the kind of "managed competi-
tion" model now popular in both the Democratic and Republican
party camps. He adds it's "ironic" that the government, in the
form of the huge CRI pact, was responsible for leading organiza-
tions such as First Choice and Group Health Cooperative to this
new kind of teamwork.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
THE PPO LETTER via NewsNet
November 2, 1992

22 Companies Offer New Medicare SELECT Plans, HCFA Survey Shows

An informal and limited survey conducted by the Health Care
Financing Administration (HCFA) indicates that a total of 22
companies are offering plans under the new Medicare SELECT
program in 10 of the 15 designated states.

The survey, sent out in late August and just tabulated, also
shows that seven additional companies have SELECT proposals
awaiting approval in the same plus one other state, which HCFA
declines to identify.

But two of the designated states, Oregon and Michigan, have
withdrawn from the program, and replacement states probably won't
be named until early next year, according to HCFA.

Medicare SELECT, which began operation July 1, enables Medicare
supplemental insurance (Medigap) carriers to offer retirees a
fee-for-service preferred provider network. A principal attrac-
tion is that employers can buy Medicare SELECT plans at prices
15% to 25% lower than they paid for previous conventional Medigap
policies.

But there are some restrictions. The policies offered must be
selected from the 10 specific ones described by the National
Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) and must include
the basic plan A. And no other new Medigap policies may be
offered in the participating states.

The HCFA survey did not attempt to find out which of the nine
other plans were being offered or how many beneficiaries are
being covered. It did show SELECT policies are available in
Alabama, Arizona, Florida, Indiana, Kentucky, Minnesota, Missou-
ri, North Dakota, Texas, and Wisconsin.

That indicates no SELECT policies were being offered as of the
time of the survey in two of the biggest states, California and
Ohio, as well as in Washington state. Oft-proposed legislation to
extend the SELECT program to all 50 states died in a House-Senate
conference committee this year. It is expected to be reintroduced
in 1993.

Despite the relatively limited initial use of the pilot program,
which runs through 1994, HCFA expects other companies to begin
offering SELECT policies in the designated states soon.

One major trigger for that may be the long-delayed approval of
"safe harbor" provisions for the SELECT plans. They would allow
SELECT PPOs to get discounts from providers and waive copayments
for only the Medicare beneficiaries who use these providers
without running afoul of Medicare's anti-kickback rules. That
might help overcome the current lack of interest among many PPOs
in the over-65 market.

A Department of Health and Human Services source says those safe-
harbor provisions - along with others eagerly awaited by PPOs
for non-SELECT plans to protect their payment arrangements -
probably won't be out until late November at the earliest.

The reason for the delays, the source says, aside from the
relatively recent addition of the SELECT provisions, is that the
rules need the blessing of the Office of Management and Budget.

There also have been managed-care industry concerns, communicated
to federal policy makers, that the planned safe-harbor rules were
too narrow and leave too much regulatory authority to the states,
which often do not have mechanisms for overseeing PPOs.

Safe-harbor worries notwthstanding, one Medicare SELECT market
participant sees a bright future for the plans.

SELECT will become "more and more significant" in the future
since the over-65 population is growing and becoming more accus-
tomed to preferred provider arrangements, says Debbie Ahl, execu-
tive vice president of Olympic Health Management Systems, Inc.
(Bellingham, Wash.).

Olympic is a health-care consulting firm and third-party admin-
istrator specializing since 1986 in Medigap and now SELECT plans.
The company is marketing SELECT policies underwritten by Sierra
Health & Life in Texas, where it knows of only one other company
(Humana) competing for that business, according to Greg Brethour,
vice president of sales.

Ahl, however, says she's not surprised by that since SELECT is a
"brand new concept." She declines to say in what other SELECT
states Olympic is active.

But she does say there is a consensus in the industry that NAIC-
designated plans C and F will be the dominant SELECT policies.
Plan C pays the 20% Medicare Parts A and B coinsurance based on
the Medicare-allowable fees, while Plan F covers 100% of physi-
cian charges.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
THE PPO LETTER via NewsNet
November 2, 1992

SouthCare Adds 11 Hospitals to Establish Statewide PPO Network

SouthCare Medical Alliance, which has been a provider-owned PPO
in the Atlanta area since its establishment in 1985, will have a
statewide hospital network by the end of the year. The PPO has
signed up nine not-for-profit hospitals outside metropolitan
Atlanta (11 overall) as affiliates during the past three months,
says President and CEO Larry L. Madlem.

Moreover, Madlem says, SouthCare expects to start contracting
with physicians affiliated with these hospitals in 1993. By
completion in 1994, the PPO will boost by about 1,200 its current
1,300-physician network, he adds.

SouthCare, which now has 16 hospitals in its network, thereby
apparently will become the first statewide provider-owned PPO in
Georgia. Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Georgia now has a state-
wide network, as does investor-owned Affordable Health Concepts,
a unit of HealthCare COMPARE.

The expansion push for SouthCare outside metropolitan Atlanta
began in the Savannah area and includes hospitals generally in
the 400- to 500-bed size range, according to Madlem.

The additions are Douglas General Hospital (Douglasville),
Egleston Children's Hospital at Emory University (Atlanta), Floyd
Medical Center (Rome), Northeast Georgia Medical Center (Gaines-
ville), Paulding Memorial Medical Center (Dallas), Peach County
Hospital (Fort Valley), Rockdale Hospital (Conyers), Saint
Joseph's Hospital (Savannah), Scottish Rite Children's Medical
Center (Atlanta), The Medical Center of Central Georgia (Macon),
and University Hospital (Augusta).

Madlem says several factors resulted in the decision to go
statewide. Among them were the requests of some of SouthCare's
major customers, including The Principal Financial Group and
Mutual of Omaha, he says. Others that have contracted for state-
wide access include employers Waffle House and Home Depot.

The "changing dynamics" in the legislative and political arenas
also spurred the statewide expansion, Madlem adds. He explains
that SouthCare wants to be able to bid on Medicare and Medicaid
as well as large private provider-network contracts that will
become more prevalent.

There is an industry trend, he says, toward consolidation,
bringing more and more coverage under a single contract largely
to save on expense from a time and personnel standpoint.

"We didn't feel we had much time left to be viable in the market
as just a metropolitan area PPO" as SouthCare was before, asserts
Madlem. To remain competitive, he says, the PPO needed to become
broader in the services it offers (including adding mental
health, workers' compensation, and utilization review), and "we
needed to be at least statewide."

SouthCare now claims to be Georgia's largest managed care organi-
zation with 366,390 covered lives as of last month and more than
1,300 doctors in its directory. A handful of physicians, as well
as 11 hospitals, were its original owners.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
THE PPO LETTER via NewsNet
November 2, 1992

New York Life Chooses PHC to Provide Mental Health Networks

New York Life Insurance Co., fulfilling a pledge early this year
that it would hire a nationwide mental-health services vendor
rather than handle this specialty in house, said October 20 that
Preferred Health Care Ltd. (PHC) will be its provider.

The agreement, which New York Life predicts will cover 525,000
lives by 1995, offers major pluses for both firms.

New York Life, which has been rolling out a whole range of new
provider-network products (THE PPO LETTER, 1/13/92, p. 1), gains
the aid of a proven developer and manager of mental-health
networks. It does that at less cost than if it had developed a
program from scratch or acquired a behavioral-health specialist
such as insurers CIGNA, The Travelers, and Aetna have done.

PHC (Wilton, Conn.), which has built its reputation and much of
its business providing services directly to self-funded Fortune
500 employers, gains enhanced access to the insured, smaller-
employer market through an alliance with a huge carrier.

Under the contract, PHC will support mental-health components of
a wide range of New York Life's managed care products, including
PPOs and managed indemnity.

The agreement calls for it to furnish provider networks, case
evaluation, patient referral, utilization review, claims review,
and management reporting and analysis. Those services will not be
provided in "southern New York State," where New York Life says
its Sanus HMO subsidiary will continue to furnish managed mental
health care to clients.

"Our unique affiliation with New York Life will provide nation-
wide access to managed mental health services for small and mid-
size businesses," says David McDonnell, chairman and CEO of PHC.
He calls that an "expanding segment" in the managed mental health
market.

PHC, founded in 1983, now covers seven million people in managed
behavioral health and workers' compensation services. It has been
been boosting stakes aggressively in both businesses this year,
most recently in the latter by agreeing to buy the stock of
Adjustco Inc., a third-party administrator primarily in workers'
comp.

In its most recent financial report, for the quarter that ended
June 30, PHC posted net income from continuing operations of 10
cents a share, up from 4 cents a share in the comparable year-ago
period. Revenues climbed to $13.3 million from $9.3 million.

New York Life has introduced an exclusive provider organization
(EPO) this year and continued its rollout of second-generation
PPO products designed for employee groups of up to 3,000 covered
lives.

In unveiling its mental-health strategy early this year, Vice
President for Managed Care Dr. Dan Fishbein pointed to the
efficiency of using an established vendor rather than "reinvent
the wheel." Fishbein added then, "It's not a carve-out. We're
assuming risk."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
THE PPO LETTER via NewsNet
November 2, 1992

Admar Acquires Two TPAs As Part of EPO "Evolution" Move

The Admar Group, which started out as a third-party administrator (TPA) in
California before becoming a PPO operator, has come full circle. The Santa
Ana, Calif.-based managed care firm acquired two TPAs in Colorado to support
its planned operation of an exclusive provider organization (EPO) there.

"We're evolving into an EPO organization," says Richard Toral, CEO of Admar.
Because of the need for its own administration to support the more intensive
data requirements of an EPO than of a PPO, he explains, the company agreed to
purchase Boulder, Colo.-based TPAs Benefit Plan Administrators and Hofgard &
Co. for a total of $1.6 million in cash and notes.

He says the additional administrative capability will aid the marketing of
the EPO, which Admar plans to start in Colorado in the first quarter of 1993.
Admar already has PPOs in the state, but Toral says the company has no plans
to start an HMO there.

An HMO isn't necessary in Colorado, according to Toral, since Admar can
"equal the performance of an HMO with an indemnity-based product."

Admar, which also plans an EPO in southern California and is in the midst of
rapid PPO expansion in several states (THE PPO LETTER, 9/21/92, p. 1),
expects the major portion of its growth to come internally, Toral says. He
adds, however, that further acquisitions are a "possibility."

The firm recently agreed to furnish an 18-state preferred provider network
for National Insurance Services (Tampa), thereby adding 100,000 covered lives
and anticipated first-year revenues of $1 million from the PPO and
utilization management provisions of the contract.

The growth, however, is coming at a price. The company posted a net loss of
$296,000 or 4 cents a share in the fiscal second quarter, which ended July
31, compared with net income of $57,000 (less than one cent a share) in the
year-ago period as revenues climbed 12% to $2.8 million from $2.5 million.
Part of the reason for the decline in the bottom line, Admar says, is an
increase in marketing expenditures.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
THE PPO LETTER via NewsNet
November 2, 1992

CHAMPUS Northern Region Rebidding Offers New Market for PPOs

Adhering to mandates contained in the new law that resolved a
stalemate (THE PPO LETTER, 6/29/92, p. 1), the Department of
Defense is seeking bids that include a PPO option for the first
time for the 19-state Northern Region CHAMPUS contract.

The huge contract contains the requirement, included in the
Request for Proposals (RFP), that "all network providers shall
discount rates at least 5% below the CHAMPUS allowable amount."
The PPO also must include retail pharmacies as well as hospitals
and physicians.

Proposals on the one-year pact (with four one-year renewal
options), which is a "rebid" of a contract that did not previous-
ly have a managed-care network component, are due November 18. A
bidders' meeting was held in Denver September 23.

The Northern Region solicitation is the third of four major
contracts up for grabs with the Civilian Health and Medical
Program of the Uniformed Services (CHAMPUS) that involve the
CHAMPUS Reform Initiative (CRI) style of managed care.

The others are the controversial rebid California-Hawaii pact
(THE PPO LETTER, 8/10/92, p. 1), a Washington-Oregon contract now
out for proposals (see article, page 1), and a Florida pact for
which the RFP still is in development, according to Commander Tom
Corrato, director of cooordinated care operations for CHAMPUS.

There also are smaller projects, to be set up by next May, linked
with military-base closure sites in Austin and Dallas-Fort Worth,
Tex. and Alexandria, La.

The Northern Region contract, though, dwarfs all the others in
terms of sheer size of area covered. It covers the states of
Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky (except
the Ft. Campbell "catchment area"), Maine, Massachusetts, Michi-
gan, Minnesota, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Ohio,
Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont, West Virginia, and Wiscon-
sin.

Its managed care "task" includes an enrolled HMO-like plan, using
a "gatekeeper"-like Primary Care Manager, as well as the PPO.
There are stringent network access mandates for bidders as well
as a requirement that "PPO networks shall continuously operate in
all areas" where "sufficient beneficiary population exists."

The PPO developer would have to show why it is not cost-effective
to implement a network within any of the areas. It also would
have to document efforts to contract with providers there.

The RFP states that no payment may be required for a noncovered
service from a network provider unless the beneficiary has agreed
in advance to pay for such service.

The PPO benefit plan design calls for a beneficiary copayment for
most outpatient services of 15% of the fee negotiated by the
contractor for active-duty (AD) families and 20% for retirees and
their families. For ambulatory surgery, there is no copayment
for AD and 20% for retirees.

On hospitalization, there is no copayment for AD families. For
retirees and dependents, the copayment requirement is $125 per
day or 25% of total charges (based on fee schedules negotiated by
the contractor), whichever is less, for "institutional services"
plus 20% of "separately billed professional charges."

For mental illness and alcoholism treatment, the RFP for the PPO
plan calls for no copayment for AD families. For retiree fami-
lies, the "cost share" is $50 per day or 25% of total charges
(based on negotiated fee schedules), whichever is less, for
institutional services plus 20% of separately billed professional
charges.

While Corrato says "there is a push for us" to develop mail-order
pharmacy plans for CHAMPUS health-care programs, there is no
mail-order requirement in the Northern Region RFP. A pilot of
such a plan is salted to be tried in Hawaii.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
THE PPO LETTER via NewsNet
November 2, 1992

Spiegel Looks to Add Physician, POS Networks to Successful PPO

Spiegel Inc., which began using a hospital-only PPO network in
1989, is "leaning toward" adding the physician portion of that
network next year, says Michael Tulaga, benefits and compensation
director. And Tulaga says the company might develop a point-of-
service (POS) plan in 1994.

The Downers Grove, Ill.-based specialty retailer, which spent
$16.3 million on employee health care (excluding a couple of
subsidiaries) in 1991, says it saved more than $1.1 million
through using the 52-hospital network of Blue Cross and Blue
Shield of Illinois. That compares with savings of about $300,000
in 1989 and $600,000 in 1990.

The high savings in 1991, according to Tulaga, result not only
directly from the approximately 20% discounts the network pro-
vides but also from the fact that 80% of eligible employees now
use the network for hospitalization.

He attributes the high usage partly to the concentration of the
company's employees (4,000 out of 5,000) in the well-networked
Chicago area. "Employees don't have to go far to [preferred]
providers," Tulaga says.

Another factor, though, is plan design, he asserts. Spiegel
reworked its overall employee benefits when the PPO option was
introduced to give employees a flexible structure in which they
could choose from three different levels of health-insurance
coverage.

A thorough employee communications effort also has helped. Small
staff meetings explaining the benefit changes with the aid of
slides or videos were accompanied by education about the causes
and effects of rising health costs.

Together with written materials, Spiegel says, the effort helped
reverse a prior (before the PPO) lukewarm feeling surveyed
employees displayed toward the company's health benefits.

Having made its first limited move into managed care from the
previous indemnity plan, which still covers about 1,000 employees
outside the Chicago area, Tulaga says, the self-insured company
now wants to go further.

He says the physician network "could be our next step." But
Spiegel also is looking into developing a POS plan with HMO and
indemnity components in 1994 "to help manage overall costs," he
adds. The company now has HMOs only for hourly employees and just
since this year.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
THE PPO LETTER via NewsNet
November 2, 1992

PHCS Uses Quality-Based Ranking System to Evaluate PPO Providers

Preferred Healthcare Systems, Inc. (PHCS) is using a quality-based evaluation
system to rank its 63,500 PPO providers and to make retention and patient
"redirection" decisions, according to Dr. N. Stephen Ober, vice president and
corporate medical director.

Preliminary results of the system, Ober told a session of the American
Managed Care and Review Association annual conference in San Diego October
20, show 90% of the physicians examined ranked in the top two categories.
This is a similar result, and indeed the system is similar to that used by
unrelated mental-health PPO Preferred Health Care Ltd. in provider profiling
(THE PPO LETTER, 9/21/92, p. 7).

But the PHCS system generated several questions from attendees about use of
the findings. The Lexington, Mass.-based PPO, Ober responded to a couple of
them, shares some of the information with its employer clients but does not
make results available to patients, partly because of liability
considerations.

And it doesn't report "incidents" of inappropriate care to the government, he
noted, partly because PPOs aren't allowed to access the National Practitioner
Data Bank.

The preliminary findings, he said, showed that 16.7% of its network
physicians accounted for all the incidents found, and only 2.7% of the
doctors examined had five or more incidents. About 30% of the physicians
ranked in the top category and are being rewarded by gaining referrals of
patients who call the PHCS "hotline" for assistance.

Ober said the system depends on using a large amount of data on physicians'
practice patterns over time to obtain "meaningful" and comprehensive clinical
information on the providers. The idea is to assess the quality of the
physician, not just that of the care provided, he added.

The raw data used in the system include medical and pharmaceutical claims,
utilization review results, patient surveys, and "administrative reports"
(often "ad hoc" documents filed by PHCS' field staff). Using a computerized
method and physician reviewers, the data are looked at for indicators of
performance.

The "indicators" are in several areas. Patient satisfaction information comes
from surveys and administrative reports. The reports also provide raw
material for an indicator of administrative efficiency, which takes into
account such findings as "upcoding" and claims unbundling. Indicators of
outcomes of care come from both administrative reports and from data on post-
procedure complications.

Moreover, the "process of care" is examined, according to Ober, for such
deficiencies as inappropriate use of assistant surgeons, "procedure/diagnosis
mismatch," outmoded procedures, and "therapeutic overlap" in the drugs
prescribed.


In the second phase of the process, PHCS does a "targeted review" using
"relative weighting of incidents" to examine "targeted outlier providers" to
get a "provider quality score," Ober said. He explained that quality ratings
of 3 to 5 in this phase involve "deviations in practice patterns" with a 5
indicating "major deviations."

The final phase involves "provider intervention." After using its medical-
director and quality-assurance subcommittees to arrive at a consensus on what
to do, PHCS discusses its findings with the targeted providers and gets
"feedback" from them.

Those who receive a score of 3 get an inquiry letter, are asked for
additional "general information" and "educated" about PHCS quality management
processes. A 4 score gets the provider a warning letter, a request for
additional specific information, and an "evaluation." A score of 5, said
Ober, results in termination from the network, although there is an appeal
procedure.

In the preliminary results, only 1% of the physicians received a 5 score,
while 4% had a 4, 5% a 3, 60% a 2, and 30% a 1.

Ober said the system should be usable for any contracted network, especially
since it utilizes commonly available data and doesn't require a huge data
base. The "multiple interventions," which focus on non-punitive actions, he
said, broaden the impact of the system.

In response to questions, he said the system can detect underutilization as
well as overutilization and can even pinpoint when physicians are not
administering needed periodic immunizations. But he acknowledged that PHCS
doesn't yet have the means to use this system for examination of physicians'
referral patterns.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
THE PPO LETTER via NewsNet
November 2, 1992

Letter to the Editor

Dear Editor,

The Sept. 21, 1992 issue of THE PPO LETTER somewhat misrepresent-
ed my comments regarding [American] Biodyne's provider network
made at the recent Behavioral Health Tomorrow conference in
Chicago.

It is not Biodyne's goal to narrow its current network. Rather,
we are committed to developing and maintaining the highest
quality networks. This necessitates a process of selection which
tends to result in a more refined network which is traditional
for managed care companies. We want to ensure that our patients
are treated by the most qualified providers available and that
these providers receive valuable support from Biodyne.

We are not looking to reward efficiency. We are looking to reward
clinical effectiveness and high quality service. Our unending
commitment to this goal will guarantee that our provider networks
are strong and that our patients receive the most clinically
appropriate care possible.

Jeffrey I. Bragman, Ph.D.
Vice President, Quality Management and Clinical Services
American Biodyne, Inc.
South San Francisco, Calif.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
THE PPO LETTER via NewsNet
November 2, 1992

Specialized Needs of Retirees Said to Create PPO Opportunities

While managed health care for retirees remains largely an HMO
rather than PPO emphasis, there is potential for substantially
more provider network activity, particularly in specialty areas.
And those opportunities, which some employers already are taking
advantage of, could rise if proposed legislation is enacted.

That, at least, appeared to be the consensus of speakers at a
conference on managing health care for retirees, sponsored by the
Washington Business Group on Health, in Washington, D.C. last
month.

The biggest component of retiree managed care now is Medicare
risk contracting. About 100 HMOs (no PPOs) participate in that
program, which involves Medicare paying the HMOs 95% of its
average per-capita cost in return for providing at least Medi-
care's standard level of benefits.

But there are relatively untapped options for PPOs, even aside
from the new Medicare SELECT program (see article, page 1). These
areas especially involve "younger retirees," not Medicare eligi-
ble, who usually can be "leveraged" into existing networks, said
Dr. Saul Spivack, a consultant with Tillinghast in New York.

Some of the opportunities, Spivack said, lie in specialized areas
that reflect the different health conditions and performance
expectations of retirees as well as their geographical disper-
sion. He saw a need for "subnetworks" in such specialties as
cardiac, musculoskeletal/orthopedic, cancer, organic brain
disorders, neurology, and multidisciplinary diagnostics.

For these networks to be successful, he contended, utilization
management must be a high priority. It should include prospective
identification of high risk/high cost retirees, retroactive
evaluation of emergency admissions, and on-site concurrent
reviews.

For younger retirees, regular PPOs are a feasible option for
employers, according to Spivack. His findings are supported by an
Intracorp survey, conducted this summer, which showed 51% of
responding employers used PPOs for pre-Medicare eligible retir-
ees, compared with only 24% for Medicare eligible retirees.

For the older retirees, Spivack suggested point-of-service (POS)
plans of a "soft" nature that pull enrollees through "perceived
value" rather than through cutting benefits.

Medicare has proposed legislation for retiree POS programs along
these lines, pointed out Edmund C. Moy, director of the office of
coordinated care policy and planning at the U.S. Health Care
Financing Administration.


The plan, not acted on by Congress this year, would involve the
government renting an employer's existing POS network for its
retirees to get continuity and "not reinvent the wheel," Moy
said. A lure for retirees, he explained, would be that network
beneficiaries get higher benefits than they would under Medicare.

While that proposal seems unlikely to get action soon, some
corporations have taken their own actions involving PPOs for
retirees. One is Chrysler Corporation. Its financial staff
specialist for health care planning, Christopher Mykrantz, told
the conference that the automaker has successfully employed
several directly contracted specialty PPOs for retirees.

All of these PPOs use capitated rate payments. A podiatry PPO,
started in Michigan in 1986 and extended regionally in 1991,
saved 40% the first year and now is limiting the annual cost
increase trend to 1.8%.

A laboratory PPO, also begun in Michigan in 1986, expanded in
1992 to other states, Mykrantz said. It saved 30% the first year,
and the cost-hike trend since then has been 1.9%. There also are
new prescription-drug and durable-medical-equipment PPOs that are
off to good starts, according to Mykrantz.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
THE PPO LETTER via NewsNet
November 2, 1992

PPOs Expected to Participate in New AMCRA Healthcare Database

Having completed its technical and financial feasibility analysis with
favorable results, the AMCRA Healthcare Database (AHD) now is beginning a
two-year development phase in which 250 additional managed care plans will
participate.

Those participants will include PPOs as well as HMOs, says Howard Fomby, a
principal in Prolifix, the Lenexa, Kan. firm putting together the huge data
base. He predicted that 400 plans will be participating when AHD begins
actual, self-sufficient operation in 1995.

Fomby updated the status and business plan for AHD at a session of the
American Managed Care and Review Association (AMCRA) annual conference in San
Diego Oct. 19. AMCRA commissioned the project in 1988 as a means of
quantifying the impact of managed care in such areas as cost, utilization,
and quality of care.

A more specific set of objectives involves aiding managed care plans in
evaluating utilization management, predicting revenue requirements, and
reporting data to clients and regulators. Some of these objectives overlap
those of the American Accreditation Program Inc., the PPO-industry plan that
has published similar summary information about its approximately 25
accredited PPOs.

AHD obtained funding and management aid for its pilot phase from Marion
Merrell Dow, Fomby's former employer, in 1991.

The just-completed pilot included data from six HMOs selected on the basis of
diversity of hardware, software, and type of plans. One of them, which Fomby
declined to identify, also submitted PPO data. He did say PPOs will be
invited to be full participants in AHD, which started out as an HMO-only
project.

Previous unsuccessful private and public efforts to create a comprehensive
data base have been plagued by fragmentation and insufficient participation
by individual plans. Their problems, said Robert Thompson, a Health Care
Horizons, Inc. vice president who chairs AMCRA's data committee, included
inconsistent data, no way to verify accuracy, and lack of flexibility in data
use.

Those problems resulted in high cost, the resulting lack of participation,
and a "limited payback" to participants, Thompson explained. He asserted that
the AMCRA project overcomes these problems by collecting raw claims and
enrollment data from individual plans and then manipulating them into a
common format for comparability, thereby minimizing the cost to participating
plans.

The kind of data to be included, according to Thompson, include average cost
per member and per month, and service- and procedure-specific utilization,
all analyzable demographically.

The data base won't analyze financial or administrative expenses and will
protect the confidentiality of individual patient information as well as the
identities of individual plans. There also is no attempt to adjust for plans
that do not furnish data to the data base.

AHD is meant for use not only by participating HMOs and PPOs, which would not
have to pay for it, but also by large employers, pharmaceutical companies,
actuaries, and government.

The concept, Thompson said, is to make it marketable to aid its self-
sufficiency after expected grant funding for its development runs out. He
added that AHD now has about half the funding needed for the developmental
phase, in which it plans to start establishing a paying customer base, and
expects to get the rest by the end of the year.

During the development phase, AHD will be able to offer both a standard
report and some custom reports, Fomby said. Starting in 1994, he said, the
data base also will allow dial-up access, with CD-ROM access planned for
"later." AHD will use encryption so that it can be accessed only with the
proper participant program.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-26</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B042-26</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh58.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020231 text/html 38113
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:00:37 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:37 GMT
Content-length: 37926
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh58.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
QUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNet <BR>
APRIL 24, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>JCAHO Issues Second Call For Indicators</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(342 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>Medicare Pay System Boosts Satisfaction</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(516 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>NCQA Drafts Behavioral Health Norms</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(639 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Vaccine Rate Up Due to Fed Effort</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(480 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Satisfaction Poll Marks HMO Guide</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(324 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Drug Company Promotes QI Tools</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(348 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>AIDS Evolution Means QM Changes</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2122 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Developments In Brief</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(729 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
QUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNet
APRIL 24, 1996

JCAHO Issues Second Call For Indicators


The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) has
launched the second phase of its attempt to create a comprehensive catalogue
of performance measures - the National Library of Healthcare Indicators
(NLHI).

On April 16, JCAHO announced a Request for Indicators (RFI) for ambulatory
care, behavioral health care, home care, or long term care indicators, to
serve as a resource to organizations interested in measuring performance.
JCAHO sent information to more than 1,200 health care organizations for
comments, which will be accepted until May 10.  JCAHO expects indicators for
these settings to be selected by the end of the year and available for use in
the spring of 1997.

"This RFI gives us a major opportunity to enrich the Library to include
measures that cover the full mainstream of the delivery system," says Dennis
O'Leary, MD, JCAHO president.  "This will substantially enhance our abilities
to support quality improvement in health care organizations while also setting
the stage for using performance measures in the accreditation process."

The call for these measures specifies that indicators be classified into one
of four broad categories:  administrative/financial (coordination and
integration of functions); clinical performance (care processes and outcomes
for specific conditions and procedures); health status (functional well-being
of populations); and satisfaction (how well patient, purchaser, and
practitioner needs are met).  After May 10, the Joint Commission will assemble
expert panels to select indicators based on importance and usefulness for each
of the four areas.

Last March, the Joint Commission began the first phase of its Library effort
when it solicited measures applicable to health plans and networks.  The 900
suggested indicators have been whittled to about 200, and these will be
available for use this summer (QMU, 3/20/96).  JCAHO also is planning to issue
a call for acute measures sometime next year.  Eventually, indicators will be
included as part of accreditation surveys, although JCAHO has not specified
when this will take effect.

For more information on the RFI and the Library project, call JCAHO's Sharon
Sprenger at 708/916-5968.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
QUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNet
APRIL 24, 1996

Medicare Pay System Boosts Satisfaction


Recently-published research indicates that patient satisfaction increased
after implementation of the 1992 Medicare Fee Schedule (MFS) despite fears
that the new payment approach would compromise quality.

Between 1991 and 1993, Medicare beneficiaries' satisfaction with quality,
availability, accessibility, and costs of care significantly increased.  The
area with the greatest rise (costs) was a direct result of the relative
value-based fee schedule, write the authors of the research.  The information
appears in the Winter 1996 Health Care Financing Review, published on April 5
by the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), which runs the Medicare
program.

"With the implementation of the MFS, access, use, and satisfaction have not
deteriorated during the 3-year period included in this study," write the
authors.  "Indeed, we have shown that Medicare beneficiaries are reporting
increased satisfaction with many aspects of their health care .  .  .
suggesting that the program has become 'more equitable' over time."

Despite the improved satisfaction, the study is lacking, says Uwe Reinhardt,
professor of political economy at the Woodrow Wilson School in Princeton NJ.
"The real distinction to make is between the chronically ill and the healthy,"
he says, adding that 90 percent of the elderly are relatively healthy and not
heavy users of health services.  "I'd like to see a breakdown of satisfaction
scores by level of functioning."

The article bases its findings on HCFA surveys conducted from 1991-93 of 7,651
continuously-enrolled Medicare beneficiaries (6,337 elderly and 1,314 disabled
nonelderly).  Researchers exclude any results for beneficiaries who died from
1991-1994.  Enrollees in managed care programs and fee-for-service plans are
combined.

Of the four parameters measured, satisfaction with quality of care was
highest, while satisfaction with costs was lowest.  However, satisfaction with
costs between 1991 and 1993 rose most sharply, from 71.0 to 83.5 (scale 0 to
100).  For each of the four categories, scores for the disabled are lower than
those for the elderly (see chart).

Higher satisfaction was reported for persons with the fewest limitations on
activities of daily living, whites, the high-income population, persons in
areas with the highest number of physicians per capita, and persons with
insurance supplementary to Medicare.

One interesting finding was the reduction from 1991 to 1993 in mammography (40
percent to 32 percent) and Pap smears (49 percent to 32 percent).  Medicare
introduced new benefits for both of these preventive services in late 1990.
However, the decreases may reflect women screened in 1991 who would not be
rescreened until after 1993; Medicare officials recommend mammographies every
two years and Pap smears every three years.

In a second study in the same issue of the journal, HCFA official Margo
Rosenbach found that within the disabled Medicare population, those with
mental disabilities are less satisfied with their care than those with
nonmental disorders.  The disabled are most satisfied with their care after an
initial treatment or operation (score of 89) and least satisfied with
out-of-pocket costs of medical care (60).

Single copies of the issue of the Health Care Financing Review may be
purchased for $19 by calling HCFA at 410/786-6572.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
QUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNet
APRIL 24, 1996

NCQA Drafts Behavioral Health Norms


The first national accreditation standards designed for managed behavioral
healthcare organizations (MBHOs) moved one step closer to reality when the
National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) announced the completion of a
draft set of standards.

On April 10, NCQA held a news conference to discuss the proposed standards,
which are being circulated to more than 1,000 organizations for comments over
the next 45 days.  After pilot testing the standards in the fall, NCQA hopes
to begin review of MBHOs, separate from its standard review of HMOs, early
next year.  To date, no MBHO has received accreditation from NCQA using HMO
standards.

NCQA President Margaret E.  O'Kane acknowledges concerns about the lack of
information related to MBHO quality and says, "these standards fill that void
and provide assurance that NCQA will be scrutinizing the quality of behavioral
health plans every bit as closely as we do that of HMOs."  Others see the
standards as playing a broader role; Harvard Pilgrim Health Plan's John Ludden
believes that the new standards will promote "integration of managed
behavioral health care to other care, which can lead to a whole series of
improvement in quality and cost."

The draft standards are an outgrowth of the rapid expansion of MBHOs, whose
ranks number more than 300 and cover 100 million Americans.  Payers turned to
MBHOs in the past decade to control behavioral health expenses; however, these
cost-containment methods have caused widespread public concern that enrollees
are being denied necessary services, shortchanging quality to save money.  No
national set of accreditation standards exists to ensure that MBHOs' practices
are acceptable.

In 1995, NCQA convened a 22-member Behavioral Health Task Force to draft new
standards, recognizing that services covered by MBHOs were distinct from those
covered by HMOs.  The Task Force initially framed its work in terms of
standards developed by several large employers.  The draft emulated NCQA's HMO
standards to promote coordination between primary care and behavioral health.
In fact, the seven categories of behavioral health standards are quite similar
to the HMO version:

1.  Quality Management and Improvement.  The most comprehensive of the seven
categories, it covers the structure, process, and outcomes of the MBHO quality
management program.

2.  Accessibility, Availability, Referral, and Triage.  This section includes
specific standards for telephone access, geographic distance, and travel times
for appointments.

3.  Utilization Management.  NCQA requires MBHOs to have written protocols
"based on reasonable scientific evidence" for authorizing members to use
services.

4.  Credentialing and Recredentialing.  NCQA mandates MBHOs to exercise "due
diligence" in ensuring that its participating providers maintain proper
credentials.

5.  Members' Rights and Responsibilities.  Each accredited MBHO must have a
grievance procedure that will be scrutinized by NCQA for the opportunity to
appeal MBHO decisions on coverage.

6.  Preventive Behavioral Health Care Services.  MBHOs must have programs to
decrease incidence, prevalence, and residual effects of behavioral health
disorders among its enrollees.

7.  Clinical Evaluation and Treatment Records.  MBHO records must be current,
comprehensive, detailed, and organized.

"The standards are not perfect, but solid," says Leslie Scallet, executive
director of the Mental Health Policy Research Center in Washington and a
member of the task force.  She also believes the standards will promote
quality and appropriate practices due to the support of managed care
organizations, "which were stung by bad press and are committed to seeing the
standards work."

Managed care organizations with behavioral health programs will be given the
option of NCQA reviewing their behavioral health component under the
established HMO standards or the new behavioral health-specific standards.
Eventually, MBHO survey scores will be released to the public, says NCQA
spokesperson Barry Scholl.

For more information or for a copy of the draft standards, call NCQA at
202/955-3577 or use NCQA's site on the World Wide Web (www.ncqa.org).





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
QUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNet
APRIL 24, 1996

Vaccine Rate Up Due to Fed Effort


Children receiving all recommended immunizations by age two rose from 55
percent to 75 percent in the last four years, according to figures released
April 10 by Dept.  of Health & Human Services (HHS) Secretary Donna E.
Shalala.

Shalala credits the improved vaccination record to a variety of federal
government initiatives.  "Just two months after he was sworn into office,
President Clinton personally committed his Administration to an historic,
comprehensive strategy to immunize our youngest and most vulnerable children,"
says Shalala in remarks delivered to the 30th National Immunization Conference
sponsored by the Centers for Disease Control & Prevention (CDC).  "And
together, we are making good on that promise."

Ten infectious diseases - polio, measles, diphtheria, mumps, whooping cough,
German measles, tetanus, spinal meningitis, chicken pox, and hepatitis-B - can
be prevented through childhood vaccines.  Experts recommend that children
receive 12 to 16 doses of the various vaccines by age two, accounting for 80
percent of all recommended childhood immunizations.

Noncompliance with vaccination requirements stems from inadequate numbers of
accessible services, including public clinics; lack of parental awareness of
the need to immunize children by age two; and the increasing cost of vaccines.
HHS estimates that the full series of immunizations costs $313 per child, up
from $27 in 1983.

One of President Clinton's initial pledges was a government buyout of all
vaccines, to be distributed from a warehouse in New Jersey.  Congress failed
to pass Clinton's plan, but the federal government made other moves in the
past three years to improve vaccination rates.

For example, CDC funding for immunization programs has doubled to about $1
billion, and HHS has approved and funded a number of demonstration projects by
state governments to improve immunization rates.  Also a number of states now
require childhood immunizations as a condition for receiving benefits under
Aid for Families with Dependent Children and Women and Infant Children
programs.

Climbing immunization rates can also be linked to the emergence of HMOs, with
their traditional focus on preventive health services.  Last year, 21 large
HMOs released 1993 data showing that 79 percent of enrolled children had been
fully immunized by age two, a figure higher than the national rate (QMU,
3/1/95).  The goal set by the U.S.  Public Health Service for the year 2000 is
90 percent.

It continues to be debated whether or not cost is a major obstacle to children
receiving immunizations.  Despite the defeat of its plan to distribute all
vaccines, the Clinton Administration expanded the Vaccines for Children
program to all 50 states.  The program offers free vaccines to about 60
percent of U.S.  children, including the uninsured, Medicaid-eligible, and
American Indians/Alaska natives.

Despite the improved rates of immunization, considerable variation between
geographic areas remains.  For example, the compliance rate in Boston is 87
percent, but only 52 percent in Detroit.  v





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
QUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNet
APRIL 24, 1996

Satisfaction Poll Marks HMO Guide


The first national survey of consumer satisfaction using measures specified by
the National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) is a prominent new
addition to a guide on health plans, physicians, hospitals, and health
systems.

The survey, launched earlier this month, will include all patient satisfaction
questions from the NCQA Annual Member Health Care Survey, a poll of more than
170,000 U.S.  households (see chart p.4).  When the data are released in June,
users will be able to compare results for their geographic area - zip code,
county, state, etc.  - with national averages or benchmarks/best practices.
Data will be contained in the sixth edition of the Healthcare Market Guide, a
product of National Research Corp.  (NRC) of Lincoln NE, a company
specializing in health care performance assessment.

NRC touts its database as the first national measurement of all satisfaction
questions from the NCQA Annual Member Health Care Survey, finalized over a
year ago.  To date, use of these questions has been left to the discretion of
each managed care plan.  The survey is likely to be a component of NCQA's
report card prototype Health Plan Employer Data and Information Set (HEDIS)
3.0, due to be presented in draft form this summer.

The Guide encompasses 16 major categories, including quality attributes such
as best-reputed hospitals and doctors, most personalized care, best community
health programs, best image, and lowest costs.  To date, NRC has published the
guide every two years, but now will publish an annual volume.  National
information in the Guide is contained on a computer diskette, says Kris
Benson, NRC director of marketing.  She says that plans, hospitals, and
physician groups, in releasing their data, will often compare it to industry
averages and benchmarks found in the Guide; NRC requests that it review data
before public dissemination.

For more information about the Guide, call Benson at 800/388-4264.  Costs of
the product vary according to the data requested.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
QUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNet
APRIL 24, 1996

Drug Company Promotes QI Tools


Pfizer Inc.  has formed a subsidiary that will link up with providers to
introduce new quality management products.

The April 15 announcement of Pfizer Health Solutions Inc.  (PHS), based in New
York, represents a venture into an area in which pharmaceutical companies have
historically had little involvement.  "While Pfizer's innovative
pharmaceuticals have long been recognized for their contributions to treating
disease, I am confident that PHS will help strengthen our partnerships with
our customers .  .  .  and position Pfizer at the forefront of new solutions
for improving patient care, whatever the setting," says Karen Katen, president
of the Pfizer U.S.  Pharmaceuticals Group.

PHS has kicked off its agenda by selecting three pilot projects, each testing
a different product with a client provider.  The first pilot is the Clinical
Management System (CMS), a clinical guideline instrument customized to local
practices.  The CMS analyzes physician examination and laboratory test
results, lists possible treatment options, and produces reports for providers
on effects of care.

Value Health Sciences of Avon CT, which specializes in developing guidelines
and software, helped Pfizer create this tool.  The new system is being tested
in diagnosing and treating depression and benign prostatic hypertrophy at the
Lahey Hitchcock Clinic in Burlington MA.

The second product being tested by PHS is a wireless, handheld computer that
allows practitioners to access any part of the medical record instantaneously.
This product, developed with WiSE Medical Systems Inc.  of Los Gatos CA (a
company that creates mobile information systems for physicians), is expected
to enhance physician decisionmaking.  It is being demonstrated at several
sites, including Santa Cruz (CA) Medical Center.

The third tool tested by PHS is making clinical information available via
telephone around the clock.  The information is maintained through a series of
"medical call centers" made up of specially-trained nurses using algorithms to
answer patients' questions.  National Health Enhancement Systems, Inc.  of
Phoenix AZ developed the system; test sites have not yet been selected.

For more information on PHS and its related products, call Bob Fauteux at
Pfizer at 212/573-3079.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
QUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNet
APRIL 24, 1996

AIDS Evolution Means QM Changes


The Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) epidemic presents a stiff and
growing challenge to quality managers trying to assess and improve processes
in AIDS care.  In the March 20 issue, QMU looked at examples of AIDS QM in
hospitals, home care organizations, and regulatory agencies.  HMOs, employers,
and researchers are also trying their hand at improving the state of the art.

NONPROVIDERS EVALUATE AIDS CARE

A variety of research projects evaluating the care given to HIV-positive
patients are now under way, including one by the Columbia University School of
Public Health in New York.  The School contracts with the city's health
department to evaluate AIDS programs funded under the federal Ryan White law,
says Peter Masseri, associate clinical professor at Columbia.  Masseri and
other staff are conducting interviews with 650 HIV-positive New Yorkers to
evaluate how well services are being rendered and what the outcomes of these
services are.  These verbal interviews take more than two hours each and are
conducted every six months.

Masseri says initial results of the study will not be ready until the summer.
However, he and other researchers will look at utilization of services (at all
levels) and evaluate changes in health status, compared to the patients'
needs.  The SF-36 tool, which measures patient self-reported health status,
will be used:  "We find the tool to be quite reliable," says Masseri.  In
addition, other measures of health status, such as CD-4 cell count, will be
included in the analysis.

HMOS LOOK TO COORDINATED CARE

Although hospitals are extending AIDS care beyond just the acute level, it is
managed care organizations (MCOs) that portray themselves as providers of
coordinated care across all levels.  Despite this stated purpose, there is
much controversy over how MCOs handle AIDS treatment as more and more AIDS
patients (especially Medicaid recipients) enroll in MCOs.

The Gay Men's Health Crisis (GMHC) in New York City reports that a recent
survey finds 95 percent of HMOs unable to refer callers to primary care
physicians experienced in AIDS treatment.  GMHC Senior Policy Associate Susan
Dooha says this lack of expertise lowers the use of prophylactic therapy
needed by many patients infected with HIV.  Other aspects of medical care are
affected by practitioner inexperience.  A 1995 study published in the Journal
of the American Medical Assn.  found that of 134 general practitioners and
family physicians (not just HMO physicians), only 25.8 percent correctly
diagnosed Kaposi's sarcoma, and 22.7 percent diagnosed oral hairy leukoplakia,
conditions common in the AIDS population.

GMHC also says they believe there is a lack of specific standards for AIDS
care, particularly newer therapies, and HMOs do not monitor care to
HIV-positive patients.  Most plan-based report cards, including the Health
Plan Employer Data & Information Set (HEDIS), do not include indicators
specifically addressed to AIDS patients.

Possibly the hottest quality-related issue surrounding AIDS patients in HMOs
is financial incentives.  Because many HMOs pay providers on a capitated
basis, the incentive to not provide unnecessary services exists.  The practice
of HMOs denying what they consider "unneeded" treatments in order to hold down
costs has the AIDS community in an uproar.  With a lack of standards for
treatment, especially newer therapies, and with the cost of care escalating,
the furor is not likely to end any time soon.

One HMO that has addressed this issue by revamping its quality management
program is the Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound of Seattle WA.  Founded
in 1947, this group-model HMO covers more than 500,000 lives in the Pacific
Northwest.  It functions as a cooperative governed by consumers.

Group Health recognizes the special needs of AIDS patients.  "TQM [total
quality management] for HIV-positive patients is not the same as that for
other diseases," says Wayne Dodge, MD, HIV/AIDS program director at Group
Health.  A more activist patient group plus a bevy of expensive treatments
available before effectiveness is proven creates "a challenge for all
providers," he says.

The HMO has a specific TQM structure for AIDS treatment, focused around three
groups committed to a team approach, says Dodge:

1.  The core committee, which meets twice a month, serves as the operating
committee for AIDS TQM activities.  It is multidisciplinary, consisting of
Dodge, the nursing HIV coordinator, a social worker, systems analyst,
administrator, and liaison with the local AIDS foundation.

2.  The steering committee is also a multidisciplinary panel providing general
direction and strategic planning to AIDS quality activities.  It meets
quarterly.

3.  The prevention subcommittee meets quarterly and specifically supports
preventive activities related to care of AIDS patients.

Puget Sound's focus on prevention has guided some of its decisions on AIDS
quality management.  The core committee reviewed the administration of Pap
smears and recommended this test be performed for all HIV-positive women
enrolled in the HMO, says Dodge.  In addition, prophylactic treatment is now
given to all HIV-positive patients with CD4 cell counts below 200 or less than
14 percent of white blood cells (the clinical definition of full-blown AIDS)
in order to prevent pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP), which is common in
the AIDS population.

Another Group Health initiative, on physician expertise and AIDS, is contained
in an article published in the March 13 New England Journal of Medicine.  Mari
Kitahara, MD, the study's principal investigator, reported that men who were
the first-ever AIDS patient seen by a physician lived 14 months with
full-blown AIDS, compared with 26 months for men who consulted physicians that
had treated at least five cases of the disease previously.  Kitihara
calculated that patients treated by doctors more experienced in AIDS care had
a 43 percent lower risk of death after adjustment for CD-4 cell count.

Group Health has also developed a Clinical Roadmap, or a set of priorities for
HIV care.  "We have sent out flow sheets and pathways to caregivers," says
Dodge, adding that later in 1996 the HMO will evaluate how successful these
interventions are.

The problem of how to handle new treatments for AIDS is a difficult one, says
Dodge.  "We've got no real answer," he says, although several principles guide
the HMO.  No treatments considered experimental are covered by Group Health,
says Dodge, but other new treatments are placed on a "Code 29" list.  This
designation means that a drug is not automatically covered by the HMO, but if
the treating physician consults with a designated peer at Group Health, it may
be covered if deemed best for the patient.  Dodge says the new protease
inhibitors are on the Code 29 list.

Dodge says that his HMO has a huge advantage in analyzing processes and
improvements in AIDS care.  "We're a totally computerized system that includes
all levels of care," he says.  "I can't see how you can do good quality
management any other way."

Another managed care organization with an innovative approach to AIDS
treatment is the Community Medical Alliance (CMA) of Boston.  The Alliance is
an HMO founded in 1989 that manages only the care of AIDS patients and
chronically-ill populations with special needs.  Its current enrollment of
more than 300 includes 18 percent of Boston's Medicaid recipients that are
HIV-positive.  The state pays CMA a flat, capitated fee of $4,337.54 per
enrollee per month to manage the needs of Medicaid patients with AIDS.

CMA's QM structure for AIDS patients revolves around a committee that sets the
goals of the program, says Priscilla Meriot, QI director at the Alliance.
Goals are developed in conjunction with the Massachusetts Division of Medical
Assistance (Medicaid agency).  "We have a number of multidisciplinary teams
that have developed protocols," she says, including:

* prophylactic therapy for PCP; * pain management; * screening/treatment for
Cytomegalovirus retinitis; * screening for tuberculosis; and * Pap smear
screening for cervical cancer.

"We don't have any critical paths yet," says Meriot, acknowledging that the
complexity of treating AIDS patients often makes use of paths somewhat
difficult.  CMA has done some benchmarking using information from the medical
literature as a standard and will be doing more outcomes studies, frequently
using functional status as a measure of outcomes, she adds.

What have been the major enhancements in the quality of care managed by CMA?
Meriot first mentions that more patients live at home instead of in
institutions, which is a byproduct of coordinated care and early intervention.
CMA Medical Director Robert Master, MD, estimates that about 40 percent of
costs now go to hospital-based care, down from 60 percent to 75 percent when
the program started.

A second improvement is a more satisfied population with a better quality of
life, which Meriot attributes to CMA's educational activities.  In August
1995, Master stated there was "virtually no disenrollment from CMA due to
dissatisfaction" with the program.  Education of both patients and physicians
makes satisfaction rates higher and hospitalizations lower, he says.  "You
don't need as much specialty care if you have an educated, empowered patient
and a well-skilled and responsive primary care provider."

Better prevention of AIDS-related illnesses is a third area of achievement by
CMA.  "We're seeing fewer infections and a more delayed onset of certain
diseases," says Meriot.

In one example of this type of improvement, the 1992-93 rate of PCP episodes
was 17.2 per 100 patient years, down from 58.7 prior to enrollment in CMA.  Of
the 113 patients studied, 82 (73 percent) received prophylactic (preventive)
care under the management of CMA.  The drugs trimetheprim/sulfamethexazol,
aerosolized pentamidine, and dapsone were used in treatment for all but one of
the 82 patients.  The data appear in an article by Master in the Winter 1996
Journal of Ambulatory Care Management.

Meriot says the organization doesn't pay for experimental AIDS treatment, but
monitors the progress of patients already enrolled in clinical trials.  No
category of drug therapy is automatically paid for; all drug decisions must be
reviewed by the QI committee on a case-by-case basis.  Patients or physicians
have the right to appeal any decisions to an ethics advisory committee,
although such appeals "are rare," says Meriot.

A major thrust started by CMA last year is a redesign of the medical record
and a bolstering of the computer system to help the organization more
effectively manage patient care.

AN EMPLOYER TAKES A ROLE

Although a portion of the bill for treating HIV-positive patients is borne by
employers, corporations are not usually involved in quality standard setting
and monitoring.  One exception is the Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) of
Maynard MA, which formed an HIV/AIDS program in 1988.

"It was really a partnership with HMOs," says Paul Ross, worldwide manager of
the program.  He says that since 1988, the proportion of DEC employees
choosing an HMO has increased.  Currently, most employees are covered by one
of 85 HMOs.

Ross says that DEC took several steps to manage quality of care given to
HIV-positive employees.  First, it hired Clinical Partners, a San
Francisco-based case management firm with considerable experience in AIDS
treatment, to better coordinate care.

Second, the company developed standards about five years ago for HIV/AIDS
treatment in conjunction with the 85 HMOs.  DEC mandates that HMOs comply with
these standards as part of the contract with the company.  Ross says that the
standards cover patient care, education, and reporting procedures, and "are
broad enough to accommodate the rapid upgrades in HIV/AIDS treatment."

DEC is currently working on an evaluation of what effects the standards have
had on care of its employees.  Although results aren't available yet, Ross
expects to see improvements in the continuum of care and education of the
staff, increased AIDS testing of at-risk workers, and a greater proportion of
physicians with AIDS expertise treating patients.

CAN AIDS CARE BE IMPROVED?

Most experts agree that while improving AIDS care is possible, it is
difficult.  The most desirable outcome - decreased mortality - is still
elusive.

GMHC's Dooha says there have been a number of improvements in recent years.
"There is definitely better coordination of care," she says, citing a greater
number of knowledgeable physicians who are more accessible to the public.  She
also lists the survival of patients with AIDS-related pneumonia and fewer,
less expensive hospitalizations as other improvements.

Statistics seem to back up Dooha's contentions that care is being better
coordinated and requiring fewer hospital stays.  The number and rate of
discharges continue to grow, which represents the rising number of
HIV-positive Americans in the population.  However, the average length of
stay, which was 17.1 days in 1985, dropped to 11.4 days in 1993, the latest
year for which data are available.  For the first time, days of care fell
between 1990-92, before rising again in 1993.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
QUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNet
APRIL 24, 1996

Developments In Brief


Conference on NCQA.  "Surviving NCQA:  Lessons Learned from Health Plans" is
the theme of a May 13-15 conference held by the American Assn.  of Health
Plans (AAHP) in San Antonio TX.  Participants will hear from health plans that
recently underwent accreditation surveys from the National Committee for
Quality Assurance.  For more information, contact AAHP at 202/778-3269.

PRO Contractor Sues Feds.  Following the termination of its contract as the
Peer Review Organization (PRO) for Maine and Rhode Island, Medical Synergy is
suing the Medicare program.  The Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA)
cited "significant weaknesses" in the company's proposal to renew the
contracts, which expire June 30.  Medical Synergy President Edward Lynch told
Faulkner & Gray's Medicine & Health that he believes philosophical differences
lie behind the decision - HCFA perceives the company as too tough on
providers.

NY Hospitals Receive Funds To Improve Home Care.  Nine New York City hospitals
have received grants totaling $500,000 to devise enhanced ways to help
patients manage their care at home after a hospital stay or outpatient
surgery.  Issues such as recognizing danger signs, coordinating medication
schedules, obtaining answers to medical questions, and finding psychological
support are examples of subjects to be researched by the hospitals.  The April
12 grant is part of the Discharge Preparation Initiative of New York's United
Hospital Fund.

HCFA Expands Centers for Excellence Program.  As many as 100 hospitals in 10
states will receive the "Participating Centers of Excellence" designation for
cardiovascular and orthopedic services from HCFA.  Such a designation is seen
as prestigious for hospitals, which must meet HCFA volume and quality
standards and are paid by Medicare through a "package price" for episodes of
care.  The initial two services in the program cover coronary artery bypass
graft surgery and outpatient cataract procedures.  Ten states are eligible
(AZ, CA, HI, IL, IN, MI, MN, NV, OH, and WI).  Call HCFA's Office of Research
and Demonstrations (410/786-7800) for more information.

New HSQB Director Appointed.  Richard W.  Besdine, MD, is the new director of
the federal Health Standards & Quality Bureau (HSQB), the agency responsible
for enforcing Medicare and Medicaid quality standards.  The April 9
announcement by Bruce C.  Vladeck, administrator of the HCFA (to whom Besdine
will report), notes his extensive academic experience at the University of
Connecticut and Harvard Medical School.  Besdine takes over for Barbara Gagel,
who resigned late last year.

Healthcare Forum Recognizes Young Leaders.  At its 1996 Healthier Communities
Summit in San Francisco on April 22, the Healthcare Forum recognized four
winners of the International Emerging Leaders in Healthcare award.  The award,
given to health care leaders under age 40 who have made achievements in
improving community health (national or local), went to Todd Linden of
Grinnell (IA) Regional Medical Center; Joanne Marqusee of Beth Israel Hospital
in Boston; Arthur Southam, MD, of CareAmerica in Woodland Hills CA; and Paul
Zucarelli of Partners Health Plan in Tucson AZ.  For more information about
the award, call Sally Mudd at the Healthcare Forum (415/356-4312).

CA Regulators Accused of Weak Oversight.  A California consumer group has
issued a report asserting that state regulators have not adequately evaluated
consumer complaints and overall quality of care by HMOs.  The April 11 report
by Consumers Union is critical of the state Dept.  of Corporations' ability to
keep up with the fast pace of HMO growth in California.  It recommends that
the state review HMOs every year instead of every three years and make review
standards available to the public.

Pocket Guides on LOS, Costs Available.  Three pocket guides giving the number
of 1992 hospital discharges, average LOS, and average charges for all
diagnosis and procedure groups were recently issued by the Agency for Health
Care Policy & Research (AHCPR).  The three guides are aggregated by 260
principal diagnosis categories, 230 procedure categories, and 492 Diagnosis
Related Groups.  For free copies, call AHCPR at 301/594-1410 and ask for the
Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP-3) pocket guides.

Seattle Groups Team Up for QM Effort.  A think tank, the Peer Review
Organization, and a business coalition in the Seattle area have combined to
form the Quality Measurement Advisory Service.  The Service, funded by the
John A.  Hartford Foundation, will hold national and local meetings, assist
local groups in QM projects, and operate an information clearinghouse.  For
more information, call Richard Rubin at 206/682-2811.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-27</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B042-41</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh63.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020248 text/html 35380
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:00:52 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:36 GMT
Content-length: 35193
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh63.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
REPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNet <BR>
February 21, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>Hospital Hits Cardiac Care Mortality Rate With&nbsp;Heart Risk Assessment Program</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(460 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Utah Targets Health Plans, Providers In Mandated,&nbsp;Statewide Report Card Effort</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(430 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Committee Outlines Criteria For HEDIS 3.0 Measures</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(343 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Quality Boils Down to Cost In Blue Cross Hospital Program</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(441 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>Outcomes Focus Helps Network Hike Survival Rate Above&nbsp;Norm</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(568 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>MDs Develop QA Program For Managed Kidney Care</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(359 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Risk Assessment Draws Fire; Regulators Say HMO Form OK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(684 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>REPORTS & SURVEYS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(509 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>QUALITY BRIEFS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(498 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>AUTOMATED PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(413 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
February 21, 1996

Hospital Hits Cardiac Care Mortality Rate With
Heart Risk Assessment Program


The risk assessment program includes EKG, cholesterol
screening and blood pressure measurement. Patients receive a
coronary risk report on disk, which offers suggestions for avoiding
heart attack.

To reach more patients and intervene in the early stage of heart
disease - thus boosting performance and outcomes - Sarasota
Memorial Hospital implemented the Heart C.A.R.E. program, a cardiac
assessment and risk evaluation initiative.
Sarasota, Florida's second largest hospital, realized last year
that it was caring for only 5% of the patients in its service area
who were at risk for heart disease.
Announced less than a month ago, Heart C.A.R.E. has received
overwhelming response. The hospital has booked patients for
screening through May.
"It took off like lightening," says April Mason, director of
cardiovascular diagnostic service at Sarasota.
Heart C.A.R.E. accomplishes two goals: screening and educating
patients.
The 35-minute screening requires that a patient fast for 12 hours.
Evaluators get a detailed family and personal history from the
patient, such as eating and exercise habits. The patient receives
an electrocardiogram (EKG) and cholesterol test. Blood pressure
measurements, both in the arm and ankle, determine presence of
peripheral heart disease. Measurement of hip-to-waist ratio
determines level of obesity.
The hospital places this information on a computer disk, which the
patient receives as a coronary risk report. The seven-page report
details coronary risk overview, fitness profile and cardiovascular
fitness recommendations.
A learning guide tells the patient ways to prevent heart attacks
and heart disease and reduce risk factors.
The patient's doctor receives a copy of the coronary risk report.
But in many cases, patients don't have a doctor, so the hospital
refers them to an internist or  cardiologist.
Sarasota hopes to measure program outcomes in a year. In an
evaluation, the hospital will look at several interrelated factors
of success, such as acuity, intervention and morbidity rates.
But hospital officials have already recognized some kinks in the
system.
For instance, because "snowbirds" make up much of Sarasota's
population, follow-up becomes difficult. The hospital wants to
target the older, more permanent residents of the Sarasota area
through churches and businesses.
The hospital has targeted people 40 years and older and have paid
special attention to women, who don't realize they are at risk and
have lesser chances than men for surviving a heart attack. Sarasota
wants to lower the mortality rate for that group.
Currently, 94% of patients that Sarasota sees has acute heart
disease. The hospital wants to lower that rate. "It's outrageously
high," Mason says. "Some patients come straight from the airport to
the hospital complaining of chest pains."
Finally, the hospital hopes to raise from 5% to 45% the percentage
of Sarasota residents it treats who are at risk of heart disease.
Contact Mike Vizvary at (941) 917-1499.  




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
February 21, 1996

Utah Targets Health Plans, Providers In Mandated,
Statewide Report Card Effort


The state could begin with patient satisfaction and
cost comparisons before tackling the more expensive and difficult
comparison of clinical outcomes.

Utah lawmakers could bring a statewide quality report card
initiative a step closer to reality this week, just days after
yielding to providers' demands that an outside vendor evaluate the
state's data collection process.
State Sen. John Holmgren (R), who introduced the Health Care
Quality bill (SB 171) Jan. 31, says the Senate should vote on the
measure this week. The bill strengthens the role of the Utah Health
Data Committee and calls for the committee to publish "comparative
analyses" of provider performance.
"I think a year from now you'll see [the report card system] up and
running," Holmgren says, noting the need for heightened
accountability in a state of under  2 million people where health
care is a major $4.5 billion industry.
The Utah Assn. of HealthCare Providers "insisted" that comparative
quality data collection and analysis be validated by an outside
vendor, says Rick Kinnersley, president of the association of 53
hospitals and eight health care systems.
Kinnersley says hospitals were "uncomfortable" with the Health Data
Committee's earlier validation of hospital discharge data. He
expects the state to begin with patient satisfaction and cost
comparisons before tackling the more expensive and difficult
comparison of clinical outcomes.
Under the Utah Health Data Authorization Act of 1990, the committee
may collect data on cost, quality of care, and access from any
provider. Hospitals were the first priority; the committee has
collected four years (1992-95) of hospital discharge all-payer
data.
Denise Love, committee executive secretary, says the group has
collected some financial data on hospital performance as well.
But other efforts were put on hold for a report card initiative
that provides better consumer information at the health plan level.
The Utah Health Data Committee's advisory committee is hashing out
the details of the report card to recommend to the full committee.
The advisory committee is talking to the provider community about
what data are now collected by plans, and looking at enrollee
satisfaction survey instrument models.
Discussions have not begun on specific data measures. Love notes
the committee is considering public dissemination of comparative
health plan data, perhaps at an aggregate level, while reserving
more detailed information for health plans' internal quality
improvement efforts.
The committee's future priorities may include comparative
performance reports on health systems, networks, or individual
providers, adds Love, who is also director of the Utah Department
of Health Office of Health Data Analysis.
Contact Kinnersley at (801) 364-1515, and Holmgren at (801)
538-1407.  




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
February 21, 1996

Committee Outlines Criteria For HEDIS 3.0 Measures


The National Committee for Quality Assurance Committee on
Performance Measurement approved criteria for HEDIS 3.0 measures,
set for release this month. Attributes fall in three categories and
include:

o        Relevance.
  x  Meaningful. Decisionmakers should be able
to use the measures to understand clinical or economic differences
among plans; this will be enhanced if benchmarks or targets are
available.
  x  Health importance. The measure should
capture as much of the plan's activities relating to quality as
possible, including type of measure, prevalence and seriousness of
the related medical condition.
  x  Financial importance.
  x  Strategically important. The measure
should encourage plans to devote resources to activities that most
effectively maximize the health of members.
  x  Controllability. Health plans should be
able to take actions that improve their performance.
  x  Variance among plans. There should be
potentially wide variations across plans.
  x  Potential for improvement. There should be
substantial room for improvement on the measure.
o        Scientific validity.
  x  Reproducible. The measure should produce
the same results when repeated with the same population and in the
same setting.
  x  Accurate.
  x  Valid. It should make sense logically,
clinically and, where appropriate, financially. It should correlate
with other related measures.
  x  Risk adjustable. Factors outside the
plan's control should be adjusted for whenever possible and/or
stratified to account for differences in populations.
  x  Comparability of data sources. The above
dimensions of scientific validity should not be greatly affected if
plans use different data sources.
o        Feasibility.
  x  Precisely specified. The measure should
have clear methods for data collection and reporting.
  x  Reasonable cost. The measure should not
impose an inappropriate burden on plans.
  x  Confidential. Collecting data for the
measure should not involve any violation of member
confidentiality.
  x  Logistically feasible. The data required
for the measure should be available in the time period allowed for
collection and should not be subject to cultural or other barriers,
such as a satisfaction survey in English for Spanish-speaking
members.

The committee would not expect all measures to meet all attributes.
Contact NCQA at (202) 955-3500.  




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
February 21, 1996

Quality Boils Down to Cost In Blue Cross Hospital Program


Hospitals seeking "Partnerships for Quality" status had to
meet some baseline quality standards, but the first year of the
program focuses on reimbursement, not performance.

Blue Cross of California is touting its recent placement of 85% of
participating hospitals within its statewide network as preferred
"Tier I" facilities and the rest as "Tier II," but officials
acknowledge the designation boils down to reimbursement rates, not
quality.
Hospitals within both "Partnerships for Quality" tiers have passed
a quality threshold that must be met in order to discuss
contracting and rates with Blue Cross affiliate CaliforniaCare
Health Plans, explains Dr. Jeffrey Rideout, vice president and
medical director of quality management for Woodland Hills,
Calif.-based Blue Cross of California.
Indeed, Rideout says the quality threshold is fairly low in order
to keep most of the network intact. "We didn't want to eliminate
many [participating hospitals], but we wanted to take the first
step to build the logic of quality performance into the contract,"
he says.
He says Blue Cross plans to become more discriminating over the
next few years as data are validated.

Tier I Hospitals Receive Preferred Status

Under the program, Tier I hospitals receive preferred status within
the network, prominent mention in marketing materials, and access
to electronic interfacing, quality and outcome support, and
utilization management from the company.
In contrast, patients face higher copayments at Tier II hospitals.
Contracting hospitals responding to a Blue Cross request for
proposal on "Partnerships for Quality" provided information on
quality and reimbursement rates, then received scores based on
comparisons within six peer categories.
The company expects to finalize designations for remaining
hospitals by the end of March.
Rideout notes Blue Cross runs programs parallel to the affiliated
hospital quality performance program: (1) a quality monitoring
program for medical groups and IPAs now in its fourth year; and (2)
an ongoing member survey on service and access.
Last year the medical group program used eight quality indicators,
including administrative and grievance rates; voluntary transfer
from one medical group to another for quality or access reasons;
and preventive measures.
Rideout says Blue Cross hopes to use its size and clout to initiate
statewide quality processes that smaller health plans cannot
negotiate.
The hospital program uses 10 quality indicators, including five
institution-specific measures on C-section rates; coronary artery
bypass graft (CABG) surgery rates; myocardial infarction with and
without catheterization; and perinatal mortality.
The indicators are supplemented by self-reported quality data
including JCAHO accreditation and any existing patient satisfaction
surveys and clinical pathways. Data are risk-adjusted, Rideout
says, but much of it is "very old" and some is controversial.
Contact Rideout at (510) 927-6111.  




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
February 21, 1996

Outcomes Focus Helps Network Hike Survival Rate Above
Norm


An adult liver transplant calls for at least: 25
transplants per year; a program in exist- ence two years; a
transplanter with two years' post-fellowship experience who has
performed 50 cases as primary surgeon; an 80% survival rate at one
year; and a re-transplantation rate lower than 15% within the first
year.

A Minneapolis-based transplant network that focuses on outcomes
measurement and management achieved a 92% one-year survival rate
for liver transplant patients, topping the 77% national average
reported by the United Network of Organ Sharing.
United Resource Networks' 86% two-year survival rate was 14% above
a national average.
United HealthCare Corp. of Minneapolis founded United Resource
Networks in 1989 to manage the catastrophic costs of
transplantation: an end-stage disease management therapy. The
company sought out quality transplant facilities in areas with
United HealthCare HMOs, and packaged services - everything from
hospital and physician costs to organ procurement and  follow-up
expenses - in one contract.
United Resource Networks manages transplant outcomes measurement,
case management and pricing structures for 285 clients, covering
about 20 million lives. Most are HMOs, but clients also include
commercial insurers, the state of Colorado, and a couple of large,
self-funded employers.
Kirk Stapleton, president and founder, credits United Resource
Networks' work in facilitating access to quality care while
creating cost-control strategies - along with technological
advances - with improved patient outcomes and reduced costs over
the past several years.
Stapleton also cites estimated cost savings of 25%-30% per
transplant procedure. "Because we move a lot of volume, we bulk
purchase competitive packages for clients," he says. For example,
the company on average pays $178,198 on a $267,234 average bill for
a liver transplant at network facilities - an average savings of
33% per procedure.

Highlights of United Resource Networks' program include:
o        Using 38 registered nurses as
account managers to help clients manage benefits. The company
sometimes case manages individual patients.
o        Tracking outcomes at six months and
one-year for every patient "to quickly identify survival issues."
o        Recredentialing transplant sites
yearly. After the company started contracting for services, it
began looking beyond meeting price to tracking outcomes, using
guidelines from the American Society of Transplant Surgeons. 

Unlike HCFA, which reviews facilities for compliance only one time,
United returns every year to recredential sites. Stapleton notes
transplant surgeons change facilities, which can result in
different patient outcomes at a given site.
"We drop three to four programs a year on resurvey, looking at
specific organ outcomes," he says. Using 28 participating
facilities in the United States and two facilities in Canada,
United managed about 1,400 transplants in 1995.
The combined United/Specialty Care Institutes annual caseload
stands at 2,900. United plans to complete the acquisition of
competitor Specialty Care Institutes on July 1.
United's outcomes criteria, based on American College of Transplant
Surgeons guidelines, is reviewed by the company's medical
directors, all practicing transplant surgeons. 
Criteria are divided between adult and pediatric categories. An
adult liver transplant, for example, calls for at least: 25
transplants per year; a program in existence two years; a
transplanter with two years' post- fellowship experience who has
performed 50 cases as primary surgeon; an 80% survival rate at one
year; and a re-transplantation rate lower than 15% within the first
year.
"We won't contract with any program unless it meets our outcomes
criteria," Stapleton says. "We're religious about it."
Contact Stapleton at (800) 847-2050.  




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
February 21, 1996

MDs Develop QA Program For Managed Kidney Care


A medical group incorporates a patient advocate's care
model to develop a treatment path for dialysis patients covered by
managed care plans.

Southern California Permanente Medical Group and the American Assn.
of Kidney Patients will jointly develop a quality assurance program
for patients with severe kidney conditions.
Few dialysis patients are in managed care programs. In fact,
managed care plans cannot by law recruit dialysis patients, but do
care for members who develop end-stage renal disease, says Ramon
Hannah, assistant to the associate medical director and physician
manager of operations.
But that soon may change as capitated plans target dialysis care.
Worried about what this could mean for kidney patients, the
American Assn. of Kidney Patients developed a patient care model
that lays out rights and benefits for dialysis patients. The model
demands quality care and education about the disease.
The medical group, affiliated with the Southern California region
of Kaiser Permanente, persuaded the kidney group to look at the
medical group's award-winning program.
The Kaiser program sets several high standards for quality of care
and assigns nurse monitors to determine whether these standards are
met.
Indicators, such as the amount of dialysis a patient receives, tell
whether patient care is good.
The medical group will use the association's patient care model to
make improvements in its program. The improved plan is set for
implementation this spring.
Additional goal: prove the medical group is the best place for
patients who need renal disease care and results in the best
patient outcomes.
In measuring whether the program meets these goals, the group will
look at four factors: morbidity, mortality, rehospitalization and
rehabilitation rates.
The 450 patients enrolled in the group's internal program already
have better outcomes when compared to patients in other local
networks. The goal is to assure the similar rates for the group's
1,200 patients who use contract dialysis services, Hannah says.
"From a quality assurance perspective, it's a classic example of
success of quality assurance," Hannah says. "If you define
indicators and push providers to improve, good outcomes result. And
good outcomes does lower costs."
Contact Pamela Dean of Kaiser Permanente at (818) 405-5534.
 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
February 21, 1996

Risk Assessment Draws Fire; Regulators Say HMO Form OK


An HMO using a health risk appraisal tool finds that 60%
of members completing the survey reported behavioral changes to
improve health status.

A major Colorado HMO, stung by bad publicity over a clinical
quality tool that launched a state inquiry, now emphasizes to
members the survey is  voluntary and, as confidential medical
record information, can't be released without member authorization.
Kaiser's "Confidential Health Profile" form is a clinical tool that
serves as the "cornerstone" of the HMO's prevention program, "and
we have proof that it makes a difference," says Dr. Ned Calonge,
chairman of preventive medicine. The HMO's experience highlights
the troubles plans can have in collecting data for performance
improvement.
The Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Colorado at a December 1995
media briefing announced the ongoing dissemination of a
questionnaire seeking medical and lifestyle information on the
321,000-member HMO's adult members.
But the Colorado Division of Insurance launched an inquiry when the
media asked whether the HMO could penalize members by requiring
members supply the information in order to stay in the plan or to
receive treatment, or whether health profile information, such as
acknowledging HIV risk factors, could be used by other insurers to
deny coverage.
State regulators, after review and clarification from Kaiser,
concluded that no regulatory concerns exist and that the HMO is
taking appropriate action to ensure information remains
confidential.
The state also found no violation of a state insurance regulation
that prohibits the development of sexual orientation questions with
subsequent use of the information for underwriting purposes. The
HMO's questionnaire lists several risk factors for HIV infection or
AIDS, including "male homosexual or bisexual contacts," and asks
whether factors in the aggregate apply to the member.
Although the state required no action, Kaiser officials say the
HMO's cover letter accompanying the health profile now states the
survey is voluntary. And the HMO modified its medical record
release form to include members' approval or denial of release of
survey information.
The questionnaire consists of 40 questions for men and 51 questions
for women on such topics as smoking, exercise, dietary habits and
sexual activity. Members get a computer-generated personal health
risk profile suggesting ways to reduce risks and quantifying risks
through a pie chart that shows the number of years a change in each
unhealthy habit would add to life expectancy.
A multidisciplinary team of the HMO's physicians and nurses, along
with a consultant, in 1991 began  developing the survey based on
a federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) health
risk appraisal form. Calonge says it evolved into the "shortest,
easiest form possible" through HMO physicians' input and member
focus groups' recommendations.

Survey Helps Create Whole-Life Algorithm

The CDC looked at predicted mortality for a person over a 10-year
period; Calonge says this underestimates risk. The HMO created a
whole-life algorithm summarizing risk over a lifetime.
Kaiser piloted the form in 1994, then reworded some questions and
added a query on depression.
Calonge says the health profile will continue to evolve. The HMO
may, for example, add questions on family history to determine
genetic predisposition to certain cancers, and fine-tune the pie
chart based on additional epidemiological information.
"The concept was to quantify risk factors in a way to motivate
behavioral changes," Calonge explains, noting the HMO expects
behavioral changes among members and greater utilization of
resource programs thanks to the questionnaire. In the pilot study,
more than 60% of members completing the health risk appraisal
reported behavioral changes or intended behavioral changes, vs. 30%
in the group not using the form.
Kaiser expects 70% of adult members will complete the health
profile, up from 40%. The HMO plans to use another mailing in the
second year, plus handouts in physician offices, to reach the
target. A 70% level "could really show a programmatic impact," he
says.
While confidentiality has not been an issue, Calonge says some
members object to the form's questions on birth control, sexually
transmitted diseases, and HIV risk factors. But he says such
queries are important to a comprehensive health risk appraisal.
Contact Calonge at (303) 344-7830.  




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
February 21, 1996

REPORTS & SURVEYS


       With continuous changes in the
quantity and types of health care personnel providing services,
health plans and providers will increasingly need to monitor and
understand the various aspects of patient satisfaction, according
to "Tracking the System: American Health Care 1996." The report,
the fifth from the National Committee for Quality Healthcare, says
current patient satisfaction measurement tools "collect information
of questionable rigor." For a copy, call (202) 347-5731. Cost: $15.

       A Kaiser Permanente physician
completed a study on the effectiveness of fecal occult blood test
in detecting colorectal cancers and large polyps. Dr. James
Allison, in a study published in the New England Journal of
Medicine, documents for the first time that fecal occult blood
tests can detect 1.5 to two times as many cancers and polyps as the
most-used test, Hemoccult II. Clinicians and health planners can
use the study data to recommend tests. Contact Kaiser at (510)
987-3900.

       In a study of nearly 2,000 seriously
ill hospital patients, only about one quarter said they didn't want
CPR used to save their lives - many fewer than researchers
expected, given the poor prognosis of the study group and the
likely outcome of cardiopulmonary resuscitation in the event of
cardiac arrest. After adjusting for demographics, severity of
illness and functional status, the Beth Israel Hospital researchers
found that a patient's diagnosis, his or her understanding of the
prognosis, and the institution where a patient was hospitalized
were some of the factors influencing decisions about whether to
forgo CPR. A patient's decision not to have CPR was associated with
a decrease in the intensity, not the quality, of patient care. It
also did not result in differences in hospital mortality rate. The
study was published in The American Journal of Medicine.

       Get a look at four methods for
conducting an internal quality assessment based on the
healthcare-specific Malcolm Baldridge National Quality Award pilot
criteria. A new handbook, "Quality,  Assessment for Healthcare,"
details the process,  including planning, preparation and
implementation stages covering management workshops, focus groups,
surveys and an assessment based on comprehensive criteria. To order
the handbook, authored by Barber Associates Inc. consultant Ned
Barber, call (800) 247-8519. Cost: $29.95, paperback.

       "The search for `best practices' to
benchmark the rates of surgery leads to those practices that have
adopted shared decision-making, because learning which rate is
right requires the active participation of the patient in the
decision process," say the authors of the "Dartmouth Atlas of
Health Care." For a copy, call (800) 242-2626.

       Hospitals in cities with high levels
of managed care report significantly lower costs, reduced length of
stay and decreased mortality rates, according to a national study
of 11.7 million patients at 3,700 acute care hospitals. The KPMG
Peat Marwick study, "The Impact of Managed Care on U.S. Markets,"
also finds the presence of managed care has not resulted in higher
mortality rates or complication rates. The risk-adjusted mortality
rates in high managed care markets were 5.25% below the national
average. For a copy of the study, call (800) 243-1397.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
February 21, 1996

QUALITY BRIEFS


       The National Committee for Quality
Assurance next week will release information that will enable
people to compare information from hundreds of health plans. NCQA's
effort is culled from its national database for HEDIS and
accreditation information. For more information, contact Barry
Scholl of NCQA at (202) 955-3500.

       Watch for HCFA to announce this
month a Medicare "centers of excellence" program for cardiac and/or
orthopedic care, according to HCFA Administrator Bruce Vladeck. The
program currently bundles payments to designated coronary artery
bypass graft and cataract surgery facilities and gives seniors who
choose such facilities a rebate.

       Prudential HealthCare Group formed
a special unit, Health Management Programs, to build expert
guidelines, collect outcomes data, enhance patient and physician
education, provide case management and measure results - all aimed
at managing chronic illness. The plan will build on experience
garnered in its three-city asthma management pilot program in
January 1995. Other programs under consideration: diabetes,
depression and hypertension. Contact Prudential at (201) 802-4884.

       Humana Medical Plan Inc. of South
Florida won full accreditation from the National Committee for
Quality Assurance. NCQA denied the plan accreditation during its
first review of the HMO in 1993.

       HEDIS 3.0 should be used to measure
the quality of care a population is receiving and to assess whether
plan efforts are helping to improve public health, for example by
reducing tobacco use, according to members of the NCQA Committee on
Performance Measurement. At its last meeting, committee members
expressed interest in both medical care and other interventions,
such as weight loss programs, that the plan implements to improve
the health of its members. Contact NCQA at (202) 955-3500.

       The Colorado legislature shelved a
bill to implement a mandatory maternity stay after state insurers
and managed care plans agree to comply voluntarily with the bill's
provisions. The bill would have required plans to cover 48 hours of
hospital care following a normal delivery and 96 hours after a
C-section. Instead, plans agree to allow 48-hour stays without
reauthorization and to apply guidelines issued by the American
College of Obstetrics and Gynecology and the American Academy of
Pediatrics when conducting utilization reviews and considering
authorization requests.

       In related news, the American Nurses
Assn. called for a standard of postpartum care that includes
stabilization in the hospital or birth center, home visits and case
management by a registered nurse. For a copy of the position paper,
"Home Care for Mother, Infant and Family Following Birth," call
Dawn Johnson at (202) 651-7046.

       NCQA received a $636,893 grant from
the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to develop chronic care
performance measures that could become part of the Health Plan
Employer Data and Information Set. NCQA in a previous foundation
grant identified major depression, childhood asthma, diabetes and
coronary artery disease as conditions for which to develop
performance indicators. In this phase, the group will develop, test
and evaluate the indicators. Contact NCQA at (202) 955-3500, or at
http://www.ncqa.org on the World Wide Web.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
February 21, 1996

AUTOMATED PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT


       Kaiser Permanente uses the
PediAdvice System to help Advice Nurses in Northern California
access advice protocols for pediatric care and patient histories.
The system, a telephone triage tool aimed at getting patients to
the right level of care, runs on a local-area network. Pediatric
advice nurses and front-line nurse managers developed the program
in collaboration with a software developer and physicians. Call
Kaiser at (510) 987-3900.

       Informed Access Systems Inc.
received a U.S.  patent for its FirstHelp patient assessment and
provider referral system. The patent covers the system's two parts,
the patient assessment component, which includes an automated set
of proprietary patient assessment algorithms, and the provider
information component, which consists of a proprietary relational
database containing data necessary to differentiate providers
participating in a network and to manage patient flow to their
practices. Contact Informed Access Systems at (303) 443-4600.

       The Medical Group Management Assn.
and Response Healthcare Information Management Inc. together will
develop patient satisfaction and outcomes measurement tools. The
project will benchmark medical practice activities and establish a
national repository of patient satisfaction and outcomes data.
Contact MGMA at (303) 799-1111.

       Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. partnered
with Compass Information Services Inc. of King of Prussia, Pa., for
the exclusive pharmaceutical rights to distribute the COMPASS
system, a scientific method for measuring the outcome of ongoing
treatment of mental illness. The system measures a patient's
progress during treatment by gathering information from the patient
and clinician at regular intervals. The analysis of the data
provides a measurement of response to treatment, which enables the
provider, health plan and third-party payer to evaluate the
effectiveness of the treatment. Contact Bristol-Myers Squibb at
(609) 252-4000.

       MedPlus Inc. and Medicus Systems
Corp. will jointly market the MedPlus ChartMaxx Electronic Patient
Record System, which increases communication of clinical data
within an integrated delivery network. Contact MedPlus at (513)
583-0500.

       An emergency department software
package called Rumpelstiltskin helped the St. Luke's- Memorial
emergency department in central New York target patient waits for
quality improvement initiatives. Call (607) 674-5729 for
information about Rumpelstiltskin.

       The MedStat Group added data
certification, MedScore satisfaction surveys and accreditation
readiness to its performance measurement services. In other news,
MedStat signed multiyear license agreements with Trigon Blue Cross
and Blue Shield and Blue Cross and Blue Shield of the National
Capital Area for the MedStat DataScan system. DataScan supports
HEDIS reporting, network management, utilization management.
loss-ratio analysis and enterprisewide decision support. Contact
MedStat at (313) 996-1180.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-28</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B042-57</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh46.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020401 text/html 17657
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:02:04 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:42 GMT
Content-length: 17470
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh46.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
SMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNet <BR>
January 8, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS AND DEVELOPMENTS FROM ACROSS THE NATION...</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Reform moves to state arena, loses some ground.  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(148 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>Risk managers want OSHA reform issue resolved.  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(51 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>"Growing pains" predicted for health care industry in 1996.  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(33 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Wellness programs reduce employer health care costs.  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(68 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Medical fee schedules most popular cost control measure.  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(64 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Poll shows general dissatisfaction with health care.  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(86 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Carrier expands comp coverage through new endorsements.  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(88 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS AND DEVELOPMENTS IN THE STATES...</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>Health Insurance Plan of California brings in some employers, but many workers&nbsp;still uncovered.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(126 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>New York slated for comp reform.  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(160 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>Concern over ADA kills New Jersey HIV exclusion testing.  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(53 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>Pennsylvania small businesses urge passage of comp reform bill.  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(131 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>Other Keystone State bills would clarify emergency coverage for HMO members.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(131 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>Ohio Blue Cross/Blue Shield to base copayments on negotiated discounts.  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(77 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>Florida reform helping many to obtain health care coverage.  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(78 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>South Carolina comp costs will continue to drop.  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(127 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>Two more managed care providers adopt 24-hour health hotline.  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(67 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>Texas comp carriers given rate reduction ultimatum.  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(166 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>HMO controls costs despite difficult market.  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(43 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
SMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

Reform moves to state arena, loses some ground.  


With the federal government focusing on other issues, health care reform
shifted back to the states, where it suffered some setbacks.  Opposition from
small business employers and Republican control of more state legislatures put
reform issues on hold or reversed them.  Massachusetts' "play or pay" law,
which would have taxed employers who did not offer their workers health
coverage, was tabled for the third time in seven years.  Washington state
dismantled a law requiring employers to pay for group health coverage, and
Vermont opted out of a single-payer system proposal.  Groundwork was laid,
however, for expansion of coverage due to a recent U.S.  Supreme Court
decision in a New York case.  The court found that a surcharge on hospital
bills is not pre-empted by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act.  Other
states are now expected to enact their own surcharges to fund coverage for
uninsured individuals.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
SMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

Risk managers want OSHA reform issue resolved.  


Paul Brown, director of government affairs for the Risk & Insurance Management
Society, is hoping that Congress will resolve the issue this year.  "We were
happy to see them take up the OSHA reform issue and look forward to continue
working on developing an adequate reform bill," he said.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
SMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

"Growing pains" predicted for health care industry in 1996.  


According to business futurist Roger Herman, jobs in health care will
increase, but employee turnover will affect productivity.  Employers will have
to offer better pay and benefits to hold onto employees.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
SMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

Wellness programs reduce employer health care costs.  


A study by the Wellness Program Management Advisor shows that such programs
can cut costs by as much as 30 percent.  Thirty-eight percent of respondents
said that health screenings had the greatest effect on costs.  Nutrition, high
blood pressure and stress management were also found to reduce costs.  Only
two percent of respondents said they saw a rise in health care expenses after
implementing wellness programs.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
SMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

Medical fee schedules most popular cost control measure.  


Forty states now use medical fee schedules as a method of containing workers'
compensation costs, according to a study by the Workers' Compensation Research
Institute.  Hospital payment regulation is used by 35 states, and a change of
provider limit is used by 32 states.  Restrictions on provider changes is the
fastest-growing method of cost containment; 13 states enacted such
restrictions this year.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
SMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

Poll shows general dissatisfaction with health care.  


Fewer than 2 in 10 respondents were satisfied with the nation's health care
system, according to a Louis Harris poll.  Twelve percent said they couldn't
get needed treatment in 1995, and 15 percent had to wait at least a week to
get an appointment with a physician.  More than 80 percent of respondents said
the health care system is too bureaucratized.  Responses were somewhat better
than a poll taken five years ago, when only 1 in 10 said they were satisfied
with the system.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
SMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

Carrier expands comp coverage through new endorsements.  


ITT Hartford Insurance Group is now marketing two endorsements which enable
employers to broaden workers' compensation coverage.  The first, available at
no extra charge to eligible risks, expands coverage in six different areas,
including employers liability stop gap and voluntary compensation.  The
second, available at 1.5 to 3 percent of the standard premium, expands
coverage in 11 areas, such as business trips to foreign countries and an
increase in employers' liability bodily injury limits.  It also includes the
six areas covered in the first new endorsement.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
SMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

Health Insurance Plan of California brings in some employers, but many workers
still uncovered.


Although the HIPC has enrolled more than 5,000 employers and covers nearly
100,000 workers, uninsured employees are still a problem in the Golden State.
In Los Angeles County alone, four out of five are workers or their dependents,
according to a study by the UCLA Center for Health Policy Research.  A large
share of L.A.  workers are paid too little to afford coverage, and their
employers have profit margins too small to provide coverage.  "A relatively
large group of employers are still marginally profitable, and an incremental
increase in expenses may put them over the edge," said Richard Figueroa, an
HIPC state manager.  Of the employers that the HIPC has signed up during its
two years of operation, only 20 percent were previously uninsured.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
SMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

New York slated for comp reform.  


In his state of the state address, Gov.  George Pataki called for major
changes in many of the state's programs and procedures, including workers'
compensation and unemployment insurance.  The National Federation of
Independent Business applauded the governor's message.  "It's not just the
state and local taxes that have dulled small business growth, " said Mark P.
Alesse, NFIB's state director.  "Costly employer mandates like workers' comp
and UI have depressed small business job creation, too.  With real reform this
session, we are confident that small business will respond with substantial
new job opportunities."  The New York Workers' Compensation Action Network,
which represents 7,000 businesses statewide, praised the governor's plan to
implement a managed care system, a reform the group has sought for several
years.  Senate Democratic Leader Martin Connor was not as confident.  "The
governor forgets to mention that his health care plans will probably lead to
the closing of many hospitals and thousands of layoffs," he warned.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
SMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

Concern over ADA kills New Jersey HIV exclusion testing.  


The proposed regulation would have enabled group health insurers to test for
the human immunodeficiency virus and deny coverage based on test results
(SNCHB 10-23-95).  Insurance Commissioner Elizabeth Randall said that the
proposal most likely violated the Americans with Disabilities Act, as well as
state insurance regulations that bar unfair discrimination.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
SMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

Pennsylvania small businesses urge passage of comp reform bill.  


H.B.  2216, up before the state legislature this session, would reduce
workers' compensation costs for smaller employers currently facing increases
under the proposed "loss cost" filing.  The bill would change calculation of
average weekly wages to reflect actual yearly earnings; offset benefits by the
amount received in Social Security, pension, and severance benefits; prohibit
payment of disability benefits when the worker is earning wages equal to or
greater than pre-injury wages; provide safe employer discounts of five percent
on annual premiums; and permit employers to control medical care for 180 days
instead of 30 days.  Nearly 5,000 businesses are participating in the
campaign, spearheaded by SMC Business Councils, the Pennsylvania Business
Association and the Chamber Summit.  Small businesses make up over 95 percent
of all businesses in the state.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
SMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

Other Keystone State bills would clarify emergency coverage for HMO members.


State Senators Roy C.  Afflerbach and Jim Gerlach have introduced two bills
that would broaden emergency room treatment coverage for members of health
maintenance organizations.  The Gerlach bill would define an emergency for the
purposes of insurance coverage, and the Afflerbach bill would guarantee
emergency care to stabilize the patient, including 24-hour authorization
access for members.  The senators are responding to complaints from patients
whose managed health care providers have refused to pay for emergency
treatment when the symptoms were later determined not to constitute an
emergency under the medical insurers definition.  "Common sense tells you that
people with perfectly good health insurance don't get up in the middle of the
night and rush to the hospital unless they honestly believe they are having a
medical emergency," said Afflerbach.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
SMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

Ohio Blue Cross/Blue Shield to base copayments on negotiated discounts.  


After a long year of complaints and court battles, the Blues have stopped the
practice of basing insured copayments on regular hospital rates rather than
the discounted rates the Blues actually pay.  And starting the first of this
month, Blue Cross/Blue Shield of Ohio will incorporate the discounts into
copayment billings.  Still pending is a court case in Toledo, where a federal
judge is still to decide whether the Blues must pay restitution to insureds.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
SMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

Florida reform helping many to obtain health care coverage.  


Since its formation in 1994, the Community Health Purchasing Alliance has
enrolled over 14,000 businesses in the state, covering more than 63,000
individuals.  The CHPA is a non-profit group designed to help small businesses
of 1 to 50 employees afford to offer health insurance to their workers.
Purchasing alliances for small businesses are currently available in 15
states.  With more alliances in the process of forming, the number of states
is expected to climb to 23.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
SMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

South Carolina comp costs will continue to drop.  


The National Council on Compensation Insurance reports that slow economic
growth and a move toward trade and service jobs will continue to lower the
state's workers' comp costs.  Key factors are a decline in defense and other
manufacturing industries such as textiles, similar to the changes in the
Northeast.  As workers shift to less hazardous jobs, comp costs will continue
to decrease.  "Workers' compensation voluntary loss costs fell 13.9 percent in
1995 and residual market rates dropped by 1.9 percent," said William D.
Hager, NCCI president.  South Carolina's lower unemployment rate has also had
a positive impact on comp costs, dropping from 7.5 percent in 1993 to 5.0
percent in 1995.  The rate is expected to remain below 5.2 percent over the
next two years.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
SMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

Two more managed care providers adopt 24-hour health hotline.  


Minnesota's Care on Call provides callers with treatment for their symptoms
over the phone.  Developed jointly by Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Minnesota
and HealthSystem Minnesota, the service puts callers through to registered
nurses who use physician-approved guidelines to treat non-emergency
conditions, similar to medical hotlines in other states (SNCHB, 10-9-95).  The
nurses also phone in prescriptions and set up doctor appointments for callers.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
SMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

Texas comp carriers given rate reduction ultimatum.  


The Texas Department of Insurance gave insurers until February 1 to cut or
justify their workers' compensation rates or prepare for possible rollback
hearings.  Letters were sent to 17 insurer groups that write workers' comp in
the state, including Aetna, Allstate, Nationwide, Reliance and Zurich.  These
groups have 74 companies that write comp coverage, accounting for a seventh of
the state's market.  "The carriers have known for months of my concern that
workers' compensation rates are too high," said Insurance Commissioner Elton
Bomer, "particularly rates for small businesses."  He added that although some
insurers have reduced their rates due to savings created from a 1989 reform
law, more than a few have not responded.  "Some carriers have persisted in
charging rates that ignore the vastly improved claim situation," Bomer said.
"TDI's patience has worn thin, and we're carrying out the responsibility the
Legislature gave us to challenge excessive rates."  An analysis by TDI showed
comp rates were too high by 4 to 17 percent.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
SMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

HMO controls costs despite difficult market.  


Foundation Health Corp.  plans to stay healthy even in California's tough
climate.  The health maintenance organization is using physicians in Arizona
and California that actually lose money, but then compensates them by
registering them for shares in Foundation stock.






<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-29</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B042-89</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh45.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020440 text/html 100350
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:02:30 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:42 GMT
Content-length: 100162
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh45.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet <BR>
December 25, 1995 & January 1<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS REPORTS . . . DECEMBER 25, 1995 & JANUARY 1, 1996</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>Infection Control&nbsp;TB and AIDS Programs - Natural Partners or Not?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(781 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Animal Models&nbsp;Mouse Model Useful for Determining TB Pathology</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(569 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>Conference Coverage (ACTG)&nbsp;"New" ACTG Moves Forward</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(654 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>Conference Coverage (ACTG)&nbsp;Patient Recruitment and Retention a Problem for ACTG</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(384 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>Disease Markers&nbsp;Increased Soluble CD14 Useful Marker in TB Patients</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(305 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>Drug Screening&nbsp;Particle Counting Assay Evaluates TB Drugs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(247 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>Epidemiology (TB)&nbsp;Old Infection May Be Responsible for Clustered TB in Arkansas</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(345 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>Occupational Exposure (TB)&nbsp;Most TB in New York HCWs Due to Recent Infections</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(588 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>Occupational Exposure (TB)&nbsp;Product Simplifies Compliance with Guidelines for TB Exposure</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(381 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>Pediatrics &nbsp;Hepatic Toxicity Reversible in TB-Treated Children</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(238 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>Prophylaxis (TB)&nbsp;Isoniazid-Based Therapy Useful Despite Hepatotoxicity</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(700 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>Therapy&nbsp;Levofloxacin More Active than Ofloxacin in In Vitro Study</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(485 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>Transmission (TB)&nbsp;Primary School Teacher in Amsterdam Infects 19 Students</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(385 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RESEARCH FROM CONFERENCES . . . DECEMBER 25, 1995 & JANUARY 1, 1996</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>Diagnostics&nbsp;"Accuracy of Chest Radiograph Interpretation in the Diagnosis of Pneumocystis&nbsp;carinii Pneumonia, Bacterial Pneumonia, and Pulmonary Tuberculosis in HIV&nbsp;Positive Patients."  P.M.  Boiselle, I.  Tocino, R.J.  Hooley, A.S.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(261 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><LI>Diagnostics&nbsp;"Differentiation Between Tuberculosis and Malignant Lymphoma in Abdominal&nbsp;Lymph Nodes with Contrast-Enhanced CT."  Z.G.  Yang, P.Q.  Min, Z.Y.  He and&nbsp;X.P.  Choc.  Chengdu, China.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(243 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>Diagnostics (TB)&nbsp;"CT in Craniovertebral Tuberculosis."  T.B.  Buxi, R.  Vohra, S.  Yerramsetty,&nbsp;P.S.  Maini, A.K.  Kochbar and V.  Madan.  New Delhi, India.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(217 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><LI>Diagnostics (TB)&nbsp;"Effect of HIV Status on Chest CT Findings In Patients with Tuberculosis."&nbsp;L.B.  Haramati, E.R.  Jenny-Avital and D.D.  Alterman.  Bronx, New York.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(105 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><LI>Diagnostics (TB)&nbsp;"Imaging and Intervention of Genitourinary Tuberculosis:  Revisited."  S.H.&nbsp;Kim, Y.K.  Jeong, K.M.  Yeon and M.C.  Han.  Seoul, South Korea.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(149 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><A HREF = "#19"><A HREF = "#19"><LI>Diagnostics (TB)&nbsp;"Musculoskeletal Tuberculosis:  MR Imaging Manifestations."  H.S.  Kang, J.&nbsp;Ahn, S.M.  Kim and J.W.  Ryoo.  Seoul, South Korea.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(119 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><A HREF = "#20"><A HREF = "#20"><A HREF = "#20"><LI>Diagnostics (TB)&nbsp;"Sites of Tuberculous Involvement in AIDS Patients:  Correlation with Gallium&nbsp;Scans."  H.M.  Abdel-Dayem, S.Y.  Naddaf, B.  Mina, M.S.  Aziz, L.  DiFabrizio&nbsp;and J.S.  Kempf et al.  New York, New York.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(162 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><A HREF = "#21"><A HREF = "#21"><LI>Immunology (TB) &nbsp;"Regulation of the Human Cellular Immune Response in Tuberculosis."  J.J.&nbsp;Ellner.  Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(367 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><A HREF = "#22"><A HREF = "#22"><A HREF = "#22"><LI>Infection Control (TB)&nbsp;"Behavioral Factors in Tuberculosis Control."  E.  Sumartojo.  Division of&nbsp;Tuberculosis Elimination, U.S.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,&nbsp;Atlanta, Georgia.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(368 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>JOURNAL ARTICLE SUMMARIES . . . DECEMBER 25, 1995 & JANUARY 1, 1996</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#23"><A HREF = "#23"><A HREF = "#23"><A HREF = "#23"><LI>Biochemical&nbsp;Fossati, G.; Lucietto, P.; Giuliani, P.; Coates, A.R.; Harding, S.; Colfen,&nbsp;H.; Legname, G.; Chan, E.; Zaliani, A.; Mascagni, P.  "Mycobacterium&nbsp;tuberculosis Chaperonin 10 Forms Stable Tetrameric and Heptameric Structures</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(244 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><A HREF = "#24"><A HREF = "#24"><A HREF = "#24"><LI>Biochemical&nbsp;George, K.M.; Yuan, Y.; Sherman, D.R.; Barry, C.E.  "The Biosynthesis of&nbsp;Cyclopropanated Mycolic Acids in Mycobacterium tuberculosis - Identification&nbsp;and Functional Analysis of Cmas-2."  Journal of Biological Chemistry, November</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(234 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><A HREF = "#25"><A HREF = "#25"><A HREF = "#25"><LI>Diagnostics&nbsp;Anderson, C.; Inhaber, N.; Menzies, D.  "Comparison of Sputum Induction with&nbsp;Fiber-Optic Bronchoscopy in the Diagnosis of Tuberculosis."  American Journal&nbsp;of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, November 1995;152(5):1570-1574.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(257 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><A HREF = "#26"><A HREF = "#26"><A HREF = "#26"><LI>Diagnostics&nbsp;Dunlap, N.E.; Harris, R.H.; Benjamin, W.H.; Harden, J.W.; Hafner, D.&nbsp;"Laboratory Contamination of Mycobacterium tuberculosis Cultures."  American&nbsp;Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, November</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(235 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><A HREF = "#27"><A HREF = "#27"><A HREF = "#27"><LI>Drug Resistance&nbsp;Rouse, D.A.; Li, Z.M.; Bai, G.H.; Morris, S.L.  "Characterization of the katG&nbsp;and inhA genes of Isoniazid-Resistant Clinical Isolates of Mycobacterium&nbsp;tuberculosis."  Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, November</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(237 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><A HREF = "#28"><A HREF = "#28"><A HREF = "#28"><LI>Pediatrics (TB)&nbsp;Alkassimi, F.A.; Alhajjaj, M.S.; Alorainey, I.O.; Bamgboye, E.A.  "Does the&nbsp;Protective Effect of Neonatal BCG Correlate with Vaccine-Induced Tuberculin&nbsp;Reaction?."  American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine,</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(277 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><A HREF = "#29"><A HREF = "#29"><A HREF = "#29"><LI>Pharmacoeconomics&nbsp;Castelo, A.; Mathiasi, P.A.; Iunes, R.; Kritski, A.L.; Dalcolmo, M.; Demelo,&nbsp;F.F.; Drummond, M.  "Cost Effectiveness of Antituberculosis Interventions."&nbsp;Pharmacoeconomics, November 1995;8(5):385-399.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(379 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><A HREF = "#30"><A HREF = "#30"><A HREF = "#30"><LI>Screening&nbsp;Taneja, R.; Merritt, S.; Vanek, S.; Passannante, M.; Livingston, D.H.&nbsp;"Tuberculin Screening of Trauma Admissions at a University Hospital:  A&nbsp;Preventive Strategy."  Archives of Surgery, November 1995;130(11):1223-1227.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(349 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><A HREF = "#31"><A HREF = "#31"><A HREF = "#31"><LI>TB/HIV Coinfection&nbsp;Pozniak, A.L.; Macleod, G.A.; Ndlovu, D.; Ross, E.; Mahari, M.; Weinberg, J.&nbsp;"Clinical and Chest Radiographic Features of Tuberculosis Associated with&nbsp;Human Immunodeficiency Virus in Zimbabwe."  American Journal of Respiratory</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(196 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><A HREF = "#32"><A HREF = "#32"><A HREF = "#32"><LI>Therapy (Hepatotoxicity)&nbsp;Vandenbrande, P.; Vansteenbergen, W.; Vervoort, G.; Demedts, M.  "Aging and&nbsp;Hepatotoxicity of Isoniazid and Rifampin in Pulmonary Tuberculosis."  American&nbsp;Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, November</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(275 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><A HREF = "#33"><A HREF = "#33"><A HREF = "#33"><LI>Therapy (Hepatotoxicity)&nbsp;Ozick, L.A.; Jacob, L.; Comer, G.M.; Lee, T.P.; Benzvi, J.; Donelson, S.S.;&nbsp;Felton, C.P.  "Hepatotoxicity from Isoniazid and Rifampin in Inner-City AIDS&nbsp;Patients."  American Journal of Gastroenterology, November</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(231 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#34"><A HREF = "#34"><LI>MEETINGS REPORT&nbsp;*NEW LISTINGS  .  .  .  COMPILED BY KENNETH KIMSEY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(808 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Infection Control
TB and AIDS Programs - Natural Partners or Not?


Can tuberculosis and AIDS prevention and treatment programs be successfully
combined?

The question was debated during a tuberculosis (TB) conference in Paris with
researchers expressing differing views.

D.A.  Enarson of the International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease
(IUATLD) argued that tuberculosis and AIDS prevention services are less than
compatible, because they target different groups.

"Tuberculosis prevention is a medical services related activity whereas HIV
prevention is a general population activity," Enarson noted.

"Because of the difference in the point of implementation of the two programs,
attempts to combine them are difficult."

Enarson made the remarks at the 1995 annual meeting of the IUATLD Conference
on Global Lung Health, held in Paris, France.

Enarson noted that while the goal of TB and HIV prevention programs is the
same - to prevent infections - the focus must be different.

"In the case of tuberculosis, prevention is based on a strategy of case
management in which infectious cases are found and treated, thereby preventing
transmission from the source (the sick patient)," Enarson noted in an abstract
presented at the conference.  "This is the only means of primary prevention.
Persons with the infection who are not sick almost never transmit the
infection to others.  With HIV infection, transmission occurs from an infected
person who usually has no clinical evidence of the infection.

"Prevention of transmission of this infection is, in general, based on general
health education aimed at behavior modification, Thus, the point of
implementation of the two programs is quite different:  for HIV, the point of
implementation must be the general population of subsets of it."

R.  O'Brien of the World Health Organization's Global Tuberculosis Program
countered that collaboration between AIDS and tuberculosis programs is
essential if services for already-infected persons are to be efficiently
implement.

"Isoniazid preventive therapy for co-infected persons may be highly effective,
but little work on its programmatic application has been undertaken," O'Brien
noted.  "Testing of TB patients for HIV may provide for better patient care
and help reduce HIV transmission, but voluntary testing with counselling is
not widely available."

O'Brien noted that virtually no home-based care programs for AIDS patients
with TB exist, even though these programs may help alleviate the burden on TB
programs and prevent further TB transmission in households.

O'Brien also found efforts to control nosocomial transmission of tuberculosis
to be lacking.

"AIDS and TB programs have unique expertise and orientations which together
can address the problems," he wrote in an abstract presented to the IUATLD
meeting.

"Unfortunately, until now these factors have been used as excuses for working
separately rather than for seeking fruitful collaboration.  However, TB is now
recognized as the most important opportunistic infection and cause of death in
HIV infected persons worldwide.  TB and HIV/AIDS programs can no longer be
permitted to function in isolation and must collaborate to improve care and
preventive services for those suffering from this 'deadly duo'."

The World Health Organization's E.  van Praag agreed that home-care programs
for people with AIDS offer unique opportunities to control tuberculosis in
developing areas.

"Over the last few years initiatives to set up community-based or home care
programs for people and families living with HIV/AIDS have mushroomed
rapidly," van Praag wrote in an abstract of a presentation to the IUATLD
conference.  "In countries heavily affected by HIV/AIDS, between 50-100
different home care programs can be identified (Uganda, Zambia, Zimbabwe,
Thailand).  These initiatives are a response to needs felt by HIV affected
families, communities and health staff in environments where hospitals can
scarcely cope and economic survival and social status of those families have
seriously deteriorated, due to AIDS.

"More than half of the people with HIV related illness will develop
tuberculosis.  Early recognition of tuberculosis and chances to complete
treatment are again hampered by limited collaboration within various health
care programs and by AIDS specific issues such as recurrent illnesses and
reduced income to afford frequent return visits.  Opportunities exist within
home care programs where peripheral health and social staff are in close
contact with patients and family care givers to early recognize TB disease
among HIV infected and affected family members.  Home care staff could provide
drugs, supervise DOT and educate families and communities about HIV and TB
prevention and care.  Projects in Ghana, Zimbabwe and South Africa have
already implemented joint TB and AIDS home care programs."

Researcher D.A.  Enarson is from the IUATLD, Paris, France.  R.  O'Brien and
E.  van Praag are from the Global Tuberculosis Program and the Global Program
on AIDS, World Health Organization, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland.

 - by Salynn Boyles, Senior Editor




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Animal Models
Mouse Model Useful for Determining TB Pathology


A murine study suggests that Mycobacterium tuberculosis is far more virulent
when given by the respiratory route than by the intravenous route.

Researcher Robert J.  North of New York's Trudeau Institute earlier reported
that intravenous inoculation of mice with M.  tuberculosis results in a slowly
progressive infection in the lungs, despite the acquisition of systemic host
immunity capable of resolving infection in the liver, spleen and kidneys.

"The present study was undertaken to determine whether the peculiar
susceptibility of the lungs to M.  tuberculosis infection is even more obvious
in mice infected via the respiratory route," North wrote ("M.  tuberculosis is
Strikingly More Virulent for Mice When Given via the Respiratory than via the
Intravenous Route," Journal of Infectious Diseases, December
1995;172:1550-1553).

North found that fewer M.  tuberculosis colony-forming units (cfu) given by
aerosol were substantially more virulent for mice than much larger numbers
inoculated intravenously, as shown by a faster rate of bacillary growth in the
lungs and much shorter survival of the host.

"Earlier death of mice infected by aerosol was associated with faster
development of lung pathology, even though the number of M.  tuberculosis
given intravenously resulted in the same number of bacilli initially
implanting in the lungs as the number given by aerosol," North wrote.  "Mice
depleted of CD4 T cells died of infection much sooner than immunocompetent
mice but at about the same time after being infected via either route."

North noted that mice infected by aerosol, in contrast with those given M.
tuberculosis intravenously were incapable of resolving infection in their
livers, indicating that they generated and expressed a lower level of systemic
immunity.

"This interpretation is in keeping with the finding that mice depleted of CD4
T cells died at about the same time after infection was initiated via either
route and much earlier than immunocompetent controls," North wrote.  "In
addition, the survival time of mice infected via the respiratory route was
greatly extended if they were also infected intravenously with a larger number
of M.  tuberculosis.  Thus, a larger number of M.  tuberculosis cfu given
intravenously induces a higher level of systemic immunity than does a smaller
number given by aerosol.  This likely occurs because a larger intravenous
inoculum represents a larger quantity of replicating antigen capable of
engaging larger amounts of lymphoid tissue, including that in the spleen."

North concludes that bacilli that reach the lungs via the respiratory route
have a growth advantage over those that enter from blood during the initial
stage of infection.

"This may be because microorganisms that enter the lung via the respiratory
route are ingested by resident alveolar macrophages, whereas those that enter
from the blood need to be carried into the organ after being ingested by
monocytes, neutrophils, or pulmonary intravascular macrophages.

"Given that resident alveolar macrophages tend to be less capable than other
macrophages of killing microbial pathogens in general, it is possible that
this enables M.  tuberculosis to grow more rapidly during the initial stage of
infection.  Results of the present study support this concept in that M.
tuberculosis that entered the lung directly grew faster during the first 20
days of infection than did M.  tuberculosis that entered from blood."

The corresponding author for this study is Robert J.  North, Trudeau
Institute, Inc., P.O.  Box 59, Saranac Lake, New York 12983.

 - by Salynn Boyles, Senior Editor




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Conference Coverage (ACTG)
"New" ACTG Moves Forward


Can the main clinical trials group in the U.S.  shed its image as a dinosaur
too large and slow-moving to respond to new developments in AIDS therapies?

According to the chair of the group's Adult Executive Committee - University
of Colorado researcher Robert "Chip" Schooley - recent reorganization has
accomplished this objective.  Schooley made his remarks during the Twentieth
AIDS Clinical Trials Group Meeting, held December 2-6, 1995, in Washington,
D.C.

The AIDS Clinical Trials Group (ACTG) is the arm of the U.S.  National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) Division of AIDS (DAIDS)
responsible for testing new treatments for HIV disease and its complications.

But the group - particularly the division responsible for testing drugs in
adults - has been severely criticized for lacking central control and for
moving far too slowly to provide answers to pressing questions about AIDS
therapies.

DAIDS recently completed a top-to-bottom evaluation and reorganization of the
ACTG.  In a plenary address to the group's first general meeting since the
changes took effect, Schooley acknowledged that many of the criticisms were
valid, but also stressed the group's many achievements.

"We've been through a lot of self and external evaluation," Schooley said.
"But there are a lot of things right with this organization.  This is the
preeminent clinical organization in the world.  We have put together a
tremendous organization to deal with a disease we all are tired of."

Schooley noted that four years ago only one drug had been approved for the
treatment of primary HIV infection and that today, largely due to ACTG
efforts, there are five such drugs with a sixth on the way.

"This organization will play a major role in understanding how these drugs
work," he said.  "We have a tremendous opportunity to move along quickly."

Schooley noted that recent ACTG studies have defined a role for combination
therapy with the nucleoside analog didanosine (ddI) and for the use of the new
protease inhibitor saquinavir.

He promised that the ACTG would make increased use of new laboratory findings
"to tell us what we need to do."

The "new" ACTG will collaborate more closely with DAIDS, Schooley said.  But
most importantly, the ACTG will streamline and simplify the process by which
it generates clinical trial protocols.

"One of the things we were appropriately criticized for was behaving like
civil servants," Schooley said, referring to previous bureaucratic processes
that prevented the rapid testing of new treatments in a clinical setting.

The organization of the ACTG has been streamlined so that the adult section
has only three committees making research decisions.  These three Research
Agenda Committees (RACs) are the HIV Disease RAC, the Immunology RAC, and the
Opportunistic Disease RAC.  Committees that were once separate RACs - the
Pharmacology Committee, the Women's Health Committee, and the Patient Care
Committee - will now be established as standing resource committees within
each of the three main RACs.

There will be two major changes in how the ACTG functions:  there will be
centralized control of both resources and laboratories.

Resources will now be controlled directly by those planning and executing the
ACTG scientific agenda via a Scientific Agenda Steering Committee comprised of
the various committee chairs.

Laboratories previously operated independently of the research committees,
receiving their funds directly from DAIDS.

"Now scientific committees will directly control the labs," Schooley said.  "I
think this will work very well."

But the executive committee chair warned that the ACTG would continue to
change.

"Four years from now this will be a very different organization than now," he
said.  "The changes have been good, they have been enabling."

He called for the active participation of each investigator.

"Two thousand people thinking will get more done than just a few executive
committee members," Schooley said.

 - by Daniel J. DeNoon, Senior Editor




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Conference Coverage (ACTG)
Patient Recruitment and Retention a Problem for ACTG


Many institutions conducting AIDS clinical trials have been unable to find and
keep study participants.

A study of 28 institutions participating in U.S.  government-sponsored
clinical trials showed that 18 of the sites (64 percent) failed to meet their
patient accrual goals.

The study, conducted by Washington University researcher Michael Klebert and
colleagues, was presented at the Twentieth AIDS Clinical Trials Group (ACTG)
Meeting, held December 2-6, 1995, in Washington, D.C.  The ACTG Patient Care
Committee, a resource committee of the ACTG executive committee, performed the
study.

"Adequate recruitment and retention are essential in conducting successful
clinical trials," Klebert said.

Of 35 participating ACTG sites queried anonymously, 28 participated in the
study.  Except that they tended to be located on the east coast,
nonparticipating sites were not significantly different in terms of size or
patient demographics from participating institutions.

Surprisingly, the study found that the number of recruitment strategies used
by a study site was not related to meeting recruitment and retention goals.

Strategies positively correlated with successful patient recruitment and
retention were provision of child care, education of patients, provision of
peer advocates for patients, and payment via cash or vouchers.  Provision of
support groups was negatively correlated with success.

More than half of the sites identified study design as a barrier to
recruitment.  Nearly 40 percent of the sites said that barriers to successful
recruitment were lack of outreach and cultural sensitivity.

The sites with the worst recruitment/retention problems tended not to combine
primary care with study-protocol visits.  But high proportions of minority
patients or high proportions of patients using intravenous drugs was not
associated with poor recruitment or retention.

The major barriers to patient retention were the use of unpopular or too many
drugs in the study, high frequency of visits, and the availability of
alternative drugs.

Based on the study findings, Klebert made several recommendations to improve
patient recruitment and retention:

*  Combine primary care and research visits.
*  Promote a strong relationship between the study nurse and patients.
*  Provide transportation to the study site.
*  Ask patients about factors that might interfere with their participation.
*  Design studies to address retention problems.
*  Study identified problem sites in detail.
 - by Daniel J. DeNoon, Senior Editor




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Disease Markers
Increased Soluble CD14 Useful Marker in TB Patients


Increased levels of soluble CD14 are present in bronchoalveolar lavage
supernatant of pulmonary tuberculosis patients.

CD14 was first identified as a marker of cells derived from the
monocyte/macrophage lineage, although it was later found on other cells like
neutrophils and B lymphocytes.  The cell surface glycoprotein serves as a
cellular receptor for complexes of lipopolysaccharide with
lipopolysaccharide-binding protein.

Soluble CD14 (sCD14) is present in normal plasma and is found increased in
serum of patients with septicemia, polytrauma, and sarcoidosis.  In pulmonary
sarcoidosis, increased levels of soluble CD14 have been detected in serum and
in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid.  In this study researcher Gerhard Hoheisel
and colleagues attempted to determine whether increased levels of CD14 are
also found in pulmonary tuberculosis ("Increased Soluble CD14 Levels in
Bronchoalveolar Lavage Fluid in Primary TB," Chest, December
1995;108:1614-1616).

Bronchoalveolar lavage was performed in 12 patients with active but untreated
pulmonary tuberculosis and 12 healthy persons.  Cytologic and immunologic
characteristics were determined.  sCD14 was measured by a sandwich
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.

"The level of soluble CD14 in patients with pulmonary tuberculosis was
increased compared with controls (mean +/- 34.4 +/- ng/mL versus 11.5 +/- 22
ng/mL)," Hoheisel et al.  wrote.

"No correlation was found between sCD14 levels and bronchoalveolar lavage
supernatant of pulmonary tuberculosis patients.  We conclude that similar to
patients with sarcoidosis, increased BAL fluid levels of sCD14 are found in
patients with active pulmonary tuberculosis compared with controls.  Moreover,
this finding might signal a similar immunopathogenetic process contributing to
granuloma formation in both diseases.  Further studies of respective cell
surface markers and endogenous cytokine production seem necessary to determine
the significance and clinical relevance of this finding."

The corresponding author for this study is Gerhard Hoheisel, Department of
Pneumology, Ruhrlandklink, Tuschener Weg 40, D-45239.

 - by Salynn Boyles, Senior Editor




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Drug Screening
Particle Counting Assay Evaluates TB Drugs


A particle counting immunoassay developed in Belgium appears to offer a rapid
and inexpensive method for screening antituberculosis agents.

Researcher J.P.  Van Vooren and colleagues from the University of Brussels
developed the method based on particle counting immunoassay to detect
mycobacteria in clinical specimens.

"We adapted this procedure to test the efficiency of antimicrobial agents
against M.  tuberculosis," Van Vooren et al.  wrote in an abstract presented
to the 1995 annual meeting of the International Union Against Tuberculosis and
Lung Disease (IUATLD), held in Paris, France.

The latex particles used in the technique were coated with polyclonal anti-BCG
to detect mycobacterial antigens.

Four drug-susceptible, five multi-resistant and three isoniazid-resistant M.
tuberculosis strains were inoculated in bottles containing nonradioactive
Middlebrook 7H9 liquid medium and rifampin or isoniazid.

To lessen risk of contamination the mycobacteria were destroyed in an
autoclave between culture and subsequent manipulations.  Drug susceptibilities
were measured and those obtained with the BACTEC system were critically
compared.  For each of the 12 strains drug sensitivities were found comparable
in the two methods and could be determined after five days.

"We conclude that particle immunoassay gives access to a safe, reproducible,
fast and inexpensive nonradioactive procedure to screen drug sensitivities for
mycobacterial strains," Van Vooren et al.  wrote in an abstract presented to
the IUATLD meeting.

The corresponding author for this study is J.P.  Van Vooren, Hopital Erasme,
Universite Libre de Bruxelles.

 - by Salynn Boyles, Senior Editor




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Epidemiology (TB)
Old Infection May Be Responsible for Clustered TB in Arkansas


Fingerprint clustering in large rural geographic areas may not represent
recent tuberculosis transmission, according to a report from the U.S.  Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the Arkansas Department of
Health.

Researcher C.R.  Braden and colleagues reported the findings at the 1995
annual meeting of the International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung
Disease (IUATLD).

Previous studies have suggested that M.  tuberculosis isolates with similar
DNA fingerprints represent recent transmission of tuberculosis (TB) between
patients.

In this study DNA fingerprinting and conventional epidemiology techniques were
used to identify connections, recent and remote, among clustered patients.

M.  tuberculosis isolates obtained from Arkansas residents diagnosed in 1992
and 1993 were analyzed by DNA fingerprinting.  For clustered patients, health
department and laboratory records were established by identifying direct
exposure among cluster members or by placing cluster members in the same
location when TB transmission could have occurred.

A total of 338 culture positive cases of TB were identified.  Fingerprints
were obtained on isolates from 248 (73 percent).  Of these, 137 (55 percent)
grouped into 35 clusters.  Fingerprints had from two to 17 bands.  Cluster
sizes ranged from two to 15 patients and 15 clusters had only two patients.

Connections were found for all patients in seven (20 percent) clusters, some
in eight (23 percent) clusters and none in 20 (57 percent) clusters.

Twelve clusters, including the two largest, had fingerprints with five or less
bands.  Some or all patients were linked in 57 percent of clusters whose
isolates had fingerprints with more than five bands, but only 13 percent of
those with fingerprints with five or less bands.

"For most clusters, conventional epidemiologic methods did not identify
opportunities for TB transmission among cluster patients," Braden et al.
wrote.  "Fingerprint clustering in a large rural geographic area may not
represent recent transmission and DNA fingerprint patterns with five or less
bands may lack specificity."

The corresponding author for this study is C.R.  Braden, Arkansas Department
of Health, Little Rock, Arkansas.

 - by Salynn Boyles, Senior Editor




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Occupational Exposure (TB)
Most TB in New York HCWs Due to Recent Infections


A finding that most tuberculosis cases among health care workers in a New York
study were due to recent infections suggests that occupational transmission of
tuberculosis routinely occurs in facilities without recognized tuberculosis
(TB) outbreaks, according to Cornell University's Public Health Research
Institute.

A number of nosocomial outbreaks of tuberculosis occurred across the United
States during 1990 and 1991, resulting in several deaths among personnel in
contact with infected patients.  These outbreaks prompted the issuance of new
guidelines for health care workers from the U.S.  Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC).

"Since (the implementation of the CDC guidelines) there have been relatively
few reported outbreaks, which suggests that current control measures may be
effective," researcher Kent A Sepkowitz and colleagues wrote ("TB Among Urban
Health Care Workers:  A Study Using Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism
Typing," Clinical Infectious Diseases, November 1995;21:1098-1102).

"However, it is not known whether the apparently sporadic cases of
tuberculosis in health care workers are due to occupationally acquired
infections or, as a recent study suggested, are more likely due to
community-acquired infections.  In addition, the risk for HIV infected
personnel is not well defined, although some have suggested that HIV infected
health care workers should have the option of being assigned to an area
associated with a low risk of exposure to tuberculosis."

In this study Sepkowitz and colleagues at New York's Cornell University
Medical College analyzed cases of tuberculosis using laboratory-based active
surveillance system for TB at six hospitals in New York City (members of the
TBNetwork).

Cases of tuberculosis identified during 1992 to 1994 were analyzed according
to the occupational status of the patients.

The researchers reviewed medical records and restriction fragment length
polymorphism (RFLP) typing of Mycobacterium tuberculosis isolates was
performed.

"No known nosocomial outbreaks of tuberculosis occurred at these hospitals in
the study period," Sepkowitz et al.  wrote.  "Occupational status was known
for 142 of 201 patients whose isolates were available for strain typing.
Patients infected by organisms with a clustered strain typing pattern, as
determined by RFLP analysis, were presumed to have recently acquired disease."

RFLP typing revealed that isolates from 13 (65 percent) of 20 health care
workers and 50 (41 percent) of 122 non-health care workers had a clustered
RFLP pattern.

Multivariate analysis of 75 patients with known HIV and occupational status
revealed that HIV status and health care worker status were independent risk
factors for a clustered RFLP strain.

The recent transmission rate of 65 percent outlined by Sepkowitz et al.  is
greater than that seen among health care workers with tuberculosis in Bern,
Switzerland, San Francisco, California, or the Bronx, New York.

Sepkowitz et al.  conclude that many apparently sporadic cases of tuberculosis
among health care workers may be due to unrecognized occupational
transmission.

The authors note, however, that the cases analyzed in their report probably
reflect transmissions that occurred prior to the time hospitals updated
infection control procedures.

"Our data suggest that occupational transmission of tuberculosis occurs in
hospitals without recognized outbreaks," Sepkowitz et al.  wrote.  "Health
care workers with HIV infection appear to be at particular risk.  Prospective
RFLP-based studies will be useful to confirm these findings and may help
determine the efficacy of current guidelines for preventing transmission of
tuberculosis in health care settings."

The corresponding author for this study is Kent A.  Sepkowitz, Infection
Disease Service, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New
York, New York 10021.

 - by Salynn Boyles, Senior Editor




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Occupational Exposure (TB)
Product Simplifies Compliance with Guidelines for TB Exposure


Uvex Safety, Inc., Smithfield, Rhode Island, has introduced a new family of
N95 disposable particulate respirators designed to help healthcare and
emergency medical organizations comply with recently-enacted regulations for
respiratory protection for workers exposed to tuberculosis (TB).

The uvex/Pro-Tech N95 respirators enable users of existing uvex HEPA-Tech
respirators to update their equipment at about half the cost without
fit-testing for employees.  Because they have the same physical design, the
uvex N95 respirators allow users to switch without a re-fit test if they have
been trained and fit tested with the HEPA-Tech models.

Featuring a 95 percent efficient filter media, the N95 respirators meet the
new NIOSH test criteria for particulate respiratory filters (42 CFR Part 84).
In addition, they comply with the new U.S.  Center for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) guidelines for respiratory protection against occupational
exposure to TB.  Available in three sizes and capable of
qualitative/quantitative fit testing as well as reliable fit checking, they
also meet all performance criteria in the new OSHA enforcement policies for TB
protection.

There are currently two models in the uvex/Pro-Tech N95 product family, both
of which feature adjustable top and bottom head straps as well as a patented
foam sealing flange.

* The Model 4010 is an entry level respirator designed for medical
environments that do not permit open exhalation of respiratory aerosols.

* The Model 4Al0 includes an exhalation valve that streamlines exhaled air out
of the facepiece, making it cooler and more comfortable to wear.

"Now that OSHA has adopted the CDC guidelines into regulation, the healthcare
field has a new alternative for TB protection," explains uvex industrial
hygienist Michael Fuchs.  "In many cases, the new regulations enable employers
to make an across-the-board change from existing HEPA respirators to the new
N95 models.  But in large facilities and organizations, this can prove to be a
time-consuming problem for safety officials.

"With its new N95 respirators, uvex is making the transition easier and less
costly for its customers.  Users who have been fit-tested for uvex HEPA-Tech
respirators can simply switch to similar sized uvex N95 models with no
qualitative or quantitative fit testing ...  at about half the cost of the
Hepa-Tech 3010 Series.  The switch will be quick and simple."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Pediatrics 
Hepatic Toxicity Reversible in TB-Treated Children


Hepatic toxicity in children treated for tuberculosis in Macedonia was less
severe and long lasting when preventive measures were undertaken.

Researcher L.  Jakovski and colleagues from Macedonia's Institute for
Respiratory Diseases in Children compared hepatic toxicity during two periods
(1974 to 1982 and 1986 to 1994).

Their study was presented at the 1995 annual meeting of the International
Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease (IUATLD) , held in Paris, France.

Investigations were performed before the beginning of treatment and each 15
days after treatment was begun (during hospitalization).

Of the 1521 patients treated for tuberculosis between 1974 and 1982, 118 had
disturbed hepatic function (7.76 percent).  In the group of 917 children
treated between 1986 and 1994, 29 had disturbed hepatic function (3.16
percent).

Jakovski et al.  found that there were 2.5 times fewer hepatic disturbances in
the second group of patients.  The majority of toxicities occurred in the 0-2
year old age group during both periods.

Combination therapy with isoniazid, rifampin and pyrazinamide was the
treatment regimen which caused the most adverse reactions.

During the second treatment period patients were given hepatoprotective drugs
and toxic reactions were monitored carefully.

In all cases during both treatment periods there was recovery of hepatic
function.

The corresponding author for this study is L.  Jakovski, Institute for
Respiratory Diseases in Children, Skopje, Macedonia.

 - by Salynn Boyles, Senior Editor




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Prophylaxis (TB)
Isoniazid-Based Therapy Useful Despite Hepatotoxicity


Prophylactic isoniazid therapy is beneficial to all patients with pulmonary
fibrotic lesions compatible with previous tuberculosis (TB), despite the risk
of potentially life-threatening complications such as hepatitis, according to
a report from Switzerland.

The report warns, however, that it is still unclear whether the benefits of
such therapy outweigh possible side-effects.

Tuberculosis reactivation is increased among patients with chest X-rays
showing untreated fibrotic lesions suggestive of healed, previous TB
(so-called fibrotic lesions).

"Prophylactic treatment with a six to 12-month course of isoniazid (INH) has
proven effective in these cases, giving about 70 percent protection rate
against reactivation of TB," researcher F.P.  Sarasin and colleagues wrote
("Isoniazid Preventive Therapy for Pulmonary Tuberculosis Sequelae:  Which
Patients Up to Which Age?"  Tubercle and Lung Disease, 1995;76:394-400).

"Nonetheless, whether the benefit of isoniazid outweighs it potentially
life-threatening side effects (isoniazid-induced hepatitis) in all age groups,
and in patients with coexisting diseases that limit life expectancy such as
severe chronic heart failure (CHF) or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), a frequent clinical situation, remains unstudied."

Earlier studies have focused on recommendations for prophylactic isoniazid
among patients with positive tuberculin skin test reactions only.  None,
however, has specifically addressed recommendations regarding persons with
fibrotic lesions discovered on chest X-ray.

In this study Sarasin et al.  conducted a Markov-based decision analysis model
which balances the risk of recurrent TB against TB-related mortality,
incidence of isoniazid-related hepatitis, and isoniazid-related death.

They also sought to determine the optimal strategy between a six- to 12-month
course of prophylactic isoniazid and therapeutic abstention in different age
groups and in patients with severe coexisting diseases that limit life
expectancy such as CHF or COPD.

"The core of our decision tree was a model representing the natural history of
untreated patients with pulmonary tuberculosis sequelae," Sarasin et al.
wrote.  "Over time, they may die from different age- or gender-related causes,
or develop early or late TB and die from it.  Whether these patients may
benefit from prophylactic isoniazid involves weighing the trade-offs between
the short term risks of isoniazid-related complications and avoidance of TB
reactivation, a benefit that may be accrued over the short or the long term,
depending on when TB occurs."

The Markov decision analysis found that in all groups of patients,
prophylactic isoniazid clearly reduced the number of deaths from tuberculosis,
whereas very few cases died from isoniazid-related toxicity.  However, because
isoniazid-related deaths occur early, and TB-related deaths can occur early or
late, the gain in life expectancy was small.

"Particularly for patients with short survival such as those older than 80
years and those with CHF or COPD, the average gain in life expectancy provided
by prophylactic isoniazid did not exceed on week," Sarasin et al.  wrote.

"When the gains in life expectancy provided by prophylactic isoniazid are
small and may not be considered clinically relevant, the optimal therapeutic
decision becomes a toss-up.  In clinical practice, toss-ups will undoubted be
interpreted differently by the physicians, the patients, and the health care
planners.  While physicians will focus on the patient's attitude toward risk
(risk-aversion versus risk-seeking profile) and on therapeutic observance,
patients will pay much more attention to the quality of life associated with
isoniazid therapy, and specifically the inconvenience of taking medication,
office visits, and laboratory tests.  On the other hand, from the health
planners' vantage point, the potential epidemiologic benefit of preventing
several future TB cases by treating one patient preventively will be the most
important determinant of decision making."

The authors conclude that the usually recommended six- to 12-month course of
prophylactic isoniazid is beneficial to all cohort age groups.  They added,
however, that recommendations should be modulated for the very elderly and
those with severe disease that limits life expectancy.

"For this subgroup of patients, frequently encountered in daily clinical
practice, the decision whether and for how long to give prophylactic therapy
might reasonably be left to the judgement of the individual patient and the
physician," they wrote.

The corresponding author for this study is F.P.  Sarasin, Clinique de Medecine
1, Hopital Cantonal Universitaire, 24 rue Micheli du Crest, 1211 Geneve 14,
Switzerland.

 - by Salynn Boyles, Senior Editor




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Therapy
Levofloxacin More Active than Ofloxacin in In Vitro Study


The experimental antituberculosis quinolone levofloxacin showed two- to
four-times more antimicrobial activity than ofloxacin in a newly reported in
vitro study from Japan.

"Levofloxacin showed greater activity against Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv
phagocytosed in macrophages than ofloxacin," researcher H.  Saito and
colleagues wrote ("In Vitro Antimycobacterial Activity of a New Quinolone,
Levofloxacin," Tubercle and Lung Disease, 1995;76:377-380).

Levofloxacin, the optically active L-isomer of ofloxacin, exhibits significant
bactericidal activity by inhibiting DNA gyrase and has a strong antimicrobial
activity against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.

The antimicrobial activity of levofloxacin has been found to be eight to 128
times greater than that of the corresponding D-isomer and approximately twice
as potent as that of ofloxacin.

In earlier studies Saito et al.  reported that some new quinolones including
ofloxacin, ciprofloxacin, fleroxacin and sparfloxacin possessed appreciable in
vitro and in vivo antimycobacterial activity, especially against Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, M.  kansasii, M.  fortuitum, and M.  leprae.

In this study Saito et al.  examined in vitro antimicrobial activity of
levofloxacin against various pathogenic mycobacteria, in particular M.
tuberculosis and M.  avium complex (MAC).

Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of levofloxacin for various
mycobacterial species were determined by the agar dilution method using 7H11
medium and compared with those of ofloxacin.  Antimicrobial activity of
levofloxacin against M.  tuberculosis and M.  intracellulare phagocytosed in
murine peritoneal macrophages was measured in terms of reducing
cell-associated bacterial colony forming units (CFUs).

MICs of levofloxacin against M.  tuberculosis, M.  kansasii, M.  marinum, M.
scrofulaceum, M.  avium, M.  intracellulare, M.  fortuitum, and M.  chelonae
were two to four times lower than those of ofloxacin.  Levofloxacin exhibited
higher efficacy in reducing bacterial CFUs in macrophages than ofloxacin.

"The present results showed that in vitro antimicrobial activity of
levofloxacin against various mycobacteria was two to four times greater than
that of ofloxacin, in terms of minimum inhibitory concentration values," Saito
et al.  wrote.

Previous investigators have reported that the antimicrobial activity of
levofloxacin against various bacteria other than mycobacteria is generally
twice that of ofloxacin (Hayakawa et al., Antimicrob Agents and Chemother
1986;29:163-164; Imamura et al., Antimicrob Agents and Chemo 1987;31:325-327
and Tanka et al., J Antimicrob Chemother 1990;26:659-666).

"The difference in in vitro activity of levofloxacin from ofloxacin in these
reports is therefore consistent with that in the present study," Saito et al.
wrote.  "In the case of M.  intracellulare, significant delay of bacterial
growth was caused by levofloxacin added at 1 mg/L, but such efficacy was not
observed for ofloxacin at the same concentration.  Levofloxacin and ofloxacin
at doses of 10 mg/L prevented the bacterial growth during the whole incubation
period.  There were significant differences between these two quinolones in
the efficacy in reducing the intra-macrophage growth of M.  intracellulare."

The corresponding author for this study is H.  Saito, Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Shimane Medical University, Izumo 693, Japan.

 - by Salynn Boyles, Senior Editor




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Transmission (TB)
Primary School Teacher in Amsterdam Infects 19 Students


A primary school teacher with tuberculous laryngitis in Amsterdam, the
Netherlands, infected all of his students with tuberculosis (TB) before his
disease was detected.

All 19 children who had been taught by the teacher became infected with TB and
four contracted active disease, according to a report presented at the 1995
Annual Meeting of the International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung
Disease (IUATLD), held in Paris, France.

"Three months after the start of the new school year, the notification of
primary tuberculosis in two children of the same primary school urged the
local Municipal Health Service to perform source detection and contact
tracing," researcher S.T.  Keizer and colleagues from The Netherlands' Health
Service wrote in an abstract presented at the IUATLD conference.

Extensive testing was conducted and those with a skin induration of 10 mm or
more were considered infected.  A case of primary tuberculosis was defined as
the combination of a positive Mantoux test and compatible radiographic
findings.

"A teacher was identified as the source case," Keizer et al.  wrote.  "At the
time of detection he was without symptoms, yet his chest X-ray showed typical
infiltration of the left upper lobe and his sputum was Ziehl-Neelsen positive.
His medical history revealed that he had been suffering from severe hoarseness
for three months until a benign growth was removed from his vocal cords during
the summer-holidays.  The pathologist had reported the presence of epithelioid
cell granuloma indicating tuberculosis, but this had not reached the attention
of the otorhinolaryngist."

Nearly one-third of all 99 children at the school were found to be infected
with tuberculosis.

"All 19 children who had been taught by our patient until the summer holidays
were infected," Keizer et al.  wrote.  "Among them were four cases of primary
tuberculosis.  In the group (13 children) that had entered his class after the
summer-holidays only one infection was detected.  It is concluded that this
teacher was extremely infectious during the time he was hoarse from a
tuberculous laryngeal lesion.  The consideration of TB in the differential
diagnosis of laryngeal lesions needs emphasis for individual and for public
health reasons."

The corresponding author for this study is S.T.  Keizer, Tuberculosis
Departments of the Municipal Health Services, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

 - by Salynn Boyles, Senior Editor




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Diagnostics
"Accuracy of Chest Radiograph Interpretation in the Diagnosis of Pneumocystis
carinii Pneumonia, Bacterial Pneumonia, and Pulmonary Tuberculosis in HIV
Positive Patients."  P.M.  Boiselle, I.  Tocino, R.J.  Hooley, A.S.

Pumerantz, P.A.  Selwyn and V.P.  Neklesa, et al.  New Haven, Connecticut.

According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 81st Scientific
Assembly of the Radiological Society of North America, held November 26 -
December 1, 1995, in Chicago, Illinois, "PURPOSE:  To assess the accuracy of
chest radiographic interpretation in the diagnosis of Pneumocystis carinii
pneumonia (PCP), bacterial pneumonia (BP), and pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) in
HIV-positive patients and to identify the frequency with which these
infections mimic each other radiographically.  MATERIALS AND METHODS:  The
admitting chest radiographs of 153 HIV-positive patients with laboratory
proved BP (n=71), PCP (n=73) and pulmonary TB (n=9) and those of 10 HIV
positive patients with no active disease were reviewed retrospectively and
independently by 3 radiologists.  Readers were blinded to clinical
presentation, CD4 count, original radiographic interpretation, and final
diagnosis.  For each case, the radiologists listed a single diagnosis followed
by an assessment of degree of confidence.  RESULTS:  A confident diagnosis was
made in 136 of 163 cases (83.4%).  By specific diagnostic category, the median
accuracies are as follows:  pulmonary TB, 85%; PCP, 75%; BP, 64%; and no
active disease, 100%.  Correcting for random agreement, there was moderate
interobserver agreement.  Fifteen of 153 cases (9.8%) mimicked other
infections radiographically and were given the same inaccurate diagnosis by
all 3 independent observers.  CONCLUSION:  Chest radiographic interpretation
allows a confident and accurate diagnosis to be made in the majority of HIV
positive patients with PCP, BP, and TB at the time of hospitalization.  In
approximately 10% of cases, these infections may mimic each other
radiographically."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Diagnostics
"Differentiation Between Tuberculosis and Malignant Lymphoma in Abdominal
Lymph Nodes with Contrast-Enhanced CT."  Z.G.  Yang, P.Q.  Min, Z.Y.  He and
X.P.  Choc.  Chengdu, China.


According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 81st Scientific
Assembly of the Radiological Society of North America, held November 26 -
December 1, 1995, in Chicago, Illinois, "PURPOSE:  Tuberculosis of abdominal
lymph nodes is in some countries and can be easily misdiagnosed as malignant
lymphoma.  This study evaluates specific imaging criteria for differentiating
tuberculosis from malignant lymphoma in abdominal lymph nodes on contrast
enhanced CT.  MATERIALS AND METHODS:  The enhanced CT features of 125 sites in
50 patients, including tuberculosis (20 patients) and malignant lymphoma (30
patients) in abdominal lymph nodes, were retrospectively evaluated in a blind
review for the enhancement criteria of morphology, density, and location.
RESULTS:  Approximately 94% of sites of tuberculosis showed a ringlike
enhancement of enlarged lymph nodes, as compared with 4% of the sites of
malignant lymphoma (P<.01).  Approximately 55% of the patients with
tuberculosis had a mass of multilocular appearance compared with 4% of the
patients with malignant lymphoma (P<.01).  Tuberculosis frequently involved
the mesenteric, omental, and retroperitoneal lymph nodes, while malignant
lymphoma frequently involved the retroperitoneal space.  But, the
retroperitoneal lymph nodes under L-2 were involved with tuberculosis in only
8% of the patients, whereas malignant lymphoma involved about 20% (P<.01).
Combining all criteria, reviewers diagnosed tuberculosis correctly in 94%,
with 93% specificity and 95% sensitivity.  CONCLUSION:  The differentiation of
tuberculosis from malignant lymphoma can be made with contrast-enhanced CT on
the basis of characteristic enhancement and sites of involved
lymphadenopathy."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Diagnostics (TB)
"CT in Craniovertebral Tuberculosis."  T.B.  Buxi, R.  Vohra, S.  Yerramsetty,
P.S.  Maini, A.K.  Kochbar and V.  Madan.  New Delhi, India.


According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 81st Scientific
Assembly of the Radiological Society of North America, held November 26 -
December 1, 1995, in Chicago, Illinois, "PURPOSE:  A prospective cum
retrospective analysis of distinctive CT features in 30 cases of
craniovertebral tuberculosis (CVTB) and comparison with other common diseases
that afflict this region are presented.  MATERIALS AND METHODS:  All patients
suspected of having CVTB underwent contrast-enhanced CT of the base of the
skull and upper cervical spine.  Cases with either positive smear, culture, or
characteristic histopathologic changes were evaluated.  Follow-up CT scans
were obtained in 17 patients at an interval of 1-18 months.  RESULTS:  Bone
destruction was seen in atlas in 73.33% of patients, in axis in 56.66% of
patients, and in basioccipital in 33.33% patients.  In the majority of the
patients, pus and granulation tissue were seen together.  Intraspinal
extension was seen in 80% patients; however, it had no correlation with the
neurologic complications (seen in 53.33%).  Prespinal and paraspinal location
was seen in 63.33% and 40% of patients, respectively.  Majority of the
patients had a complex combination of dislocations.  Anterior atlanto-axial
dislocation (AAD), atlanto-occipital dislocation, and superior translocation
of dens were encountered in 56.66% of cases each, followed by lateral AAD (50%
of patients) and rotatory subluxation (40% patients)."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Diagnostics (TB)
"Effect of HIV Status on Chest CT Findings In Patients with Tuberculosis."
L.B.  Haramati, E.R.  Jenny-Avital and D.D.  Alterman.  Bronx, New York.


According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 81st Scientific
Assembly of the Radiological Society of North America, held November 26 -
December 1, 1995, in Chicago, Illinois, "PURPOSE:  To describe the chest CT
findings of tuberculosis in HIV positive patients compared with a combined
group of HIV negative and untested patients with no known HIV risk factors.
CONCLUSION:  Chest CT in HIV positive patients with tuberculosis demonstrated
bilateral mediastinal lymphadenopathy significantly more frequently (67% vs
20%) and cavitation significantly less frequently (0% vs 80%) than a combined
group of HIV negative or untested patients with no known HIV risk factors."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Diagnostics (TB)
"Imaging and Intervention of Genitourinary Tuberculosis:  Revisited."  S.H.
Kim, Y.K.  Jeong, K.M.  Yeon and M.C.  Han.  Seoul, South Korea.


According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 81st Scientific
Assembly of the Radiological Society of North America, held November 26 -
December 1, 1995, in Chicago, Illinois, "Tuberculosis has again become a
significant public health problem in various parts of the world, and the
genitourinary tract is the most common site of extrapulmonary tuberculosis.
The purpose of this exhibit is to illustrate the findings of the genitourinary
tract involved with tuberculosis by using conventional and modern imaging
studies.  This exhibit includes the imaging findings of the early
dissemination, progressive destruction and healing, and late sequelae of
tuberculosis involving various organs of the genitourinary tract including the
kidney, ureter, bladder, testis and epididymis, prostate and seminal tracts,
uterus, ovary, and the related peritoneal cavity.  This exhibit also
demonstrates the long-term results of balloon dilation and stent placement for
the tuberculous strictures of the urinary tract."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Diagnostics (TB)
"Musculoskeletal Tuberculosis:  MR Imaging Manifestations."  H.S.  Kang, J.
Ahn, S.M.  Kim and J.W.  Ryoo.  Seoul, South Korea.


According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 81st Scientific
Assembly of the Radiological Society of North America, held November 26 -
December 1, 1995, in Chicago, Illinois, "With the increasing incidence of AIDS
and drug abuse, tuberculosis has been resurging.  Tuberculosis is especially
important because it is readily treatable, and permanent damage is potentially
preventable.  MR imaging has been successfully used for the evaluation of
musculoskeletal tuberculosis.  This exhibit presents various MR imaging
manifestations of musculoskeletal tuberculosis that involves the spine,
tubular bones, flat bones, synovial joints, fibrous joints, bursae, tendon
sheaths, and muscles.  The role of MR imaging and contrast enhancement in the
evaluation of musculoskeletal tuberculosis and the differential diagnosis are
discussed."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Diagnostics (TB)
"Sites of Tuberculous Involvement in AIDS Patients:  Correlation with Gallium
Scans."  H.M.  Abdel-Dayem, S.Y.  Naddaf, B.  Mina, M.S.  Aziz, L.  DiFabrizio
and J.S.  Kempf et al.  New York, New York.


According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 81st Scientific
Assembly of the Radiological Society of North America, held November 26 -
December 1, 1995, in Chicago, Illinois, "PURPOSE:  Tuberculosis (TB) in AIDS
patients has a more aggressive and different pathologic picture than it does
in non-AIDS patients; this fact influences the methods of diagnosis and
treatment.  Gallium studies have been recommended in the work-up of these
patients.  The purpose of this study was to review the gallium scans in all
AIDS patients with a proved diagnosis of TB to find the sites of involvement
and causes of false negative gallium scanning and to provide correlation with
chest x-ray findings.  CONCLUSION:  Lymph node involvement with TB infection
in AIDS patients is more common than parenchymal lung involvement.  The
mediastinal and supraclavicular areas were involved most often, followed by
the axillary, upper abdominal and inguinal regions.  Anti-TB treatment affects
the sensitivity of gallium scanning in AIDS patients with TB."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Immunology (TB) 
"Regulation of the Human Cellular Immune Response in Tuberculosis."  J.J.
Ellner.  Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio.


According to an abstract submitted by the author to The Lancet Conference 'The
Challenge of Tuberculosis', held September 14-15, 1995, in Washington, D.C.,
"Pulmonary tuberculosis is characterized by activation of local and systemic
immune and inflammatory cells and mediators.  Somewhat paradoxically, delayed
type hypersensitivity responses to tuberculin purified protein derivative, and
in vitro correlates frequently are depressed in patients with tuberculosis.
Cross-modulatory cytokines, produced by mononuclear phagocytes, chiefly
transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-(beta)), deactivate effector function,
depress T-cell activation and may account for depressed delayed-type
hypersensitivity (DTH) and increased antibody levels.  Ingestion of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis by mononuclear phagocytes stimulates expression of
cytokines.  Tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-(alpha)) and TGF-(beta) function
in autocrine circuits producing activating and deactivating signals,
respectively, for macrophage effector function.  Lipoarabinomannen (LAM) from
virulent M.  tuberculosis selectively induces expression of TFG-(beta)
relative to TFG-(alpha) by monocytes.  In patients with tuberculosis,
TFG-(beta) is expressed in granulomas, and blood monocytes show increased
spontaneous and tuberculin purified protein derivative (PPD)-stimulated
production of this cytokine.  Moreover, neutralizing antibody to TFG-(beta)
reverses depressed PPD-stimulated blastogenesis and interferon-gamma
expression.  Therefore, TFG-(beta) seems a key mediator of immunosuppression
and energy.  Moreover, neutralizing antibody to interleukin-10 partly restores
PPD-stimulated blastogenesis.  Parallel with depressed T-cell responses,
patients with pulmonary tuberculosis show increased levels of IgM, IgG, IgG-1,
and IgE antibodies directed against M.  tuberculosis.  This finding too may
reflect cross-regulation by TFG-(beta).  Current understanding of
immunoregulation in tuberculosis provides some clear directions for
immunotherapy.  In dually-infected persons, activation of CD4 lymphocytes and
monocytes by tuberculosis might promote replication of HIV-1.  In fact, serum
and cell-derived TNF-(alpha) are increased in HIV infected tuberculosis
patients and this cytokine is known to stimulate HIV replication.  Further,
monocytes from patients with tuberculosis show increased infectability by HIV;
and PPD and M.  tuberculosis stimulate HIV replication in latently infected
macrophages.  Therefore, M.  tuberculosis and HIV infections may be mutually
enhancing.  The human immune response can be used to identify candidates for a
subunit vaccine.  Increasing evidence supports a primary role for
extracellular products of M.  tuberculosis as a target of protective immunity.
Epitope mapping of the secreted 30 kD alpha-antigen indicates immunodominance
of certain peptides that could provide the basis for an improved vaccine or
DTH skin test."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Infection Control (TB)
"Behavioral Factors in Tuberculosis Control."  E.  Sumartojo.  Division of
Tuberculosis Elimination, U.S.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, Georgia.


According to an abstract submitted by the author to The Lancet Conference 'The
Challenge of Tuberculosis', held September 14-15, 1995, in Washington, D.C.,
"Tuberculosis control is directed towards ensuring that patients complete
treatment without infecting others.  Relevant Behavioral and social factors
concern the decisions and actions of individuals who influence treatment
outcomes, including persons at risk for disease, tuberculosis patients, and
health care providers.  Relevant issues include health education for patients
and for the public, provider knowledge and practice, the unique needs of HIV
infected persons and others at high risk of tuberculosis, and the quality of
treatment and control services.  Poor medication adherence remains the core
Behavioral problem in tuberculosis control.  Supervised or directly observed
therapy (DOT) is a currently accepted solution but it is not a panacea; where
successful, it is part of an array of other services.  Continuing social and
Behavioral research describes factors associated with adherence.  Ethnographic
research has addressed the knowledge and beliefs of individuals about
tuberculosis.  Findings are that individuals from various cultures associate
tuberculosis with stigmatization and rejection, have concerns about the
appropriateness and quality of health care, and are often misinformed about
the cause and treatment of the disease.  Studies of interventions show the
effectiveness of community health workers, family and community support, and
comprehensive services that include strong case management, efficient clinic
practices, and additional social or health services for patients.  Research is
emerging on communication strategies used by providers as they talk to
patients, and the impact of poor communication on patient behavior.  Studies
of treatment practices show that some physicians use inadequate regimens, with
implications for the education and supervision of physicians who treat
tuberculosis.  In the next few years, research will emphasize development of
locally appropriate and effective treatment services.  Behavioral research
must focus in intervention studies, informed by findings from existing
descriptive research, but also incorporating social and Behavioral theory and
research methods, and epidemiological research methods.  Critical issues will
be identifying the best mix of services for specific regions and types of
patients, improving provider communication strategies and provider practices,
and ensuring that persons with high likelihood of exposure or HIV infection
seek screening and complete preventive therapy or treatment for tuberculosis."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Biochemical
Fossati, G.; Lucietto, P.; Giuliani, P.; Coates, A.R.; Harding, S.; Colfen,
H.; Legname, G.; Chan, E.; Zaliani, A.; Mascagni, P.  "Mycobacterium
tuberculosis Chaperonin 10 Forms Stable Tetrameric and Heptameric Structures

Implications for Its Diverse Biological Activities."  Journal of Biological
Chemistry, November 3, 1995;270(44):26159-26167.

According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Journal of
Biological Chemistry, "The chaperonin activity of sequence related chaperonin
10 proteins requires their aggregation into heptameric structures.  We
describe size-exclusion chromatography and ultracentrifugation studies that
reveal that while Escherichia coli chaperonin 10 exists as a heptamer, the
Mycobacterium tuberculosis chaperonin 10 is tetrameric in dilute solutions and
in whole M.  tuberculosis lysate.  At high protein concentration and in the
presence of saturating amounts of divalent ions, the protein is heptameric.
Human chaperonin 10 is predominantly heptameric, although smaller oligomers
were detected.  These differences in structural assembly between species may
explain differences in biological activity such as antigenicity.  Using
C-terminal and N-terminal fragments, sequence 1-25 was identified as
indispensable for aggregation.  CD spectroscopy studies revealed that (i) a
minimum at 202-204 nm correlates with aggregation and characterizes not only
the spectrum of the mycobacterial protein, but also those of E.  coli and
human chaperonin 10 proteins; (ii) the interactions between subunits are of
the hydrophobic type; and (iii) the anti-parallel beta-pleated sheet is the
main secondary structure element of subunits in both tetrameric and heptameric
proteins."  The corresponding author for this study is:  P Mascagni, Univ
Nottingham, Dept Appl Biochem & Food Sci, Nottingham LE12 5RD, England.  For
subscription information for this journal contact the publisher:  Amer Soc
Biochemistry Molecular Biology Inc, 9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20814.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Biochemical
George, K.M.; Yuan, Y.; Sherman, D.R.; Barry, C.E.  "The Biosynthesis of
Cyclopropanated Mycolic Acids in Mycobacterium tuberculosis - Identification
and Functional Analysis of Cmas-2."  Journal of Biological Chemistry, November

10, 1995;270(45):27292-27298.

According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Journal of
Biological Chemistry, "The major mycolic acid produced by Mycobacterium
tuberculosis contains two cis-cyclopropanes in the meromycolate chain.  The
gene whose product cyclopropanates the proximal double bond was cloned by
homology to a putative cyclopropane synthase identified from the Mycobacterium
leprae genome sequencing project.  This gene, named cma2, was sequenced and
found to be 52% identical to cma1 (which cyclopropanates the distal double
bond) and 73% identical to the gene from M.  leprae.  Both cma genes were
found to be restricted in distribution to pathogenic species of mycobacteria.
Expression of cma2 in Mycobacterium smegmatis resulted in the cyclopropanation
of the proximal double bond in the alpha(1), series of mycolic acids.
Coexpression of both cyclopropane synthases resulted in cyclopropanation of
both centers, producing a molecule structurally similar to the M.
tuberculosis alpha-dicyclopropyl mycolates.  Differential scanning calorimetry
of purified cell walls and mycolic acids demonstrated that cyclopropanation of
the proximal position raised the observed transition temperature by
3(degree)C.  These results suggest that cyclopropanation contributes to the
structural integrity of the cell wall complex."  The corresponding author for
this study is:  CE Barry, Niaid, Rocky Mt Labs, Intracellular Parasites Lab,
Tb Res Unit, 903 S 4TH St, Hamilton, MT 59840 USA.  For subscription
information for this journal contact the publisher:  Amer Soc Biochemistry
Molecular Biology Inc, 9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20814.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Diagnostics
Anderson, C.; Inhaber, N.; Menzies, D.  "Comparison of Sputum Induction with
Fiber-Optic Bronchoscopy in the Diagnosis of Tuberculosis."  American Journal
of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, November 1995;152(5):1570-1574.


According to the authors' abstract of an article published in American Journal
of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, "Microbiologic confirmation of
pulmonary tuberculosis among patients whose sputum smear is negative is
increasingly important because of greater incidence among immunocompromised
hosts and emergence of drug-resistant strains.  We prospectively compared
sputum induction to fiber-optic bronchoscopy in the diagnosis of such
patients.  Consecutive patients referred for investigation of possible active
pulmonary tuberculosis underwent sputum induction with hypertonic saline
delivered by an ultrasonic nebulizer between 2 and 48 h before transnasal
fiber-optic bronchoscopy.  All specimens were examined for acid-fast bacilli
with fluorescent microscopy and cultured for mycobacteria.  Clinical
information was abstracted from patient records, and X-rays were reviewed by
two blinded readers.  Among 101 participants, sputum induction was
well-tolerated without complications and provided adequate samples in 93.
Sensitivity of direct acid-fast bacilli smear of specimens from both
techniques was low.  Sensitivity and negative predictive value of culture from
bronchoscopy specimens was 73% and 91% compared with 87% and 96%,
respectively, for sputum induction when a specimen was obtained.  Direct costs
for bronchoscopy totaled Canadian $187.60 compared with Canadian $22.22 for
sputum induction.  Sputum induction was well-tolerated, low-cost, and provided
the same, if not better, diagnostic yield compared with bronchoscopy in the
diagnosis of smear-negative pulmonary tuberculosis."  The corresponding author
for this study is:  D Menzies, Mcgill Univ, Montreal Chest Inst, Dept Med,
3650 St Urbain St, Montreal, Pq H2X 2P4, Canada.  For subscription information
for this journal contact the publisher:  Amer Lung Assoc, 1740 Broadway, New
York, NY 10019.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Diagnostics
Dunlap, N.E.; Harris, R.H.; Benjamin, W.H.; Harden, J.W.; Hafner, D.
"Laboratory Contamination of Mycobacterium tuberculosis Cultures."  American
Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, November

1995;152(5):1702-1704.

According to the authors' abstract of an article published in American Journal
of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, "The purpose of this study was to
investigate possible laboratory contamination of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
cultures which resulted in the misdiagnosis of tuberculosis.  We have
investigated three cases in which a patient's culture was positive for M.
tuberculosis but there was not a high clinical suspicion for disease.  In each
instance, another patient with clinically obvious pulmonary tuberculosis had
specimens cultured concurrently within the same clinical laboratory.  The
isolates from both the obvious cases of tuberculosis and the suspect cases
were obtained through the State of Alabama TB Laboratory, but these isolates
originated at a commercial laboratory, a community hospital laboratory, and at
a university hospital.  MTB isolates were fingerprinted by probing for the
insertion sequence IS6110.  With each of the three pairs of isolates (case and
suspicious case), identical IS6110 banding patterns were found suggesting
identical MTB strains.  Because the patients were geographically separated, it
is strongly suspected that laboratory contamination of M.  tuberculosis
cultures resulted in the three suspect cases being diagnosed with
tuberculosis.  These findings indicate that positive M.  tuberculosis cultures
resulting from laboratory contamination can occur."  The corresponding author
for this study is:  NE Dunlap, 246 Ohb Uab Hosp, Birmingham, AL 35233 USA.
For subscription information for this journal contact the publisher:  Amer
Lung Assoc, 1740 Broadway, New York, NY 10019.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Drug Resistance
Rouse, D.A.; Li, Z.M.; Bai, G.H.; Morris, S.L.  "Characterization of the katG
and inhA genes of Isoniazid-Resistant Clinical Isolates of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis."  Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, November

1995;39(11):2472-2477.

According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Antimicrobial
Agents and Chemotherapy, "Resistance to isoniazid in Mycobacterium
tuberculosis has been associated with mutations in genes encoding the
mycobacterial catalase-peroxidase (katG) and the InhA protein (inhA).  Among
the 26 isoniazid-resistant clinical isolates evaluated in this study,
mutations in putative inhA regulatory sequences were identified in 2
catalase-positive isolates, katG gene alterations were detected in 20 strains,
and 4 isolates had wild-type katG and inhA genes.  Mutations in the katG gene
were detected in all 11 catalase negative isolates:  one frameshift insertion,
two partial gene deletions, and nine different missense mutations were
identified.  An arginine-to-leucine substitution at position 463 was detected
in nine catalase-positive isolates.  However, site-directed mutagenesis
experiments demonstrated that the presence of a leucine at codon 463 did not
alter the activity of the M.  tuberculosis catalase-peroxidase and did not
affect the capacity of this enzyme to restore isoniazid susceptibility to
isoniazid-resistant, katG-defective Mycobacterium smegmatis pi-ii cells.
These studies further support the association between katG and inhA gene
mutations and isoniazid resistance in M.  tuberculosis, while also suggesting
that other undefined mechanisms of isoniazid resistance exist."  The
corresponding author for this study is:  SL Morris, US FDA, Ctr Biol Evaluat &
Res, Mycobacteria Lab, Hfm 431, 8800 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892 USA.
For subscription information for this journal contact the publisher:  Amer Soc
Microbiology, 1325 Massachusetts Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20005-4171.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Pediatrics (TB)
Alkassimi, F.A.; Alhajjaj, M.S.; Alorainey, I.O.; Bamgboye, E.A.  "Does the
Protective Effect of Neonatal BCG Correlate with Vaccine-Induced Tuberculin
Reaction?."  American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine,

November 1995;152(5):1575-1578.

According to the authors' abstract of an article published in American Journal
of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, "A case-control study was conducted
in Saudi Arabia, where the same strain of BCG has been used and surveys had
shown that up to 88% of vaccinated children remain tuberculin negative.
Active cases were obtained by surveying the seven tuberculosis centers in 1
yr.  Control subjects were obtained from a nationwide survey of normal
individuals.  Vaccination in both groups was ascertained by history and BCG
scar.  Relative risk of contracting active tuberculosis in the vaccinated
versus unvaccinated and protection was calculated.  protection was as follows:
age group 5 to 14 yr, 82% (55 to 93%); age group 15 to 24 yr, 67% (55 to 77%);
and age group 25 to 34 yr, 20% (-6 to 37%).  We document the uninterrupted
record of protection by BCG administered in the neonatal period and discuss
the significance of vaccination timing.  We concur with other studies that
protection lapsed after about 20 yr.  More importantly, this is the first
large study that documents a lack of tuberculin sensitivity despite
protection.  This challenges the view that sensitization is essential for
protection and supports the 'two-pathway' theory that BCG vaccination could
trigger either protective (Lister type) or antagonistic (tuberculin or Koch
type) reactions and that the most protective vaccines would have little
tuberculin-sensitizing effect because the two pathways are competitive."  The
corresponding author for this study is:  FA Alkassimi, King Saud Univ, Coll
Med, Dept Med 38, POB 2925, Riyadh 11461, Saudi Arabia.  For subscription
information for this journal contact the publisher:  Amer Lung Assoc, 1740
Broadway, New York, NY 10019.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Pharmacoeconomics
Castelo, A.; Mathiasi, P.A.; Iunes, R.; Kritski, A.L.; Dalcolmo, M.; Demelo,
F.F.; Drummond, M.  "Cost Effectiveness of Antituberculosis Interventions."
Pharmacoeconomics, November 1995;8(5):385-399.


According to the authors' abstract of an article published in
Pharmacoeconomics, "The treatment of tuberculosis (TB) is ranked as the most
cost effective of all therapeutic programmes in terms of cost per year of life
saved.  Nevertheless, TB kills or debilitates more adults aged between 15 and
59 years than any other disease in the world; furthermore, about 2 to 4% of
the burden of disease, 7% of all deaths and 26% of all preventable deaths are
directly attributable to TB.  About one-third of the world's population is
infected with the TB bacillus.  In the developing world, more women of
childbearing age die from TB than from causes directly associated with
pregnancy and childbirth.  The death of adults in their prime, who are
parents, community leaders and producers in most societies, causes a
particularly onerous burden besides being a serious public health problem.  In
the poorest countries, where the magnitude of the TB problem is greatest,
those TB control strategies that are economically feasible tend to be less
effective.  Therefore, in low and middle income countries, cost-effectiveness
considerations aimed at prioritizing resource allocation in the health sector
in general, and in TB control programmes in particular, are of paramount
importance.  Operationally, the main components of a TB control programme are:
(i) detection and treatment of TB; and (ii) prevention of TB through BCG
vaccination and chemoprophylaxis.  Priority should be given to ensuring that
TB patients complete their prescribed course of chemotherapy.  Adequate
treatment is the most effective way of preventing the spread of TB and the
emergence of drug resistance.  This article reviews evidence of the
effectiveness and cost effectiveness of different approaches to TB can,
particularly those that are applicable to low income countries, in both
HIV-infected and noninfected patients.  Financial implications and ways to
implement directly observed therapy for TB in large urban areas are discussed,
and the need to address some relevant operational issues is highlighted.  The
current role of chemoprophylaxis and BCG vaccination is also reviewed."  The
corresponding author for this study is:  A Castelo, Univ Fed Sao Paulo, Escola
Paulista Med, Rua Botocatu 740, BR-04023062 Sao Paulo, Brazil.  For
subscription information for this journal contact the publisher:  Adis
International Ltd, 41 Centorian Dr, Private Bag 65901,, Mairangi Bay, Auckland
10, New Zealand.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Screening
Taneja, R.; Merritt, S.; Vanek, S.; Passannante, M.; Livingston, D.H.
"Tuberculin Screening of Trauma Admissions at a University Hospital:  A
Preventive Strategy."  Archives of Surgery, November 1995;130(11):1223-1227.


According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Archives of
Surgery, "OBJECTIVE:  To determine the prevalence of tuberculosis (TB)
infection in our trauma service population, namely, those patients who had
positive Mantoux (purified protein derivative [PPD] [tuberculin]) tests.
DESIGN:  Prospective study.  SETTING:  Trauma service at a university hospital
in Newark, NJ.  PATIENTS AND METHODS:  During a 9-month period, 110 admitted
trauma patients underwent screening for TB.  Of these patients, 20 had
undergone recent PPD tests in the last 6 months, of which nine were positive.
The remaining 90 patients underwent PPD and delayed-type hypersensitivity skin
tests (anergy panel); five patients were unavailable for follow-up.  The
patients also answered questions regarding human immunodeficiency virus
status, risk factors for TB infection, and clinical symptoms.  RESULTS:  The
mean age of the study group was 34 years (age range, 13 to 69 years).
Eighty-four percent of these patients were males who belonged to the high-risk
socioeconomic, racial, and ethnic groups (poor, nonwhite).  The tests for 15
patients (17%) were newly discovered to be positive for PPD.  Eleven percent
of the patients with negative PPD tests were anergic, thus raising the
percentage of patients with positive PPD tests to 20%.  The human
immunodeficiency virus status was known in only 41% of the total patients.
All patients with positive PPD tests had a chest X-ray film performed; of
these patients, positive findings for TB were determined for one patient.
Another patient had evidence of abdominal TB at laparotomy.  All patients with
positive PPD tests were given appointments in the pulmonary clinic for
follow-up, and only three of 15 patients kept their appointments.
CONCLUSIONS:  Patients who were admitted to the trauma service were
predominantly young males from high-risk groups with a high incidence of TB
infection.  Their admission to the trauma service was a unique opportunity for
screening and implementing existing preventive programs."  The corresponding
author for this study is:  DH Livingston, Univ Hosp Newark, E-245, 150 Bergen
St, Newark, NJ 07103 USA.  For subscription information for this journal
contact the publisher:  Amer Medical Assoc, 515 N State St, Chicago, IL 60610.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

TB/HIV Coinfection
Pozniak, A.L.; Macleod, G.A.; Ndlovu, D.; Ross, E.; Mahari, M.; Weinberg, J.
"Clinical and Chest Radiographic Features of Tuberculosis Associated with
Human Immunodeficiency Virus in Zimbabwe."  American Journal of Respiratory

and Critical Care Medicine, November 1995;152(5):1558-1561.

According to the authors' abstract of an article published in American Journal
of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, "In the developing world, the
diagnosis of tuberculosis is dependent on clinical and radiologic features as
culture facilities are not readily available.  It has been reported that
tuberculosis in HIV-positive persons can present with atypical clinical and
radiographic features.  The object of this study was to examine how often
atypical features occur in HIV-positive compared with HIV-negative persons and
how these findings correspond to sputum-smear findings.  Detailed demographic,
clinical, and chest radiographic features of tuberculosis were assessed in 202
HIV-positive adults and 220 HIV-negative patients admitted consecutively.
Using univariate analysis, several of these features were found to be
significantly associated with being HIV-positive, but after multiple
regression analysis only, age group (15 to 42 yr), a negative tuberculin
response, intrathoracic lymphadenopathy, and lack of cavitation but not
sputum-smear status remained significant."  The corresponding author for this
study is:  AL Pozniak, Kings Healthcare, Dept Genitourinary Med, 15-22
Caldecot Rd, London SE5 9RS, England.  For subscription information for this
journal contact the publisher:  Amer Lung Assoc, 1740 Broadway, New York, NY
10019.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Therapy (Hepatotoxicity)
Vandenbrande, P.; Vansteenbergen, W.; Vervoort, G.; Demedts, M.  "Aging and
Hepatotoxicity of Isoniazid and Rifampin in Pulmonary Tuberculosis."  American
Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, November

1995;152(5):1705-1708.

According to the authors' abstract of an article published in American Journal
of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, "We evaluated whether elderly
patients with pulmonary tuberculosis and without apparent preexisting liver
disease are at an increased risk to develop hepatotoxicity from an
isoniazid-rifampin regimen and require regular liver function tests in
comparison with younger patients.  We analyzed the data of 131 patients
treated in the period 1980-1985 of whom 64 (49%) were at least 60 yr of age.
Subsequent increases of transaminases (measured weekly for as long as 4 wk
after the start of treatment and later on when symptoms suggestive of
hepatotoxicity occurred) above baseline values were found more frequently in
the elderly (38 versus 18%, P<0.05) and were also more pronounced in them
(P<0.01).  The ratio of the highest transaminase value over the baseline value
was called the transaminase index (TI).  A TI of at least 5 was found in 22%
of elderly and 8% of younger patients (P=NS), but ratios as high as 10 were
mostly asymptomatic and always normalized progressively without treatment
adjustment.  Only symptomatic patients with a TI greater than or equal to 10
(five elderly and three younger) required temporary or definitive treatment
adjustment.  We conclude that repeated liver function test evaluations are
generally unnecessary, except for symptomatic elderly and younger patients
alike, in order to detect those with a TI greater than or equal to 10, thus
requiring drug adjustment."  The corresponding author for this study is:  M
Demedts, Univ Hosp Gasthuisberg, Herestr 19, B-3000 Louvain, Belgium.  For
subscription information for this journal contact the publisher:  Amer Lung
Assoc, 1740 Broadway, New York, NY 10019.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Therapy (Hepatotoxicity)
Ozick, L.A.; Jacob, L.; Comer, G.M.; Lee, T.P.; Benzvi, J.; Donelson, S.S.;
Felton, C.P.  "Hepatotoxicity from Isoniazid and Rifampin in Inner-City AIDS
Patients."  American Journal of Gastroenterology, November

1995;90(11):1978-1980.

According to the authors' abstract of an article published in American Journal
of Gastroenterology, "OBJECTIVE:  To determine the incidence of hepatotoxicity
due to isoniazid and rifampin in inner-city patients with active tuberculosis.
DESIGN:  A hospital-based review of 70 consecutive in-patients in a 770-bed,
inner-city hospital.  The patient population is primarily African-American and
Hispanic.  METHODS:  Fifty-eight men and 12 women were followed from 2-12 wk
(median 4 wk).  Patients had to be treated for at least 2 wk to be eligible
for the study.  Patients were excluded if they had been on any
anti-tuberculous or any other hepatotoxic drug during the 2-month period
before their hospitalization.  Aminotransferases, alkaline phosphatase,
bilirubin, and albumin were obtained at least every 2 wk.  RESULTS:
Hepatocellular toxicity, defined as AST and/or ALT greater than 200 IU/L,
occurred in eight out of 70 (11.4%) patients.  The mean age of these patients
was 38.9 yr (22-58 yr).  Patients with AIDS were significantly more likely to
develop hepatotoxicity than those with any other risk factor (P<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS:  Baseline aminotransferases followed by monitoring may be
necessary in AIDS patients."  The corresponding author for this study is:  LA
Ozick, Columbia Univ, Coll Phys & Surg, Harlem Hosp Ctr, Dept Med, Div
Gastroenterol, 506 Lennox Ave, New York, NY 10037 USA.  For subscription
information for this journal contact the publisher:  Williams & Wilkins, 351
West Camden St, Baltimore, MD 21201-2436.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
TB WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

MEETINGS REPORT
*NEW LISTINGS  .  .  .  COMPILED BY KENNETH KIMSEY


January 25-27, 1996, San Francisco, CA, "Epidemiology and Prevention of
Infectious Diseases."  Information:  Office of Continuing Medical Education,
Room MCB-630, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143-0742, Phone
415-476-4251.

January 28 - February 2, 1996, Vail, CO, "Infectious Diseases in Clinical
Practice."  Information:  University of California, Postgraduate Programs,
Department of Medicine, 1383 9th Avenue, UCSF Box 0656, San Francisco, CA
94143-0656, Phone 415-476-5808.

* January 28 - February 1, 1996, Washington, DC, "3rd National Conference on
Human Retroviruses and Related Infections."  Information:  Infectious Disease
Society of America 703-299-0200.

February 11-16, 1996, Fremantle, Western Australia, "3rd Asia and Pacific
Region Social Sciences and Medicine Conference."  Information:  Dr.  Lynne
Hunt, Edith Cowan University, Goldsworthy Road, Claremont 6010, Western
Australia, Phone 61-9-442-1315, Fax 61-9-383-1786, E-mail:
l.halls@cowan.edu.au.  (Omit final period from e-mail address.)

February 12-16, 1996, Denver, CO, "Postgraduate Courses on Clinical Management
and Control of Tuberculosis."  Information:  Catheryne J.  Queen, National
Jewish Center for Immunology and Respiratory Medicine, 1400 Jackson St.,
Denver, CO 80206, Phone 303-398-1700, Fax 303-398-1806.

February 15-16, 1996, Indianapolis, IN, "TB Symposium:  Pathways to
Prevention."  Information:  American Lung Association of Indiana, 9410
Priority Way West Drive, Indianapolis, IN 46240, 317-573-3900, Fax
317-573-3909.

February 16-18, 1996, New York, NY, "Second Annual CME Course for the
Management of the HIV Infected Patient:  A Practical Approach for the Primary
Care Practitioner."  Information:  Center for Bio-Medical Communication, Inc.,
80 West Madison Avenue, Dumont, NJ 07628, Phone 201-385-8080, Fax
201-385-5650.

* February 26-27, 1996, Rockville, MD, "IBC's 3rd Annual Conference on
Vaccines:  New Advances in Technologies and Applications."  Information:  IBC
USA Conferences, Inc., 225 Turnpike Road, Southborough, MA 01772-1749, Phone
508-481-6400.

March 1-2, 1996, Chicago, IL, "Tuberculosis and Migration."  Information:
International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 68, Boulevard
Saint-Michel 75006 Paris, France, Phone 33-1-44.32.03.60, Fax
33-1-43.29.90.87.

* March 7-8, 1996, Washington, DC, "IBC's Biennial International Conference on
Mycobacterial Infection:  Pathogenesis, Prevention and Strategies for New Drug
and Vaccine Development."  Information:  IBC USA Conferences, Inc., 225
Turnpike Road, Southborough, MA 01772-1749, Phone 508-481-6400, Fax
508-481-7911.

March 19-22, 1996, San Francisco, CA, "8th National AIDS Update Conference."
Information:  NAUC 96 Conference Registrar, c/o KREBS Convention Management
Services, 555 DeHaro Street, Suite 200, San Francisco, CA 94107-2348, Phone
415-255-1297, Fax 415-255-2244.

March 26, 1996, Washington, DC, "Tuberculosis:  What's New in Diagnosis and
Therapy."  Information:  Howard University, College of Medicine, Office of
CME, 520 W Street NW, Washington, DC 20059, Phone 202-806-5620, Fax
202-806-7934.

April 14-18, 1996, Washington, DC, "Federation of American Societies for
Experimental Biology - Annual Meeting."  Information:  Experimental Biology
1996, 9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20814-3998, Phone 301-530-7010.

April 17-19, 1996, Vancouver, Canada, "The Fourth International Nature
Genetics Conference."  Information:  Diana Berger, Conference Services
Manager, Nature America, Inc., 345 Park Avenue South, New York, NY 10010-1707,
Phone 212-726-9281, Fax 212-696-9594.

April 21-23, 1996, Washington, DC, "The 6th Annual Scientific Meeting of the
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America."  Information:  Soceity for
Healthcare Epidemiology of America, 875 Kings Highway, Suite 200, Woodbury, NJ
08096-3172, Attention:  Annual Meeting Registration, Phone 609-845-1720, Fax
609-853-0411.

April 22-26, 1996, Denver, CO, "Postgraduate Courses on Clinical Management
and Control of Tuberculosis."  Information:  Catheryne J.  Queen, National
Jewish Center for Immunology and Respiratory Medicine, 1400 Jackson St.,
Denver, CO 80206, Phone 303-398-1700, Fax 303-398-1806.

* May 3-6, 1996, Washington, DC, "Biomedicine '96:  Medical Research from
Bench to Bedside."  Information:  Editor-in-Chief, National Office 6900 Grove
Road, Thorofare, NJ 08086-9447, Phone 609-848-1000, Fax 609-848-5274.

May 12-15, 1996, New Orleans, LA, "1996 Annual International Conference."
Information:  American Lung Association/American Thoracic Society, Phone
212-315-8700, Fax 212-265-5642.

May 19-23, 1996, New Orleans, LA, "95th American Society for Microbiology
General Meeting."  Information:  American Society for Microbiology, 1325
Massachusetts Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20005-4171, Phone 202-737-3600.

June 2-6, 1996, New Orleans, LA, "American Association of
Immunologists/American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology/American
Association of Investigative Pathology."  Information:  Mr.  Raymond Palmer,
Exec.  Dir., AAI, 9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20814-3994, Phone
301-530-7178, Fax 301-571-1816.

June 10-13, 1996, Hong Kong, "7th International Congress for Infectious
Diseases:  a Collaboration of the World Health Organization, the International
Society for Infectious Diseases and the Dept.  of Microbiology, Faculty of
Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong."  Information:  Norman R.
Stein, Exec.  Dir., ISID, 180 Longwood Ave., Boston, MA 02115, Phone
617-277-0551, Fax 617-731-1541.

August 27-30, 1996, Nagoya, Japan, "14th International Scientific Meeting of
the International Epidemiological Association:  Global Health in a Changing
Environment."  Information:  14th ISM Secretariat, Dept.  of Preventive
Medicine, Nagoya University School of Medicine, 65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku,
Nagoya 466, Japan, Phone 81-52-741-2111, ext.  2074, Fax 81-52-733-6729.

October 26-30, 1997, New Orleans, LA, "63rd Annual Scientific Assembly."
Information:  American College of Chest Physicians, Phone 708-498-1400, Fax
708-498-5460.

December 6-9, 1997, New Orleans, LA, "1997 Annual Meeting."  Information:
American Association for Respiratory Care, Phone 214-243-2272, Fax
214-484-2720.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-30</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B042-107</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh48.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020504 text/html 49322
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:03:02 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:41 GMT
Content-length: 49135
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh48.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
TOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet <BR>
July 1993<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>ATC PREVAILS ON CAUSATION ISSUE IN MISSISSIPPI TRIAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(362 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>HIGH COURT LETS PRISONER'S 8TH AMENDMENT ETS EXPOSURE SUIT PROCEED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(722 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>INDUSTRY SUES EPA IN NC FEDERAL COURT OVER ETS REPORT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(483 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>6TH CIR.: NO ERROR IN DISALLOWING ETS EVIDENCE IN MARITIME ASBESTOS SUIT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(764 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>HIGH COURT FINDS FOR B&W IN GENERICS WAR ANTITRUST DISPUTE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1404 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>WA SMALL CLAIMS CT. REJECTS EX-SMOKER'S CESSATION CLAIMS AGAINST PM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(168 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>HIGH COURT: JUDGES SHOULD DECIDE RELIABILITY OF SCIENTIFIC TESTIMONY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1337 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>SUPREME COURT UPHOLDS $10 MILLION WV PUNITIVE DAMAGE AWARD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1315 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>MARYLAND APPEALS CT. FINDS NO REVERSIBLE ERROR IN CANCER-FEAR EVIDENCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(607 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
TOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
July 1993

ATC PREVAILS ON CAUSATION ISSUE IN MISSISSIPPI TRIAL

    A jury empaneled in the Washington County, MS, Circuit Court on
June 17 returned a defense verdict for American Tobacco Co. in a
long-fought cigarette wrongful death action, determining 11-1 that the
plaintiffs' decedent's death resulted from a blood clot caused by urinary
tract surgery and not his lung cancer or emphysema (Wilks et al. v.
American Tobacco Co. et al., MS Cir. Ct., Washington Cty., No. 91-12,
355(B)(W)).

    After eight days of trial that featured primarily medical testimony,
the jury deliberated for two and a half hours before returning the
verdict.  Anderson Smith's lung cancer was first diagnosed four months
before his death in 1986; no autopsy was ever performed.  The panel also
cleared New Deal Tobacco Co., a regional distributor, of any liability.

    Jeanette Wilks, Smith's daughter, lodged her complaint in November
1987, seeking $17 million in damages from the defendants.  Smith began
smoking ATC's Pall Malls as a teenager when he entered the U.S. Army in
1943.  Smith's habit grew to three packs a day and would endure for 40
years; Smith became mentally incompetent during his tenure in the
Service, and he resided at a V.A. hospital for a number of years.  Wilks'
sister subsequently joined the action as a plaintiff.

    Presiding Judge Eugene M. Bogen would make various significant
rulings during the litigation's course.  In April 1991, he denied summary
judgment to the defense, finding the plaintiffs' risk/utility theory of
recovery to be viable.  This ruling ran contrary to an earlier
determination made in another Mississippi cigarette products suit by
Judge Bogen himself, and the state Supreme Court in 1992 refused to
review the inconsistency.

    Last May, Judge Bogen granted a plaintiffs' motion and held
cigarettes to be defective and unreasonably dangerous as a matter of law
and found their manufacturers to be absolutely liable on product claims.

    Don Barrett of Barrett Law Offices, Lexington, Mississippi, Victor
McTeer of McTeer & Byers, Greenville, Mississippi, and Fred Clark,
Greenwood, Mississippi, represent the plaintiffs.

    James E. Upshaw of Upshaw, Williams, Biggers, Page & Kruger,
Greenwood, Johnny Walls, Greenville, and Bruce Sheffler of Chadbourne &
Parke, New York, represent the American Tobacco Co.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
TOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
July 1993

HIGH COURT LETS PRISONER'S 8TH AMENDMENT ETS EXPOSURE SUIT PROCEED

    The U.S. Supreme Court affirmed in a 7-2 ruling on June 18 a March
1992 Ninth Circuit opinion and permitted a Nevada inmate to pursue an
Eighth Amendment claim against state prison officials for involuntary
exposure to environmental tobacco smoke (Helling et al. v. McKinney, U.S.
Sup. Ct., No. 91-1958).

    (The opinion is available from Andrews Document Access Service.  Call
1-800-345-1101 or 215-399-6600 from Pennsylvania.)

    William McKinney, who is serving a life sentence in Nevada, filed a
{1983 action in 1987 with the U.S. District Court for the District of
Nevada against officials of the Carson City prison.  McKinney, a
nonsmoker, had a cellmate with a five-pack-a-day habit; his requests to
be housed with a nonsmoking cellmate had been repeatedly denied.

    McKinney had asserted that the unabated ETS exposure had constituted
cruel and unusual punishment; a federal magistrate entered a directed
verdict for the defense in 1989, finding the plaintiff to have no
constitutional right not to be exposed to ETS.  In February 1991, the
Ninth Circuit reversed, finding that McKinney should have been permitted
to enter evidence regarding the level of his ETS exposure and whether
such exposure presented a health risk.

    The prison officials petitioned the Supreme Court in August 1991,
seeking a remand for reconsideration in light of Wilson v. Seiter, a 1991
opinion that established the "deliberate indifference" standard for
prisoners making Eighth Amendment claims.  The high court granted the
petition the following October.

    In March 1992, the Ninth Circuit reinstated its earlier opinion,
holding that Wilson only added an additional element that McKinney would
have to demonstrate to press his action.  The high court granted the
defendants' certiorari petition the following June; oral argument was
heard last Jan. 13.

    Justice Byron R. White delivered the opinion of the court, in which
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justices Harry A. Blackmun, John
Paul Stevens, Sandra Day O'Connor, Anthony M. Kennedy, And David H.
Souter joined.  "Petitioners...submit that unless McKinney can prove that
he is currently suffering serious medical problems caused by exposure to
ETS, there can be no violation of the Eighth Amendment.  That Amendment,
it is urged, does not protect against prison conditions that merely
threaten to cause health problems in the future, no matter how grave and
imminent the threat....

    "We have great difficulty agreeing that prison authorities may not be
deliberately indifferent to an inmate's current health problems but may
ignore a condition of confinement that is sure or very likely to cause
serious illness and needless suffering the next week or month or year,"
the court continued.  "We thus reject petitioners' central thesis that
only deliberate indifference to current serious health problems of
inmates is actionable under the Eighth Amendment."

    The court rejected the stance taken by the United States in its
amicus brief that the harm that ETS exposure causes to any one individual
is speculative and that exposure to ETS is not contrary to current
standards of decency.  As well as having to demonstrate that his exposure
has unreasonably endangered his future health, the court stated, McKinney
"must also establish that it is contrary to current standards of decency
for anyone to be so exposed against his will and that prison officials
are deliberately indifferent to his plight."

    The court noted that since the institution of his lawsuit, McKinney
has been transferred to another prison and is no longer housed with a
heavy smoker; and that the Nevada prison system adopted a formal smoking
policy in January 1992.  The court stated that these realities would
weigh against McKinney's ability to demonstrate the elements of his claim.

    Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissent in which Justice Antonin
Scalia joined.  "Last term," stated the dissent, "the Court held that the
Eighth Amendment prohibits the use of force that causes a prisoner only
minor injuries....  Today the Court expands the Eighth Amendment in yet
another direction, holding that it applies to a prisoner's mere risk of
injury.  Because I find this holding no more acceptable...I again
dissent."

    Nevada Attorney General Frankie Sue Del Papa argued on behalf of the
petitioners.

    Cornish F. Hitchcock of Public Citizen Litigation Group, Washington,
DC, argued on behalf of the respondent.

    Deputy U.S. Solicitor General John G. Roberts Jr. argued on behalf of
the amicus curiae.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
TOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
July 1993

INDUSTRY SUES EPA IN NC FEDERAL COURT OVER ETS REPORT

    Philip Morris Inc., R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. and four other industry
entities filed a complaint June 22 in the U.S. District Court for the
Middle District of North Carolina against the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, seeking to have the agency withdraw its January 1993
decision and risk assessment classifying environmental tobacco smoke as a
Class A carcinogen (Flue-Cured Tobacco Cooperative Stabilization Corp. et
al. v. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency et al., MD NC, No. 6:93CV370).

    (The complaint is available from Andrews Document Access Service.
Call 1-800-345-1101 or 215-399-6600 from Pennsylvania.)

    Joining the two manufacturers in the suit are Flue-Cured Tobacco
Cooperative Stabilization Corp., a North Carolina cooperative marketing
association that purchases flue-cured tobacco from growers and sells to
manufacturers; the Kentucky-based Council for Burley Tobacco Inc., which
represents growers and sellers of burley tobacco; Universal Leaf Tobacco
Co. Inc., a Virginia processor of leaf tobacco who purchases from growers
and sells to manufacturers; and Gallins Vending Co., a North Carolina
vendor/distributor.  The complainants asserted that they "have been and
will continue to be directly affected and injured by [the] unauthorized
and unlawful decision to classify ETS as a human carcinogen."

    The action, which also named EPA Administrator Carol Browner,
asserted that the Agency's actions were violative of the Radon Gas and
Indoor Air Quality Research Act of 1986, the Administrative Procedure Act
and the plaintiffs' due process rights under the Fifth Amendment.  The
plaintiffs seek a withdrawal of the decision and a declaration that the
classification and risk assessment are arbitrary, capricious, violative
of required procedures and unconstitutional.

    The complaint asserted that the EPA's actions overstepped its mandate
under the Radon Act and violated requirements to consult with specific
advisory committees.  The decision, the complaint asserted, "did have a
substantial impact throughout the country, including but not limited to
compelling increased restrictions on smoking by private entities and all
entities of government."

    The complaint deemed the EPA's conclusions "wrong as a matter of law
and science....  EPA was able to reach its conclusion only by
manipulating and 'cherry-picking' data, ignoring critical statistical
studies and chemical analyses...and generally altering EPA's models,
assumptions and methodologies when use of the Agency's usual models,
assumptions and methodologies would not have supported its conclusions."

    Submitting the complaint were Dewey W. Wells, Keith W. Vaughan and
Jeffrey L. Furr of Womble Carlyle Sandridge & Rice, Winston-Salem, North
Carolina, on behalf of Philip Morris Inc., R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. and
Universal Leaf Tobacco Co. Inc.; James K. Dorsett Jr. and James D. Blount
of Smith, Anderson, Blount, Dorsett, Mitchell & Jernigan, Raleigh, North
Carolina, on behalf of Flue-Cured Tobacco Cooperative Stabilization
Corp., and The Council for Burley Tobacco Inc.; and Richard B. Howington
of Allman Spry Humphreys Leggett & Howington, P.A., Winston-Salem, NC, on
behalf of Gallins Vending Co.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
TOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
July 1993

6TH CIR.: NO ERROR IN DISALLOWING ETS EVIDENCE IN MARITIME ASBESTOS SUIT

    The federal trial court which heard the asbestos-exposure claims of
three merchant seamen did not err by preventing the seamen from arguing
that the shipowner-defendants were liable for exposing them to passive
cigarette smoke, as well as asbestos, or by permitting alternate jurors
to participate in jury deliberations, the Sixth Circuit U.S. Court of
Appeals ruled June 3  (Smith v. Gulf Oil Co., 6th Cir., No. 91-3034;
Carbone v. American President Lines et al., No. 91-3036/3037; and Reeves
v. American Export Isbrandsten, No. 91-3040.)

    (The opinion is available from Andrews Document Access Service.  Call
1-800-345-1101 or 215-399-6600 from Pennsylvania.)

    The claims of the three merchant seamen -- Harry Smith, Joseph
Carbone and Ashton H. Reeves -- were tried with one other case in federal
court in Cleveland in 1990.  In the first phase of a bifurcated trial,
the trial court allowed the shipowner defendants to present evidence of
the seamen's smoking.  The seamen attempted to counter this defense with
evidence that the shipowners had exposed them to dense, secondhand
tobacco smoke aboard ships.  The court, however, refused a request by the
seamen that it rule that a ship laden with tobacco smoke renders a ship
unseaworthy, and it refused another request by the seamen that to
instruct the jury that dense cigarette smoke may support a finding that
the ship was unseaworthy.

    The case was given to a panel of 10 jurors, including four alternates
who were allowed to participate in the deliberations but not to vote.

    The jury found that neither Smith, Carbone nor Reeves suffers from an
asbestos-related injury.  It awarded $166,000 to the fourth claimant,
Moline.  (The judgment in the Moline case was appealed, and the Sixth
Circuit addressed that appeal in a separate opinion earlier this year in
Miller v. American President Lines.)

    In their appeal, Smith, Carbone and Reeves argued that the trial
court had erred in precluding their claim that the presence of tobacco
smoke in the ships rendered the ships unseaworthy and that the shipowners
were negligent in permitting smoking in unventilated areas of the ships.
They also alleged error in the court's decision to allow alternate jurors
to participate in jury deliberations.

    The Sixth Circuit affirmed.  It said that it need not address "the
novel and difficult question whether a shipowner, by virtue of
maintaining a ship dense with cigarette smoke generated by its occupants,
may have breached its Jone Act duty of care or its maritime law duty to
maintain a seaworthy ship" because the seamen never pleaded that theory
of liability.  Instead, the court said, they presented the theory "in an
altogether off-hand manner" during the trial.  "We conclude that the
district court was well within its discretion to eliminate the issue as
unworthy of trial," the panel said.

    The court added that counsel for the seamen suggested that he was
raising the cigarette smoke liability theory only as a "tactical effort"
to persuade defense counsel to drop their smoking defense.  "Here,
counsel [for the seamen] never seriously suggested that he was prepared
to advance this novel arugment with proof," the panel said.

    The court added that it was not deciding whether a properly presented
claim of cigarette-smoke liability would stand as a matter of law.

    With regard to the jury issue, the appeals court said that the record
showed that the parties had stipulated at trial to the unusual
arrangement, albeit after the trial court judge had threatened to
eliminate consolidated trials for other seamen if the plaintiffs refused
to agree to the arrangement.  It noted that the seamen were represented
by able and experienced counsel and that counsel agreed to the jury
arrangement during an off-record conference without the judge's
presence.

    "Based upon this record, we cannot say that the trial judge's strong
words were enough to overcome plaintiffs' counsel's ability to act in the
perceived best interest of his clients," the court said.

    It held that the seamen had waived their right, under FRCP 47(b), to
have the alternate jurors discharged after the jury retires to
deliberate.

    The seamen are represented by the Jacques Admiralty Law Firm in
Detroit, by Merrit Green with Green, Ashley & Wegian in Toledo, Ohio and
by Dean Robb with Robb, Messing & Palmer in Traverse City, MI.

    Defense attorneys involved in the case included Thomas A. Heffernan
and Richard C. Binzley with Thompson, Hine & Flory in Cleveland, David G.
Davies with Ray, Robinson, Hannian & Carle in Cleveland, and William
Tousley Smith with Calfee, Halter & Griswold, also in Cleveland.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
TOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
July 1993

HIGH COURT FINDS FOR B&W IN GENERICS WAR ANTITRUST DISPUTE

    The U.S. Supreme Court on June 21 affirmed the Fourth Circuit's May
1992 determination that Brooke Group Ltd. (nee Liggett Group Inc.) could
not sustain its claim under the Robinson-Patman Act against Brown &
Williamson Tobacco Corp. for predatory pricing in connection with the
generic cigarette war of the mid-1980s.

    Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, writing for a 6-3 majority, accepted the
theoretical viability of Liggett's contention that an oligopolist could
engage in predatory pricing tactics, but found that the plaintiff failed
to prove the level of industry orchestration that such a claim would
require (Brooke Group Ltd. v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp., U.S. Sup.
Ct., No. 92-466).

    (The opinion is available from Andrews Document Access Service.  Call
1-800-345-1101 or 215-399-6600 from Pennsylvania.)

    Liggett, whose share of the domestic cigarette market stood at
roughly 2% in 1980, became in that year the first American manufacturer
to enter the black-and-white field.  Within three years, generics came to
account for 65% of Liggett's sales volume; by 1984, Liggett's overall
market share stood at 4%, and the company had 97% of the overall generic
market.

    B&W entered the market in 1984 with black-and-white packaged product,
offering distributors both volume rebates and higher bonuses for stocking
their generics exclusively.  Liggett responded by increasing its rebates;
it would do so four more times to try to beat B&W's terms.  Liggett
shortly thereafter lodged a Lanham Act/Robinson-Patman Act complaint
against B&W in the U.S. District Court for the Middle District of North
Carolina.

    Following a 115-day trial, the jury found for Liggett in March 1990.
The plaintiff was awarded the costs of engaging in the rebate war, $49.6
million, statutorily trebled to $148.8 million.  Six months later, the
presiding judge granted B&W's motion for JNOV, holding that the plaintiff
had failed to demonstrate that the defendant's practices would injure
competition in the overall U.S. market or that such injury would result
from price discrimination.

    The Fourth Circuit predicated its May 1992 affirmance on the
rationale that, as a member of an oligopoly, B&W could not reasonably
expect to recoup the losses that pursuit of a scheme of predatory pricing
would by necessity involve.

    Justice Kennedy's affirmance was joined by Chief Justice William H.
Rehnquist, Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, Justice Antonin Scalia, Justice
David H. Souter and Justice Clarence Thomas.  "[W]hether the claim
alleges predatory pricing under { 2 of the Sherman Act or primary-line
price discrimination under the Robinson-Patman Act, two prerequisites to
recovery remain the same," wrote the Court.  "First, a plaintiff seeking
to establish competitive injury resulting from a rival's low prices must
prove that the prices complained of are below an appropriate measure of
its rival's costs....

    "The second prerequisite," the Court continued, "is a demonstration
that the competitor had a reasonable prospect, or, under { 2 of the
Sherman Act, a dangerous probability, of recouping its investment in
below-costs prices."  The Court stated that in the oligopoly context, the
plaintiff would have to demonstrate that the below-cost prices would
likely cause the plaintiff to leave the market or raise its prices to
supracompetitive levels, and show that the below-costs prices would
result in injury to competition, i.e. that the predator would have to
raise its prices above competitive levels to cover the costs of the
predation.

    "These prerequisites to recovery are not easy to establish," stated
Justice Kennedy, "but they are not artificial obstacles to recovery;
rather, they are essential components of real market injury.... It would
be ironic indeed if the standards for predatory pricing liability were so
low that antitrust suits themselves became a tool for keeping prices
high."

    The Court found the likelihood of predatory pricing by a oligopolist
to be lowest where "there is no express coordination.  Firms that seek to
recoup predatory losses through the conscious parallelism of oligopoly
must rely on uncertain and ambiguous signals to achieve concerted
action.... This anticompetitive minuet is most difficult to compose and
perform, even for a disciplined oligopoly."

    The Court rejected the Fourth Circuit's dismissal of the viability of
predatory pricing occuring within an oligopoly.  "A predatory pricing
scheme designed to preserve or create a stable oligopoly, if successful,
can injure consumers in the same way, and to the same extent, as one
designed to bring about a monopoly.... [W]hen the realities of the market
and the record facts indicate that it has occurred and was likely to have
succeeded, theory will not stand in the way of liability."

    Ultimately, however, the High Court determined that Liggett did not
have a case to take to the jury.  "The record in this case demonstrates
that the anticompetitive scheme Liggett alleged, when judged against the
realities of the market, does not provide an adequate basis for a finding
of liability."  Justice Kennedy found the evidence sufficient to show
that B&W envisioned or anticipated the anticompetitive results of its
actions; that it priced its generics below cost for a year-and-a-half;
and that Liggett sustained losses as a result of that pricing.

    "[H]owever," the Court continued, "[Liggett's] proof is flawed in a
critical respect: The evidence is inadequate to show that in pursuing
this scheme, Brown & Williamson had a reasonable prospect of recovering
its losses from below-costs pricing through slowing the growth of
generics.... [N]o evidence suggests that [B&W] was likely to obtain the
power to raise the prices for generic cigarettes above a competitive
level."

    The Court determined that Liggett's market evidence did not support
its theory of the case.  "[T]he price and output data do not support a
reasonable inference that [B&W] and the other cigarette companies
elevated prices above a competitive level for generic cigarettes.... the
record evidence does not permit a reasonable inference that output would
have been greater without [B&W]'s entry into the generic segment."

    The Court was unmoved by the plaintiff's citation to price behavior
of generic and branded cigarettes through the remainder of the 1980s.
"All of Liggett's data is based upon the list prices of various
categories of cigarettes.  Yet the jury had before it undisputed evidence
that during the period in question, list prices were not the actual
prices paid by consumers...  Liggett's gap data ignores the effect of
'subgeneric' cigarettes... Liggett itself, while supposedly under the
sway of oligopoly power, pioneered this development in 1988".

    The Court held that "rising prices do not themselves permit an
inference of a collusive market dynamic."  Justice Kennedy found
significant that Liggett's own officers had "consistently denied that
they or other firms [priced] their cigarettes through tacit collusion".

    The High Court found that the evidence did not even show a likelihood
of supracompetitive pricing, noting that the industry in 1984 faced a
decline in demand and substantial excess capacity.  "[T]he situation
facing the cigarette companies in the 1980's would have made such tacit
coordination unmanageable," Justice Kennedy determined.

    "We understand that the chain of reasoning by which we have concluded
that Brown & Williamson is entitled to judgment as a matter of law is
demanding," the Court concluded.  "But a reasonable jury is presumed to
know and understand the law, the facts of the case, and the realities of
the market."

    Justice John Paul Stevens authored a dissent in which Justice Byron
R. White and Justice Harry A. Blackmun joined.  "The fact that a price
war may not have accomplished its purpose as quickly or as completely as
originally intended," wrote Justice Stevens, "does not immunize conduct
that was illegal when it occurred...

    "That B&W executives were willing to accept [$15 million in losses]
during the entire 18 months is powerful evidence of their belief that
prices ultimately could be 'managed up' to a level that would allow B&W
to recoup its investment," the dissent stated.  "[The majority relies] on
the supposition that an 'anticompetitive minuet is most difficult to
compose and perform, even for a disciplined oligopoly'... I would
suppose, however, that the professional performers who had danced the
minuet for 40 to 50 years would be better able to predict whether their
favorite partners would follow them in the future than would an outsider,
who might not know the difference between Haydn and Mozart."

    Philip Areeda, Cambridge, Massachusetts, argued on behalf of the
petitioner.

    Robert H. Bork, Washington, D.C., argued on behalf of the respondent.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
TOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
July 1993

WA SMALL CLAIMS CT. REJECTS EX-SMOKER'S CESSATION CLAIMS AGAINST PM

    Judge Linda Jacke of the Mercer Island County, WA, District Court on
June 22 dismissed as time-barred the small claims suit lodged against
Philip Morris Inc. by a Kirkland design engineer who sought to recoup
$1154 in expenditures incurred as a result of his quitting smoking
(Deskiewicz v. Philip Morris Inc., Mercer Island Cty., WA, Dist. Ct.,
No. 16917).

    Judge Jacke determined that Alfred Deskiewicz Jr.'s claims against PM
began to run in the 1970s, when he first unsuccessfully tried to kick a
Marlboro habit that lasted 34 years.  Deskiewicz, 51, had argued that he
first realized that he was addicted to smoking in 1989; his expenses
represented the costs of doctor's visits, nicotine patches and a health
club membership in order to lose the weight gained after he quit.

    Judge Jacke also determined that the plaintiff failed to prove that
he could not stop smoking without outside aid.  Deskiewicz had made two
unsuccesful attempts at quitting before breaking his habit.

    Mr. Deskiewicz was self-represented.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
TOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
July 1993

HIGH COURT: JUDGES SHOULD DECIDE RELIABILITY OF SCIENTIFIC TESTIMONY

    The U.S. Supreme Court on June 28 held that federal judges should be
active gatekeepers charged with insuring that "any and all scientific
testimony or evidence admitted is not only relevant, but reliable"
(Daubert et al. v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., U.S. Sup. Ct.,
No. 92-102).

    (The opinion is available from Andrews Document Access Service.  Call
1-800-345-1101 or 215-399-6600 from Pennsylvania.)

    The Supreme Court case involved Jason Daubert and Eric Schuller, who
were born with severe and permanent limb-reduction birth defects.  In
1984, their parents, individually and as guardians ad litem
(collectively, Daubert), filed suit in California state court against
Merrell Dow, alleging that the birth defects had been caused by the
company's anti-nausea drug Bendectin, which each child's mother had taken
during the limb-development phase of pregnancy.  Eight experts testified
in support of the allegation that Bendectin had caused both sets of limb
defects.  Merrell Dow elected to remove the cases to the U.S. District
Court for the Southern District of California, based on diversity of
citizenship.

    After preliminary discovery, Merrell Dow moved for summary judgment
on the issue of causation, claiming there exists no scientific proof that
Bendectin causes birth defects and, therefore, it could not have caused
the birth defects at issue in this case.  The district court granted
summary judgment on the basis that none of Daubert's expert testimony was
admissible "because it lacks the sufficient foundation necessary under
[Federal Rule of Evidence] 703."  The evidence was excluded on the basis
that either:  (1) the testimony excluded epidemiological data, or (2) the
testimony included epidemiological data but the expert did not cite a
specific, published, peer-reviewed study that, considered in isolation,
proves causation with "statistical significance," i.e., 95% certainty.

    Daubert appealed, and the Ninth Circuit affirmed, advancing its own
ground for excluding Daubert's expert testimony.  Citing Frye v. Unites
States (293 F. 1013, 1014 [DC Cir. 1923]), the court held that expert
opinion based on a scientific technique is admissible only if it is
generally accepted as a reliable technique among the scientific community.

    Daubert filed a petition for writ of certiorari with the U.S. Supreme
Court, which granted certiorari on Oct. 13.  During a March 30 hearing,
Michael H. Gottesman, professor of law at the Georgetown University
School of Law, argued the case for Daubert.  He urged the court to permit
expert testimony based on animal studies, cell studies, chemical
composition studies and the re-analysis of epidemiological studies.  He
claimed the Ninth Circuit incorrectly adopted a requirement that
scientific evidence appear in peer-reviewed journals.  He said the
correct law, the Federal Rules of Evidence, would allow the evidence to
be admitted.

    Former Solicitor General Charles Fried, currently a law professor at
the Harvard University College of Law, argued the case for Merrell Dow.
He called 'scientific knowledge,' as used in Rule 702, "that body of
propositions which have been produced by the methods and procedures of
science."  He contended Daubert's propositions "have not been produced by
the methods and procedures of science."

    In an opinion written by Justice Harry A. Blackmun, the Supreme Court
said that the trial judge must determine at the outset whether an expert
is proposing to testify to (1) scientific knowledge that (2) will assist
the trier of fact to understand or determine a fact is issue.  It said,
"This entails a preliminary assessment of whether the reasoning or
methodology underlying the testimony is scientifically valid and of
whether that reasoning or methodology properly can be applied to the
facts in issue.  We are confident that federal judges possess the
capacity to undertake this review.  Many factors will bear on the
inquiry, and we do not presume to set out a definitive checklist or test."

    But the court did find some general observations to be appropriate.
"Ordinarily, a key question to be answered in determining whether a
theory or technique is scientific knowledge that will assist the trier of
fact will be whether it can be (and has been) tested....  Another
pertinent consideration is whether the theory or technique has been
subjected to peer review and publication.  Publication (which is but one
element of peer review) is not a sine qua non of admissibility; it does
not necessarily correlate with reliability,...and in some instances
well-grounded but innovative theories will not have been published....
Some propositions, moreover, are too particular, too new, or of too
limited interest to be published.  But submission to the scrutiny of the
scientific community is a component of 'good science,' in part because it
increases the likelihood that substantive flaws in methodology will be
detected....  The fact of publication (or lack thereof) in a
peer-reviewed journal thus will be a relevant, though not dispositive,
consideration in assessing the scientific validity of a particular
technique or methodology on which an opinion is premised....
Additionally, in the case of a particular scientific technique, the court
ordinarily should consider the known or potential rate of error,...and
the existence and maintenance of standards controlling the technique's
operation," the court said.

    "Finally," the panel continued, "'general acceptance' can yet have a
bearing on the inquiry....  Widespread acceptance can be an important
factor in ruling particular evidence admissible, and 'a known technique
that has been able to attract only minimal support within the
community'...may properly be viewed with skepticism.  The inquiry
envisioned by Rule 702 is, we emphasize, a flexible one....  Throughout,
a judge assessing a proffer of expert scientific testimony under Rule 702
should always be mindful of other applicable rules.  Rule 703 provides
that expert opinions based on otherwise inadmissible hearsay are to be
admitted only if the facts or data are 'of a type reasonably relied upon
by experts in the particular field in forming opinions or inferences upon
the subject.'  Rule 706 allows the court at its discretion to procure the
assistance of an expert of its own choosing.  Finally, Rule 403 permits
the exclusion of relevant evidence 'if its probative value is
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of
the issues, or misleading the jury....'"

    The court addressed Merrell Dow's concerns that abandonment of
"general acceptance" as the exclusive requirement for admission will
result in a "free-for-all" in which befuddled juries are confounded by
absurd and irrational pseudoscientific assertions.  It said, in this
regard, Merrell Dow "seems to us to be overly pessimistic about the
capabilities of the jury, and of the adversary system generally.
Vigorous cross-examination, presentation of contrary evidence, and
careful instruction on the burden of proof are the traditional and
appropriate means of attacking shaky but admissible evidence....
Additionally, in the event the trial court concludes that the scintilla
of evidence presented supporting a position is insufficient to allow a
reasonable juror to conclude that the position more likely than not is
true, the court remains free to direct a judgment....  These conventional
devices, rather than wholesale exclusion under an uncompromising 'general
acceptance' test, are the appropriate safeguards where the basis of
scientific testimony meets the standards of Rule 702."

    The court added, "We recognize that in practice, a gatekeeping role
for the judge, no matter how flexible, inevitably on occasion will
prevent the jury from learning of authentic insights and innovations.
That, nevertheless, is the balance that is struck by Rules of Evidence
designed not for the exhaustive search for cosmic understanding but for
the particularized resolution of legal disputes."

    Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist wrote a partial dissent.  "I do
not doubt that Rule 702 confides to the judge some gatekeeping
responsibility in deciding questions of the admissibility of proffered
expert testimony.  But I do not think it imposes on them either the
obligation or the authority to become amateur scientists in order to
perform that role.  I think the Court would be far better advised in this
case to decide only the questions presented, and to leave the further
development of this important area of the law to future cases," he said.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
TOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
July 1993

SUPREME COURT UPHOLDS $10 MILLION WV PUNITIVE DAMAGE AWARD

    The U.S. Supreme Court on June 25 affirmed the determination of West
Virginia's highest court that a $10 million punitive damage award granted
by a jury on a $19,000 slander of title claim was not violative of the
14th Amendment's Due Process Clause (TXO Production Corp. v. Alliance
Resources Group et al., U.S. Sup. Ct., No. 92-479).

    (The opinion is available from Andrews Document Access Service.  Call
1-800-345-1101 or 215-399-6600 from Pennsylvania.)

    The litigation arose from the petitioner TXO Production Corp.'s 1984
decision to obtain the rights to develop oil and gas resources on a
1000-acre West Virginia tract.  TXO approached the rightsholder Alliance
Resources Group with an offer of $20 per acre and a 22% royalty on all
oil and gas revenues in exchange for Alliance's interests; Alliance
accepted the offer in 1985, agreeing to return all consideration paid if
its title was found invalid.

    TXO's lawyers subsequently uncovered a 1958 deed executed by
Alliance's predecessor in interest that conveyed interests in mining
rights.  TXO's lawyers spoke to the recipient of the deed, and his
subsequent transferees, and all understood that the deed solely applied
to mine coal.  The 1958 deed stated on its face that the conveyor
retained all oil and gas rights.

    Despite this knowledge, TXO thereafter apprised Alliance that a
"distinct possibility or probability" existed that its title was flawed.
TXO obtained a quitclaim deed to the mineral rights from the last
deedholder, and unsuccessfully tried to persuade the recipient of the
1958 deed to sign a false affidavit indicating that the deed might
contemplate oil and gas rights.

    TXO thereafter sought to renegotiate the agreement, and filed the
instant suit after negotiations failed.  The McDowell County Circuit
Court rejected TXO's claims; moreover, a jury found for Alliance on its
counterclaim for slander of title.  Among the evidence before the jury
was TXO's knowledge of the validity of Alliance's title; the bad faith in
which TXO acted by challenging the title; the large size of TXO and its
parent company; that the anticipated revenues (and royalties) were
substantial; and TXO's comparable behavior in other business dealings.
The jury based its $19,000 actual damages award on Alliance's defense
costs.

    The trial court denied TXO's J.N.O.V. and remittitur motions, and TXO
appealed to the West Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals, arguing the
punitive award as unconstitutional per the U.S. Supreme Court's 1991
holding in Pacific Mutual Life v. Haslip.

    The state high court rejected the appeal, finding the award supported
by each factor in its recognized "reasonable relationship" test, i.e.,
the potential harm TXO's actions could have caused; the maliciousness of
TXO's actions; and the penalty necessary to discourage similar conduct in
the future.

    "The parties' desire to formulate a 'test' for determining whether a
particular punitive award is 'grossly excessive' is understandable,"
wrote Justice John Paul Stevens in an opinion joined by Chief Justice
William H. Rehnquist and Justice Harry A. Blackmun.  "Under respondents'
rational basis standard, apparently any award that would serve the
legitimate state interest in deterring or punishing wrongful conduct, no
matter how large, would be acceptable....

    "On the other hand, we reject the premise underlying TXO's invocation
of heightened scrutiny," the court continued.  "[I]n determining whether
a particular award is so 'grossly excessive' as to violate the Due
Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, ...we return to what we said
two Terms ago in Haslip:  'We need not and indeed we cannot, draw a
mathematical bright line between the constitutionally acceptable and the
constitutionally unacceptable that would fit in every case.'"

    In response to the petitioner's emphasizing that the punitive award
was 526 times the amount of the actual damages, the court wrote that it
has "eschewed an approach that concentrates entirely on the relationship
between actual and punitive damages.  It is appropriate to consider the
magnitude of the potential harm that the defendant's conduct would have
caused to its intended victim if the wrongful plan had succeeded, as well
as the possible harm to other victims that might have resulted if similar
future behavior were not deterred....

    "While petitioner stresses the shocking disparity between the
punitive award and the compensatory award," the court continued, "that
shock dissipates when one considers the potential loss to respondents, in
terms of reduced or eliminated royalties payments, had petitioner
succeeded in its illicit scheme."

    The court refused to find the award "grossly excessive" in light of
"the amount of money potentially at stake, the bad faith of petitioner,
the fact that the scheme employed in this case was part of a larger
pattern of fraud, trickery and deceit, and petitioner's wealth."

    TXO had argued that, unlike in Haslip, the jury was instructed to
take "the wealth of the perpetrator" into account in arriving at the
punitive award; this distinction did not alter the majority's final
analysis.  "[I]n Haslip we referred to the 'financial position' of the
defendant as one factor that could be taken into account in assessing
punitive damages....  We also note that TXO did not squarely argue in the
West Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals that these aspects of the jury
instruction violated the Due Process [Clause], possibly because many
States permit the jury to take account of the defendant's wealth," the
court stated.

    The court was unmoved by the criticism engendered by the West
Virginia high court's drawing of distinction between classes of "really
mean" and "really stupid" defendants in weighing a punitive award.  "That
those terms played little, if any, part in [the West Virginia Supreme
Court's] actual evaluation of the propriety of the damages award is
evident from the reasoning in its thorough opinion....  Moreover, two
members of the court who wrote separately to disassociate themselves from
the 'really mean' and 'really stupid' terminology shared the views of the
rest of the members of the court on the merits."

    Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, who concurred in part and concurred in
the judgment, wrote separately to state that he "was not in full
agreement [with] the plurality's discussion of the substantive
requirements of the Due Process Clause....  To ask whether a particular
award of punitive damages is grossly excessive begs the question:
excessive in relation to what?  The answer excessive in relation to the
conduct of the tortfeasor may be correct, but it is unhelpful, for we are
still bereft of any standard by which to compare the punishment to the
malefaction that gave rise to it."

    Justice Antonin Scalia, who concurred in the judgment, wrote a
separate opinion in which Justice Clarence Thomas joined.  Justice Scalia
stated that the plurality "makes explicit what was implicit in Haslip:
the existence of a so-called 'substantive due process' right that
punitive damages be reasonable....  I am willing to accept the
proposition that the Due Process [Clause] incorporates certain
substantive guarantees specified in the Bill of Rights; but I do not
accept the proposition that it is the secret repository of all sorts of
other, enumerated, substantive rights."

    Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote a lengthy dissent that was joined
by Justice Byron R. White and in part by Justice David H. Souter.  "In
[Haslip]," the dissent stated, "this Court held out the promise that
punitive damages award would receive sufficient constitutional scrutiny
to restore fairness in what is rapidly becoming an arbitrary and
oppressive system.  Today the Court's judgment renders Haslip's promise a
false one."

    "The procedures that converted this commercial dispute into a $10
million punitive verdict," the dissent continued, "were wholly
inadequate.  Rather than producing a judgment founded on verifiable
criteria, they produced a monstrous award....  In my view, due process
does not tolerate such cavalier standards when so much is at stake."

    Carter Phillips of Sidley & Austin, Washington, DC, argued the case
for the petitioner.

    Prof. Laurence Tribe of Harvard University Law School argued the case
for the respondents.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
TOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
July 1993

MARYLAND APPEALS CT. FINDS NO REVERSIBLE ERROR IN CANCER-FEAR EVIDENCE

    The Maryland Court of Special Appeals on April 28 affirmed a $407,224
judgment against Keene Corp. in an asbestosis case after rejecting
Keene's arguments that the trial court had erred in admitting evidence of
the claimant's fear of cancer and that the claimant presented
insufficient evidence to overcome Keene's state-of-the-art defense (Keene
Corp. v. Lewis, MD Ct. of Special App., Sept. Term 1992, No. 1479).

    (The opinion is available from Andrews Document Access Service.  Call
1-800-345-1101 or 215-399-6600 from Pennsylvania.)

    Plaintiff William Lewis alleges asbestosis from exposure to asbestos
while working as a sheet metal worker at the Bethlehem Steel shipyard in
Baltimore between 1942 and 1944.

    His original suit against 16 defendants alleged mesothelioma and
asbestosis, but the claim of mesothelioma was withdrawn after he learned
that it had been misdiagnosed.  Before the trial, Keene sought to prevent
all references to cancer or mesothelioma.  The trial court denied the
motion to the extent that it would have precluded all evidence concerning
Lewis' fear or emotional distress at the prospect of contracting cancer,
but it also ruled that evidence concerning the prospect of Lewis'
contracting cancer would not be allowed absent evidence of the medical
probability of contracting the disease.

    The case went to trial against Keene only.  The jury found Keene
liable on Lewis' strict liability claim and awarded him $402,224 in
compensatory damages, and awarded his wife $5,999 for loss of
consortium.

    Keene appealed, arguing that the court erred in allowing references
to cancer and evidence of Lewis' fear of cancer and in submitting the
strict liability claim to the jury.

    Affirming, the appeals court noted that the record of the trial
contains 79 scattered references to the word "cancer" and 41 references
to the word "mesothelioma."  But, it refused to regard these "incidental
references" as grounds for reversing, observing that the both plaintiff's
counsel and the court had told the jury that Lewis was making no claim
for present or future cancer.

    The court said that it could locate no testimony by Lewis in the
record concerning a current fear of cancer; the only testimony it could
locate concerned his relief upon learning that his mesothelioma had been
misdiagnosed.  "The only evidence that the jury heard in this regard was
essentially positive -- that Mr. Lewis did not have cancer and that he
was making no claim for either present or future cancer.  He gave no
testimony as to any present emotional distress but expressed only his
delight in knowing that he was 'going to be here for a while,'" the court
observed.

    "In summary, then, we do not see in this record a sufficient
intrusion of inappropriate evidence to require reversal."

    The court also rejected Keene's argument that Lewis presented
insufficient evidence to show that, at the time of his exposure in the
early 1940s, it had or should have known that its product, as used in the
shipyards where he worked, was sufficiently dangerous to require a
warning.

    The court simply reviewed the relevant state-of-the-art testimony
from Kenneth Nelson and from Lewis, and concluded that it was sufficient
to show that the product was dangerous when used in ships on which Lewis
worked, that Keene should have known of its danger to shipyard workers by
February 1943, and that it failed to warn Lewis and others in his
position of the danger.

    Lewis is represented by Shepard Hoffman and Deboarh Hines with
Connerton, Ray & Simon in Washington, DC, and by G. Mitchel Mowell of
Chestertown, Maryland.  Keene is represented by Ford Davis and John
Billmyer with Whiteford, Taylor & Preston in Baltimore.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-31</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B042-141</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh54.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020606 text/html 115376
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:03:25 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:38 GMT
Content-length: 115188
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh54.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet <BR>
December 25, 1995 & January 1<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS REPORTS . . . DECEMBER 25, 1995 & JANUARY 1, 1996</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>Encephalitis&nbsp;Microsphere Formulation Improves Encephalitis Vaccine</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(789 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Emerging Diseases&nbsp;Could Rabies-Like Diseases Enter the U.S.?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1817 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>Cancer Vaccines (Pancreatic Carcinoma)&nbsp;Vaccination with Mutant Ras Peptides Induces T-Cell Response</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(738 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>Conference Coverage (ACTG)&nbsp;"New" ACTG Moves Forward</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(654 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>Conference Coverage (ACTG)&nbsp;Patient Recruitment and Retention a Problem for ACTG</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(384 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>HBV Vaccines&nbsp;Hepatitis Screening/Vaccination Needed in Hong Kong</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(563 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>Human Papillomavirus (Vaccine Design)&nbsp;VLPs from One Variant May Help To Prevent Infection</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(532 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>Immunology&nbsp;Discovery of Tumor Antigens Facilitated by Novel Process</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(707 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>Industry News (Vaccines)&nbsp;Collaboration Announced To Develop Rabies Vaccine</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(189 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>Industry News (Vaccines)&nbsp;Survival Improvement Shown in Breast Cancer Trial with Theratope</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(277 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>Influenza&nbsp;Killer Flu Expected</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(482 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>Malaria Vaccines&nbsp;SPf66 Vaccine Candidate Is Produced Under GMP Criteria</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(529 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>Respiratory Syncytial Virus&nbsp;Human RSV Succumbs to Bioengineering Techniques</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(519 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RESEARCH FROM CONFERENCES . . . DECEMBER 25, 1995 & JANUARY 1, 1996</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>Cancer Vaccines&nbsp;"Gene Therapy for Brain Tumors by Autologous Vaccination with Engineered&nbsp;GM-CSF Secreting Tumor Cells."  J.S.  Yu, J.A.  Butwick, G.  Dkanoff, E.A.&nbsp;Chiocca and X.O.  Breakefield.  Neurosurgery Service and Molecular</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(219 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><LI>Immunology&nbsp;"Immunization and Ganciclovir Treatment Delay the Formation of HSV-TK&nbsp;Expressing Brain Tumors in Rats Through Immunologic Suppression."  U.  Blomer,&nbsp;D.  Barha, D.A.  Petersen and F.H.  Gage.  Department of Neurosurgery</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(223 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>Malaria Vaccines&nbsp;"DNA Vaccines Against Malaria Based on the SSP2 Antigen."  R.C.  Hedstrom, M.&nbsp;Sedegah, H.  Wang, M.  Kaur, P.  Hobart and S.L.  Hoffman.  Malaria Program,&nbsp;Naval Medical Research Institute, Bethesda, Maryland; Vical Incorporated, San</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(290 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><LI>Malaria Vaccines&nbsp;"Malaria Vaccine Trials Against Preerythrocytic Stages of Plasmodium&nbsp;Falciparum in Chimpanzees:  1) Effect on Parasitemia Elicited by Four Vaccine&nbsp;Candidates."  P.  Millet, A.  Luty, G.  Dubreuil, E.  LeRoy, A.  Tartar, W.M.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(368 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><LI>Malaria Vaccines&nbsp;"Optimization of Immune Responses to a Plasmodium DNA Vaccine in Aotus&nbsp;Monkeys."  R.A.  Gramzinski, D.C.  Maris, N.  Obaldia, R.  Rossan, M.&nbsp;Sedegah, B.  Wang, P.  Hobart, M.  Margalith and S.L.  Hoffman.  Malaria</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(315 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><A HREF = "#19"><A HREF = "#19"><A HREF = "#19"><LI>Malaria Vaccines&nbsp;"Protective Efficacy Against Sporozoite Challenge With a Combination&nbsp;Sporozoite and Erythrocytic Stage Malaria Vaccine."  Y.  Charoenvit, R.  Wang,&nbsp;T.M.  Daly, C.A.  Long, G.P.  Corradin and S.L.  Hoffman.  Malaria Program,</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(299 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>JOURNAL ARTICLE SUMMARIES . . . DECEMBER 25, 1995 & JANUARY 1, 1996</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#20"><A HREF = "#20"><A HREF = "#20"><A HREF = "#20"><LI>Cancer Vaccines&nbsp;Duda, R.B.; Yang, H.; Dooley, D.D.; Abujawdeh, G.  "Recombinant BCG Therapy&nbsp;Suppresses Melanoma Tumor Growth."  Annals of Surgical Oncology, November&nbsp;1995;2(6):542-549.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(242 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><A HREF = "#21"><A HREF = "#21"><A HREF = "#21"><LI>HIV Vaccines&nbsp;Honda, M.; Matsuo, K.; Nakasone, T.; Okamoto, Y.; Yoshizaki, H.; Kitamura, K.;&nbsp;Sugiura, W.; Watanabe, K.; Fukushima, Y.; Haga, S.; Katsura, Y.; Tasaka, H.;&nbsp;Komuro, K.; Yamada, T.; Asano, T.; Yamazaki, A.; Yamazaki, S.  "Protective</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(316 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><A HREF = "#22"><A HREF = "#22"><LI>Haemophilus influenzae&nbsp;Frasch, C.E.  "Haemophilus influenzae Type b Conjugate and Combination&nbsp;Vaccines."  Clinical Immunotherapeutics, November 1995;4(5):376-386.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(244 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><A HREF = "#23"><A HREF = "#23"><A HREF = "#23"><LI>Herpes Simplex Virus Type 2&nbsp;Heineman, T.C.; Connelly, B.L.; Bourne, N.; Stanberry, L.R.; Cohen, J.&nbsp;"Immunization with Recombinant Varicella-Zoster Virus Expressing Herpes&nbsp;Simplex Virus Type 2 Glycoprotein D Reduces the Severity of Genital Herpes in</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(276 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><A HREF = "#24"><A HREF = "#24"><A HREF = "#24"><LI>Immunology&nbsp;Stephens, H.A.F.; Brown, A.E.; Chandanayingyong, D.; Webster, H.K.; Sirikong,&nbsp;M.; Longta, P.; Vangseratthana, R.; Gordon, D.M.; Lekmak, S.; Rungruang, E.&nbsp;"The Presence of the HLA Class II Allele DPB1*0501 in Ethnic Thais Correlates</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(201 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><A HREF = "#25"><A HREF = "#25"><A HREF = "#25"><LI>Listeria monocytogenes&nbsp;Miller, M.A.; Skeen, M.J.; Ziegler, H.K.  "Nonviable Bacterial Antigens&nbsp;Administered with IL-12 Generate Antigen-Specific T Cell Responses and&nbsp;Protective Immunity Against Listeria monocytogenes."  Journal of Immunology,</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(228 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><A HREF = "#26"><A HREF = "#26"><A HREF = "#26"><LI>Pediatrics (HBV)&nbsp;Hurie, M.B.; Saari, T.N.; Proctor, M.E.; Davis, J.P.  "Hospitals' Responses to&nbsp;Universal Infant Hepatitis B Vaccination Recommendations."  Pediatrics,&nbsp;November 1995;96(5 Part 1):875-879.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(373 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><A HREF = "#27"><A HREF = "#27"><A HREF = "#27"><LI>Pediatrics (Immunization)&nbsp;Askew, G.L.; Finelli, L.; Lutz, J.; Degraaf, J.; Siegel, B.; Spitalny, K.&nbsp;"Beliefs and Practices Regarding Childhood Vaccination among Urban Pediatric&nbsp;Providers in New Jersey."  Pediatrics, November 1995;96(5 Part 1):889-892.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(350 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><A HREF = "#28"><A HREF = "#28"><A HREF = "#28"><LI>Pediatrics (TB)&nbsp;Alkassimi, F.A.; Alhajjaj, M.S.; Alorainey, I.O.; Bamgboye, E.A.  "Does the&nbsp;Protective Effect of Neonatal BCG Correlate with Vaccine-Induced Tuberculin&nbsp;Reaction?."  American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine,</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(277 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><A HREF = "#29"><A HREF = "#29"><A HREF = "#29"><LI>Peptide Vaccines&nbsp;Mitsuda, S.; Nakagawa, T.; Nakazato, H.; Ikai, A.  "Receptor-Linked Antigen&nbsp;Delivery System - Importance of Autologous Alpha 2-Macroglobulin in the&nbsp;Development of Peptide Vaccine."  Biochemical and Biophysical Research</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(255 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><A HREF = "#30"><A HREF = "#30"><A HREF = "#30"><LI>Pneumococcal&nbsp;Shahid, N.S.; Steinhoff, M.C.; Hoque, S.S.; Begum, T.; Thompson, C.; Siber,&nbsp;G.R.  "Serum, Breast Milk, and Infant Antibody after Maternal Immunisation&nbsp;with Pneumococcal Vaccine."  Lancet, November 11, 1995;346(8985):1252-1257.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(376 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><A HREF = "#31"><A HREF = "#31"><A HREF = "#31"><LI>Varicella-Zoster Virus&nbsp;Perry, C.M.; Bryson, H.M.  "Oka/Merck Varicella Vaccine:  A Review of Its&nbsp;Immunogenicity and Protective Efficacy Against Varicella."  Clinical&nbsp;Immunotherapeutics, November 1995;4(5):396-416.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(450 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><A HREF = "#32"><LI>MEETINGS REPORT&nbsp;*NEW LISTINGS  .  .  .  COMPILED BY KENNETH KIMSEY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(891 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Encephalitis
Microsphere Formulation Improves Encephalitis Vaccine


Mouse studies show that it may be possible to make a safe vaccine against a
deadly form of viral encephalitis.

Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis (VEE) virus - an alphavirus of the family
Togaviridae - is spread by mosquitoes and can cause fatal human infections
during epizootics among horses.

The most effective vaccine against VEE virus is the live attenuated Trinidad
donkey strain TC-83.  But not only do 20 percent of vaccinated humans and
animals fail to develop neutralizing antibody titers to TC-83, evidence
suggests that the vaccine may cause birth defects and diabetes.  Moreover,
there is concern that the vaccine strain could revert to its virulent form.

The alternative to TC-83 is the formalin-killed whole virus vaccine C-84.
While this vaccine is safe, it is far less effective than the live attenuated
vaccine and requires multiple injections for induction of immunity.

Now researcher Terrence E.  Greenway of the University of Alabama, Birmingham,
and colleagues have developed a microsphere delivery system for killed VEE
virus that is apparently both safe and immunogenic.  They reported their
results in the journal Vaccine ("Enhancement of Protective Immune Responses to
Venezuelan Equine Encephalitis (VEE) Virus with Microencapsulated Vaccine,"
Vaccine, 1995;13(15):1411-20).

"The microencapsulated VEE virus vaccine induced systemic immune responses
which were higher and persisted longer than those induced with the free virus
vaccine," Greenway et al.  wrote.  "The microencapsulated virus was more
effective than the free virus in inducing immune responses protective against
systemic challenge with virulent VEE virus."

Biodegradable polymer microspheres were developed over the last decade as a
means of releasing contraceptive steroids.  Vaccinologists were quick to see
the potential benefits of this technology.

"Microsphere technology has the potential benefits of reducing the number of
inoculations, enhancing the immune response via both parenteral and oral
vaccination routes, and in reducing the total antigen dose required to achieve
immune protection," wrote researcher M.C.  Steinhoff of the Center for
Immunization Research, Baltimore, Maryland, in a recent review (Vaccine,
January 1994;12(1):5-11).

Greenway and colleagues noted that a number of different research teams have
shown poly(DL-lactide-co-glycolide) or DL-PLG microspheres to be effective
vehicles for augmenting immune responses to antigen administered either
mucosally or systemically.

Various types of DL-PLG-based vaccines have already been proven safe in
humans.

Greenway et al.  created several versions of DL-PLG microencapsulated VEE
virus and compared their immunogenicity and protective efficacy to that of
free virus vaccine in BALB/c mice.

Subcutaneous immunization with 50 (micro)g microencapsulated VEE virus yielded
anti-VEE antibody titers up to 32 times higher than that seen with free virus.

When the mice that had received the microencapsulated vaccine received a
second booster immunization, their antibody responses remained stable
throughout the 100-day observation period.  Antibody levels began to wane only
in mice boosted with free virus.

"At high vaccine doses (i.e.  25 or 50 (micro)g), microspheres prepared with
either methylene chloride or ethyl acetate were equally effective in inducing
specific anti-VEE virus antibody response after both the primary and secondary
immunization," Greenway et al.  observed.  "However, when a lower dose (12.5
(micro)g) of the vaccines was tested, methylene chloride processed
microspheres induced higher antibody responses after both the primary and
secondary immunization.  ...  The solvent ethyl acetate reduced the
immunogenicity of formalin-fixed, inactivated VEE virus during the
microencapsulation procedure."

In addition, the researchers found that formalin-fixed VEE was far better than
non-formalin-fixed VEE for use in the microspheres.

"Formalin fixation of the whole inactivated VEE virus vaccine prior to
microencapsulation with the solvent methylene chloride dramatically enhanced
the immunogenicity of the final product, presumably through enhanced
conformational stability," they wrote.

In the mouse experiments, 80 percent of mice immunized with a single dose of 5
(micro)g VEE virus in microspheres prepared with methylene chloride survived
challenge with virulent VEE virus.  Only 20 percent of mice that received the
free virus vaccine survived challenge.

"At a high vaccine dose (i.e., 50 (micro)g), the microencapsulated vaccines
afforded 100 percent protection, whereas a similar dose of free antigen
resulted in 40 percent survival in one experiment and 100 percent survival in
a second experiment," Greenway et al.  wrote.

"These results, taken together with the protection results after secondary
immunization with either free or microencapsulated virus vaccine, indicate
that a single immunization with the microsphere vaccine could afford
protection similar to that attained with multiple immunizations with the free
virus vaccine."

The researchers are currently exploring the effectiveness of microencapsulated
VEE virus administered by various routes in protecting against aerosol
challenge with virulent VEE virus.

The corresponding author for this study is Suzanne M.  Michalek, Department of
Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Alabama 35294.

 - by Daniel J. DeNoon, Senior Editor




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Emerging Diseases
Could Rabies-Like Diseases Enter the U.S.?


Rabies-like diseases could cause epidemics in the U.S.  if infected animals
are imported from endemic areas, U.S.  Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) researchers warn.

Although each year rabies kills 40,000 to 100,000 people worldwide, only one
or two deaths occur in the U.S.  due to widespread vaccination of domestic
animals, effective (but costly) post-exposure treatment (PET), and recent
programs to vaccinate wild animals.

This reduction in mortality is expensive:  the U.S.  rabies prevention program
costs an estimated $230 million to $1 billion in public and private expenses
per year, reported Charles E.  Rupprecht and colleagues of the CDC in a recent
publication ("The Ascension of Wildlife Rabies:  A Cause for Public Health
Concern or Intervention?"  Emerging Infectious Diseases, 1995;1(4):107ff).

But little-understood cousins of the rabies virus that exist outside the U.S.
are at best only marginally susceptible to rabies vaccine.  Either accidental
or intentional importation of infected animals to non-endemic areas raise the
animal reservoir - for most if not all of these viruses are from various
species of bats.

"Infections with non-rabies lyssaviruses have resulted in rabies vaccine
failures," Rupprecht et al.  noted.  "Such infections raise the specter of
potentially serious public health consequences if introduced and subsequently
established in susceptible bat populations."

Members of the Lyssavirus genus are a group of genetically related
negative-stranded RNA viruses.  The viruses that cause rabies are the
rhabdoviridae, found everywhere except for Australia, Antarctica, and some
isolated islands.  Other Lyssaviruses include:

* Mokola virus.  The reservoir for this virus is unknown, but Rupprecht et al.
suggest that it may be some type of insectivore or rodent as it was first
isolated in a species of shrew trapped in 1968 in the Mokola Forest outside
Ibadan, Nigeria; bushveld gerbils in Zimbabwe were found to be seropositive.
Cases have occurred in Nigeria, South Africa, Cameroon, Zimbabwe, Central
African Republic, and Ethiopia.  There have been two documented human
infections.  Rabies vaccine does not protect against this virus.

* Lagosbat virus.  The reservoir for this virus is thought to be fruit bats.
Only 10 cases have been identified thus far, three in domestic animals, in
Nigeria, South Africa, Zimbabwe, the Central African Republic, Senegal, and
Ethiopia.  No human deaths are documented.  Rabies virus offers only marginal
protection.

* Duvenhage virus.  The reservoir for this virus is not known, but is
suspected to be insect-eating bats.  Cases have occurred in South Africa,
Zimbabwe, and Senegal.  The virus is named after a man from Pretoria, South
Africa who in 1970 developed rabies-like encephalitis after being bitten by a
bat.  The patient died.  No cases in domestic animals have been identified.
Rabies vaccine offers only marginal protection.

* European bat Lyssavirus 1 (EBLV1).  The reservoir for this virus is a
European insectivorous bat, most likely Eptesicus serotinus.  One human case
was documented in 1985, another was suspected in 1977.  Although the virus has
been found in more than 400 bats, no cases in domestic animals have been
identified.  Rabies vaccine offers only marginal protection.

* European bat Lyssavirus 2 (EBLV2).  The reservoirs for this virus is again a
European insectivorous bat, most likely Mytotis dasycneme.  The virus was
first identified in a Swiss bat biologist working in Finland who died of a
rabies-like illness.  Of the five known cases, none have occurred in domestic
animals.  Rabies vaccine offers only marginal protection.

"The distances between Africa, Eurasia, Pacific Oceania, and the New World
mitigate against the dispersal, migration, and introduction of healthy bats
without human intervention," Rupprecht et al.  wrote.  "However, several
recent events illustrate the opportunity for the transoceanic transfer of
rabies-infected bats."

These events include:

* Research institutions.  There have been two close calls in research
facilities.  Canadian researchers in 1986 shipped a live big brown bat
(Eptesicus fuscus) to German associates.  The bat became ill was diagnosed
with rabies.  In 1994, a Massachusetts research team collected 12 wild big
brown bats and sent them to Danish researchers.  Six of the bats died of
rabies.

* Commercial enterprises.  A big brown bat was captured in Hawaii on a
container ship carrying automobiles from Michigan.  The bat was rabid.

* Legal or illegal importation of animals.  Improperly issued federal permits
in 1994 permitted import to the U.S.  of thousands of bats, mostly Egyptian
tomb bats (Rousettus aegyptiacus).  Normally, sales of imported bats or their
offspring are prohibited by federal law except by research institutions or
zoos where contact with the public is limited.  Such bats are normally
subjected to extended quarantine.  The CDC warns people who own imported bats
to prevent contact with humans.

"Although no reports of lyssaviruses isolated from Egyptian fruit bats exist,
active surveillance for such viruses has not been conducted," Rupprecht et al.
warned.  "These bats are relatively common and widespread throughout the area
that extends from Turkey and Cyprus to Pakistan, the Arabian peninsula, Egypt,
and most of sub-Saharan Africa.  Because they may roost by the thousands in a
wide variety of habitats, there is ample opportunity for interaction with
other Chiroptera, such as the widely distributed straw-colored (Eidolon
helvum) or epauletted (Epomophorus wahlbergi) fruit bats; both of these
species have been implicated in Lyssavirus epizootiology in Africa.

"The adaptability of Egyptian fruit bats should be a cause for concern because
of the potential for survival and interaction among indigenous bat fauna,
particularly in the southern United States."

Such a disaster would not be the first importation of a lyssavirus to the
United States.  While folklore recounts tales of bat-spread disease prior to
European colonization of the New World, the importation of dogs and red foxes
for the sport of fox hunting led to widespread epizootics.

When rabies became a nationally reported disease in 1938, limited surveillance
revealed 9,412 cases per year - mostly in domestic animals - with 47 human
deaths.  Rabies control efforts for pet dogs began in the 1920s and by 1960
rabies occurred more often in wild than in domestic animals.

From 1961 to 1989, skunks were the primary U.S.  reservoir for rabies but they
were then supplanted by raccoons, probably boosted by transport of infected
animals from southern states.

Along with this change in animal vectors, the human epidemiology of rabies has
changed.  Until 1965, most up to 80 percent of human cases occurred after a
known exposure, usually a dog bite.  But in the last 10 years - with the 1975
advent of a more effective canine vaccine - rabies deaths occurred in people
who had no history of an animal bite.

"Almost all the recent human cases occurred after an animal exposure that was
unrecognized by the patient as carrying a risk for rabies infection,"
Rupprecht et al.  wrote.  "The apparent source of human rabies has also
changed:  14 of the 18 cases acquired in the United States since 1980 involved
rabies variants associated with insectivorous bats."

As noted above, the cost of rabies protection is high.  Rupprecht et al.
noted that the New York State rabies diagnostic laboratory received 3,000
submissions in 1989, but received 12,000 submissions in 1993 after the
epizootic of raccoon rabies reached the state.

"The cost per human life saved from rabies ranges from approximately $10,000
to $100 million, depending on the nature of the exposure and the probability
of rabies in a region," Rupprecht et al.  wrote.

"What's more, most economic analyses do not take into account the
psychological trauma caused by human exposure to rabies, the subsequent
euthanasia of pets, or the loss of wildlife resources during rabies outbreaks.
Rabies in wildlife has now reached historically high levels in the United
States, and the costs of preventing human rabies are mounting."

Rupprecht, chief of the CDC Rabies Section, and colleagues argue strongly
against population reduction of animal vectors for rabies on ecological,
economic, and ethical grounds.  They instead promote oral vaccination programs
for wildlife, a concept first proposed in the 1960s by the CDC.

"Oral rabies vaccination of the red fox with vaccine-laden baits is an
integral aspect of rabies control throughout southeastern Canada and Europe,
where more than 75 million doses of vaccine have been distributed over 5
million km(2) during the past two decades," they wrote.  "Consequently, rabies
incidence among wild and domestic animals has fallen, as have PETS for human
rabies."

However, the shift of the epizootic from foxes to raccoons required an
extensive laboratory and field research effort, as the vaccines effective for
foxes were ineffective for raccoons and coyotes.

"In 1983, a vaccinia-rabies glycoprotein (V-RG) recombinant virus vaccine was
developed that has proven to be an effective oral immunogen in raccoons and
various other important reservoir species; vaccine advantages include improved
thermostability and an inability to cause rabies," Rupprecht et al.  wrote.
"When vaccine-laden baits are offered under natural conditions, contact with
them by nontarget wildlife species cannot be totally excluded.  However,
studies of V-RG virus have shown no vaccine-associated morbidity, mortality,
or gross pathologic lesions in more than 40 warm-blooded vertebrate species
examined."

An efficacy field trial of the V-RG vaccine took place in Cape May, New
Jersey, between spring 1992 and autumn 1994.  Nearly 100,000 fishmeal baits
laced with vaccine were distributed over 56,000 hectares both by hand and by
helicopter.  Overall rabies incidence and rate of spread was significantly
reduced.

Although oral wildlife vaccination programs are currently in Massachusetts,
New York, Florida, and southern Texas, Rupprecht et al.  noted that there are
many questions yet to be answered:

* What is the optimal ratio of animal population density to bait density?

* What level of herd immunity will be required to eliminate rabies?

* What is the best way to distribute the vaccine bait?

* How can the methods successful for foxes and raccoons be adapted to rabies
control in species such as skunks, mongooses, and dogs?

* Who will fund these programs over time?

* What do rabies control and prevention efforts really cost?

"Given the problems inherent in wildlife control, the greater issue of
extending these methods to the control of dog rabies in the developing world
will be a challenge well into the next century," Rupprecht et al.  concluded.

The following CDC researchers contributed to this report:  Charles E.
Rupprecht, V.M.D., Ph.D., chief of the Rabies Section; Jean S.  Smith, M.S.,
research microbiologist; Makonnen Fekadu, D.V.M., Ph.D., research veterinary
medical officer; and James E.  Childs, Sc.D., chief of the Epidemiology
Section, Viral and Rickettsial Zoonoses Branch, Division of Viral and
Rickettsial Diseases, National Center for Infectious Diseases, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.

The corresponding author for this study is Charles E.  Rupprecht, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, 1600 Clifton Rd., Mailstop G33, Atlanta, GA
30333, USA; fax 404-639-1058; e-mail cyr5@ciddvd1.em.cdc.gov.

 - by Daniel J. DeNoon, Senior Editor




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Cancer Vaccines (Pancreatic Carcinoma)
Vaccination with Mutant Ras Peptides Induces T-Cell Response


Pancreatic carcinoma patients carrying a ras mutation exhibited T-cell
responsiveness after vaccination with the corresponding mutant RAS peptides.

Because CD4 and CD8 T cells specific for a single ras mutation have been
described, and because mutant p21 RAS can be recognized by human T cells,
mutant p21 RAS represents an exclusive tumor-specific antigen.  These findings
suggest that RAS peptide vaccination of cancer patients with a verified ras
mutation might be used as a specific immunotherapy.

Marianne K.  Gjertsen et al.  vaccinated pancreatic cancer patients exhibiting
a ras mutation with a synthetic RAS peptide in an effort to influence the
clinical course of the disease ("Vaccination with Mutant RAS Peptides and
Induction of T-Cell Responsiveness in Pancreatic Carcinoma Patients Carrying
the Corresponding ras Mutation," The Lancet, November 25,
1995;346(8987):1399-1400).

"Results indicate that specific T-cell responses against mutations uniquely
harbored in tumor cells can be induced in cancer patients by vaccination,"
stated Gjertsen et al.

Five patients with histologically confirmed adenocarcinoma of the pancreas
with ras mutations were enrolled in this clinical trial.  Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (1-4x10(9)) were collected by leukapheresis and loaded with
a synthetic RAS peptide encompassing residues 5-21 of p21 RAS and
corresponding to the mutation in the patients tumor tissue.

Patients were vaccinated on day 0 and boosted on days 14 and 35.  Additional
boosters were given every 4-6 weeks.  None of the patients exhibited any toxic
reactions or side-effects after vaccination.

None of the patients exhibited T-cell responsiveness to any of the RAS
peptides tested before the protocol started, although they showed normal
T-cell responses against other test antigens.  Two of the five patients
exhibited T-cell response to RAS peptides in their peripheral blood
mononuclear cells around day 40 after the onset of the vaccination protocol,
noted the authors.

The T-cell response was transient, and disappeared during the following weeks.
Repeated vaccinations did not result in a reappearance of detectable
responding T cells in the peripheral blood.

Although puzzled at first by the lack of detectable T-cell response, the
authors determined that the tumor-specific T cells elicited by RAS peptide
vaccination were homing to the tumor and being selectively removed from
circulation.

No major therapeutic response was observed in the any of the patients,
including the two who exhibited brief T-cell responses.  The authors felt that
this was due to the terminal stage of the disease in the patients.  All the
patients had large tumor burdens and progressively deteriorating immune
systems, with life expectancies of only three to four months.

Tumor tissue taken from the two responding patients after they died showed
that lymphocyte infiltration was prominent and was mainly constituted by T
cells.  This finding was compatible with the explanation that the RAS-specific
T cells elicited by the vaccination may have homed in to the tumors of these
patients, noted the authors.

They also noted that vaccination by a single tumor-specific epitope may not be
sufficient in these circumstances as the therapeutic vaccine may have been too
little, too late.  Ongoing studies in patients with minimal residual disease
could provide a clinical setting allowing for more careful evaluation of
immune responses and the potential for clinical benefits of RAS peptide
vaccine, noted the authors.

"Our method for vaccination is novel," concluded Gjertsen et al.  "We injected
large amounts of peptide-pulsed mononuclear cells.  The rational is that a
fraction of these cells (i.e., pulsed dendritic cells and monocytes) will end
up in lymphoid organs, where the actual T-cell stimulation will take place.
Two and three rounds of vaccination seemed to be sufficient to break the state
of unresponsiveness to the mutant RAS peptides in [the two] patients [who
responded]."

This study was an extension of preliminary research done by these same authors
which was presented at the International Symposium on Cancer Vaccines, held
October 3-5, 1994.  At that time, they stated "Our results indicate that
immunotherapy targeted against neoplastic cells carrying ras mutations is
possible, and a protocol based on loading professional antigen presenting
cells with synthetic RAS peptides is currently being tested in a clinical
setting."

This research was supported by the Norwegian Cancer Society, the Norwegian
Research Council for Science and the Humanities, and Pronova, Norway.

The corresponding author for this study is Dr.  Gustave Gaudernack, Section
for Immunotherapy, Institute of Cancer Research, Department of Immunology,
Montebello, N-0310 Oslo, Norway.

 - by Michelle Marble




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Conference Coverage (ACTG)
"New" ACTG Moves Forward


Can the main clinical trials group in the U.S.  shed its image as a dinosaur
too large and slow-moving to respond to new developments in AIDS therapies?

According to the chair of the group's Adult Executive Committee - University
of Colorado researcher Robert "Chip" Schooley - recent reorganization has
accomplished this objective.  Schooley made his remarks during the Twentieth
AIDS Clinical Trials Group Meeting, held December 2-6, 1995, in Washington,
D.C.

The AIDS Clinical Trials Group (ACTG) is the arm of the U.S.  National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) Division of AIDS (DAIDS)
responsible for testing new treatments for HIV disease and its complications.

But the group - particularly the division responsible for testing drugs in
adults - has been severely criticized for lacking central control and for
moving far too slowly to provide answers to pressing questions about AIDS
therapies.

DAIDS recently completed a top-to-bottom evaluation and reorganization of the
ACTG.  In a plenary address to the group's first general meeting since the
changes took effect, Schooley acknowledged that many of the criticisms were
valid, but also stressed the group's many achievements.

"We've been through a lot of self and external evaluation," Schooley said.
"But there are a lot of things right with this organization.  This is the
preeminent clinical organization in the world.  We have put together a
tremendous organization to deal with a disease we all are tired of."

Schooley noted that four years ago only one drug had been approved for the
treatment of primary HIV infection and that today, largely due to ACTG
efforts, there are five such drugs with a sixth on the way.

"This organization will play a major role in understanding how these drugs
work," he said.  "We have a tremendous opportunity to move along quickly."

Schooley noted that recent ACTG studies have defined a role for combination
therapy with the nucleoside analog didanosine (ddI) and for the use of the new
protease inhibitor saquinavir.

He promised that the ACTG would make increased use of new laboratory findings
"to tell us what we need to do."

The "new" ACTG will collaborate more closely with DAIDS, Schooley said.  But
most importantly, the ACTG will streamline and simplify the process by which
it generates clinical trial protocols.

"One of the things we were appropriately criticized for was behaving like
civil servants," Schooley said, referring to previous bureaucratic processes
that prevented the rapid testing of new treatments in a clinical setting.

The organization of the ACTG has been streamlined so that the adult section
has only three committees making research decisions.  These three Research
Agenda Committees (RACs) are the HIV Disease RAC, the Immunology RAC, and the
Opportunistic Disease RAC.  Committees that were once separate RACs - the
Pharmacology Committee, the Women's Health Committee, and the Patient Care
Committee - will now be established as standing resource committees within
each of the three main RACs.

There will be two major changes in how the ACTG functions:  there will be
centralized control of both resources and laboratories.

Resources will now be controlled directly by those planning and executing the
ACTG scientific agenda via a Scientific Agenda Steering Committee comprised of
the various committee chairs.

Laboratories previously operated independently of the research committees,
receiving their funds directly from DAIDS.

"Now scientific committees will directly control the labs," Schooley said.  "I
think this will work very well."

But the executive committee chair warned that the ACTG would continue to
change.

"Four years from now this will be a very different organization than now," he
said.  "The changes have been good, they have been enabling."

He called for the active participation of each investigator.

"Two thousand people thinking will get more done than just a few executive
committee members," Schooley said.

 - by Daniel J. DeNoon, Senior Editor




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Conference Coverage (ACTG)
Patient Recruitment and Retention a Problem for ACTG


Many institutions conducting AIDS clinical trials have been unable to find and
keep study participants.

A study of 28 institutions participating in U.S.  government-sponsored
clinical trials showed that 18 of the sites (64 percent) failed to meet their
patient accrual goals.

The study, conducted by Washington University researcher Michael Klebert and
colleagues, was presented at the Twentieth AIDS Clinical Trials Group (ACTG)
Meeting, held December 2-6, 1995, in Washington, D.C.  The ACTG Patient Care
Committee, a resource committee of the ACTG executive committee, performed the
study.

"Adequate recruitment and retention are essential in conducting successful
clinical trials," Klebert said.

Of 35 participating ACTG sites queried anonymously, 28 participated in the
study.  Except that they tended to be located on the east coast,
nonparticipating sites were not significantly different in terms of size or
patient demographics from participating institutions.

Surprisingly, the study found that the number of recruitment strategies used
by a study site was not related to meeting recruitment and retention goals.

Strategies positively correlated with successful patient recruitment and
retention were provision of child care, education of patients, provision of
peer advocates for patients, and payment via cash or vouchers.  Provision of
support groups was negatively correlated with success.

More than half of the sites identified study design as a barrier to
recruitment.  Nearly 40 percent of the sites said that barriers to successful
recruitment were lack of outreach and cultural sensitivity.

The sites with the worst recruitment/retention problems tended not to combine
primary care with study-protocol visits.  But high proportions of minority
patients or high proportions of patients using intravenous drugs was not
associated with poor recruitment or retention.

The major barriers to patient retention were the use of unpopular or too many
drugs in the study, high frequency of visits, and the availability of
alternative drugs.

Based on the study findings, Klebert made several recommendations to improve
patient recruitment and retention:

*  Combine primary care and research visits.
*  Promote a strong relationship between the study nurse and patients.
*  Provide transportation to the study site.
*  Ask patients about factors that might interfere with their participation.
*  Design studies to address retention problems.
*  Study identified problem sites in detail.
 - by Daniel J. DeNoon, Senior Editor




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

HBV Vaccines
Hepatitis Screening/Vaccination Needed in Hong Kong


Hepatitis screening and vaccination programs are desperately needed for
students in Hong Kong, according to a report from the University of Hong Kong.

Researcher Ian B.  Marshall wrote that similar programs should be recommended
for students from Southeast Asia who attend overseas colleges and
universities, including those in the United States ("Screening and Vaccination
for Hepatitis B in Hong Kong University Students," College
Health,1995;44:59-62).

Hepatitis B is endemic in Chinese populations in Hong Kong, with an overall
prevalence of hepatitis B markers of 49.9 percent and an antigen carrier rate
of 9.5 percent.  Ninety percent of hepatocellular cancer (HCC) occurs in
carriers of hepatitis B.

"In spite of improvements in treatment, HCC is still the second most common
cause of all cancer deaths in Hong Kong," Marshall wrote.  "Carriers are also
at risk of chronic liver disease and cirrhosis; combined, these two conditions
are the 10th leading cause of all deaths in the community.

"Active immunization against hepatitis B is safe and effective, with only
minor local and general reactions.  Protective antibody levels are produced in
88 percent to 100 percent of healthy adults who receive a three-dose course of
vaccination.  Because of this high level of seroconversion and presumed
immunogenicity, routine postvaccination testing is not recommended."

In this report Marshall evaluated a campaign to promote screening and
vaccination for hepatitis B in students at the University of Hong Kong.
Students entering the program appeared to have been highly motivated to
receive vaccination and responded well to a mailed recall.

Ninety-eight percent of those eligible had the first dose of vaccine, and more
than 96 percent completed the full course of three vaccinations.  The
prevalence of hepatitis B antigen was 3.59 percent; male students showed
significantly higher prevalence (4.48 percent) than female students (2.97
percent).  Hepatitis B surface antibody prevalence was the same in both sexes
(11.8 percent).

"These levels are about one third the prevalence levels found in the same age
group in the general population in Hong Kong," Marshall wrote.  "It is
recommended that students at secondary schools and postsecondary education
institutions in Hong Kong be offered serological screening and vaccination for
Hepatitis B.  A similar policy is recommended for students from Southeast Asia
who attend overseas colleges and universities including those in the United
States."

Marshall wrote that further studies are needed to assess the effect such a
policy would have in reducing the prevalence rates for hepatitis B markers in
older age groups.

"Significant numbers of young people from Southeast Asian countries, where
prevalence levels for hepatitis B are similar to those in Hong Kong, study in
colleges and universities overseas, particularly in North America, Australian,
and the United Kingdom.  Foreign students studying in the United States have
also been identified as being at higher risk for hepatitis B.  Unless students
from Southeast Asia can provide a vaccination record or laboratory evidence of
immunity, they should be screened for hepatitis B markers before they enter
postsecondary education programs overseas.  HBsAg carriers should be
counseled, and their susceptible household and sexual contacts should receive
hepatitis vaccination, as should those foreign students who test negative for
hepatitis B markers."

The corresponding author for this study is Ian B.  Marshall, University Health
Services at the University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong.

 - by Salynn Boyles, Senior Editor




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Human Papillomavirus (Vaccine Design)
VLPs from One Variant May Help To Prevent Infection


The finding that two human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV-16) variants are
serologically cross-reactive is encouraging news for the development of a
genital HPV vaccine.

Grace Cheng, U.S.  National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland and
colleagues from the U.S.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
Atlanta, Georgia, and the Danish Cancer Society, Copenhagen, Denmark, set out
to find whether DNA sequence variants of HPV-16 are distinct serotypes.

Cheng et al.  compared the reactivities of women's sera from Zaire (n=97) and
Denmark (n=123) ("Divergent Human Papillomavirus Type 16 Variants Are
Serologically Cross-Reactive," Journal of Infectious Diseases, December
1995;172:1584-1587).

For the comparison, they used IgG-specific ELISAs based on virus-like
particles (VLPs) composed of the L1 major capsid protein derived from an
HPV-16 variant commonly found in central Africa (Z-1194) or from a variant
that is common in northern Europe (114K).  Z-1194 was isolated in Zaire from a
woman with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia and who also was positive for
HIV.

"We have found that among the 220 women whose sera were tested, almost all who
had a serologic response to one HPV-16 L1 variant also responded to the
other," wrote Cheng et al.  "Therefore we conclude that strains 114K and
Z-1194 are serologically cross-reactive and likely belong to the same
serotype.  This is the case despite a relatively large number of amino acid
differences in the major capsid proteins of the two strains."

The L1s differed in seven amino acids.  In only one serum sample did the
researchers see evidence for a specific reaction to only one, and not the
other VLP variant.

If data from future research studies, which apply other L1 variants and other
sets of sera, substantiate the current findings, this would have several
implications.

The first such implication would be that the lack of serotypic divergence
would suggest individual genital HPV types have not undergone the type of
antigenic drift (such as that seen in influenza viruses) that changes
seroreactivity to virons.

"This implies either that changes in the major seroreactive virion epitopes
cannot be tolerated or that neutralizing antibodies do not play a dominant
role in controlling genital HPV infection under natural conditions," wrote
Cheng et al.

The results also suggest that an ELISA which is based on a single VLP variant
could be applied for evaluating HPV-16 infection in different populations.

"Finally, these results are encouraging from the point of view of developing a
genital HPV vaccine, since they suggest that VLPs from a single HPV-16 variant
might be effective worldwide in preventing HPV-16 infection," Cheng et al.
wrote.

Many of the nucleotide sequence variants of HPV-16 that have been identified
have been isolated in separate geographic areas (Chan et al., J Virol,
1992;66:2057-2066 and 5714-5725; Ho et al., J Virol, 1993;67:6413-6423).

Reinhard Kirnbauer, a co-author of the current report, and colleagues have
performed numerous VLP-based ELISA studies to investigate HPV-16 infection
(Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 1992;89:12180-12184; J Virol, 1993;67:6923-6936; J
Natl Cancer Inst, 1994;86:494-504).

The corresponding author for this study is Dr.  John T.  Schiller, Laboratory
of Cellular Oncology, NCI, NIH, Building 36, Room 1D32, Bethesda, Maryland
20892.

 - by Cathy Clark




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Immunology
Discovery of Tumor Antigens Facilitated by Novel Process


Elusive tumor antigens can't hide from SEREX (serological identification of
antigens by recombinant expression cloning).

The success of recombinant tumor vaccines and other immunotherapeutic
modalities in cancer patients is dependent upon the immune systems recognition
of tumor-specific and tumor-associated antigens.  In spite of extensive
efforts to identify tumor antigens in human neoplasms at the molecular level,
too few have actually been pinpointed.

Ugur Sahin et al.  modified the strategy of autologous typing to allow for an
unbiased search, in addition to the direct molecular definition of,
immunogenic tumor proteins based on their reaction with autologous patient
sera ("Human Neoplasms Elicit Multiple Specific Immune Responses in the
Autologous Host," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, December 5,
1995;92(25):11810-13).

"By applying this strategy of SEREX to four unselected human tumors of
different origin, we discovered an unexpected frequency of tumor antigens that
elicit specific immune responses in the autologous host," stated Sahin et al.
"Since the molecular definition of tumor antigens by SEREX of tumor cDNA is
fast and has a high yield, it may make sense to first define tumor antigens by
SEREX and then to analyze their role in T-cell immunity.  Such a strategy
could provide a rapidly expanding basis for additional approaches to the
immunotherapy and gene therapy of human neoplasms."

The cDNA libraries from diagnostic biopsies of four patients with malignant
melanoma, brain tumor, renal cancer, and Hodgkin disease, were expressed in E.
coli.  In order to test for clones expressing antigens against which the
autologous patient had specific antibodies, 1x10(6) recombinant clones from
each tumor cDNA were screened.  An ELISA modified for the exclusive detection
of human IgG antibodies was used.

Of the 5x10(6) clones tested, 109 were found to be reactive with IgG
antibodies in the serum sample of the autologous patient.  Cross-hybridization
experiments determined that the 109 positive clones contained 24 different
inserts.  From four patients, 24 different antigens were discovered, noted the
authors.

The autologous typing strategy that was modified by the authors was first
developed by L.J.  Old and reported in the 1981 issue of Cancer Research,
41:361-75.

In order to determine the occurrence of antibodies against these newly defined
tumor antigens, different tumor patients and healthy controls donated blood
for testing against these antigens.  Antibodies against the tumor antigens
were detected at varying rates only in patients with the same type of tumor.

The authors noted that the definition of 24 antigens in four tumors of
different origin suggests that the analysis of B-cell responses against other
tumors of the same or new types may identify an unexpected abundance of human
tumor antigens.  Their results suggested that tumor immunogenicity in the
autologous host is a common phenomenon and not restricted to malignant
melanomas.

In addition, the immunogenicity of human tumors seems not to be due to the
expression of a single antigen, but is conferred by multiple antigens.  Their
observation that antibodies against the new antigens could only be found in
the sera of patients bearing the same type of tumor suggested that tumor
growth is essential for the development of a humoral immune response against
the respective tumor antigens, and that antibody production is not an
autoimmune effect elicited by tumor-independent mechanisms.

The authors noted that their study was different from other studies which used
sera to detect antibodies.  Other studies have relied on low-titer serum
antibodies or human monoclonal antibodies generated in vitro from patients'
lymphocytes.  Theirs, on the other hand, uses a stringent serological
detection system which is limited to antigens that elicit high-titer IgG
responses in the patient in vivo.

"According to our data, overexpression of antigens in the tumor compared to
normal tissues seems to be the most common reason for immunogenicity,"
concluded Sahin et al.  "Our observation that tumor antigens defined by T-cell
responses such as MAGE-1 and tyrosinase can also be detected by the
serological approach suggest that an integrated immune response against tumor
antigens may exist that involves both CD8(+) and CD4(+) T cells as well as B
cells."

The corresponding author for this study is Michael Pfreundschuh, Medizinische
Klinik and Poliklinik, Innere Medizin I, Universitat des Saarlandes, D-66421
Homburg, Germany.

 - by Michelle Marble




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Industry News (Vaccines)
Collaboration Announced To Develop Rabies Vaccine


Microbix Biosystems Inc., Toronto, Ontario, Canada, and Mallinckrodt
Veterinary, Inc.  announced December 12, 1995, that they have reached an
agreement which will provide Microbix with funding to pursue the research and
development of its novel non-replicative recombinant rabies vaccines.

Under the terms of the agreement, Mallinckrodt Veterinary, Inc.  has provided
Microbix with an initial funding fee and will provide additional
milestone-based support to pursue the continued research, development and
registration of these vaccines.  Following the satisfactory completion of the
research and development program, both parties have agreed to enter into a
royalty-bearing worldwide licensing agreement for the use of the rabies
vaccine and Microbix will retain a portion of the manufacturing rights for the
product.

The unique properties of this recombinant vaccine is anticipated to offer
significant advantages in terms of cost of production, safety and flexibility
in administration.  Paul D.  Cottone, President and CEO of Mallinckrodt
Veterinary, Inc.  said, "This technology provides an excellent opportunity to
develop a product which will better meet the needs of our customers for rabies
prevention, through improved efficacy, routes of administration, and its use
in multiple species."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Industry News (Vaccines)
Survival Improvement Shown in Breast Cancer Trial with Theratope


Dr.  Grant MacLean, Medical Oncologist and principal investigator for
Biomira's clinical study at the Cross Cancer Institute in Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada, presented results of Biomira's Phase II clinical trials of Theratope
therapeutic vaccine, in patients with metastatic breast cancer.

The meeting "Novel Vaccine Strategies:  Immunotherapeutic Strategies for
Cancer" Conference was held in San Diego, California.  Theratope is a
non-toxic therapy designed to stimulate the immune system of cancer patients
to respond against the cancer.  The study was conducted over a 2-1/2 year
period at the Cross Cancer Institute in Edmonton and Guy's Hospital in London,
United Kingdom (U.K.).

Among 48 women in a randomized clinical trial, MacLean reported that 24 who
received Theratope in its standard investigational program had a statistically
significant increase in survival over 24 women in the other study group who
did not receive the standard immunomodulation prior to Theratope treatment.
The women on the standard Theratope program have a projected median survival
of 19.7 months versus 12.6 months for the other study group, with statistical
significant at P=0.018.

In addition to increased survival, the women on the standard Theratope program
had statistically significant higher levels of antibodies against a specific
molecule, Sialyl-Tn (STn), found on the surface of breast cancer cells, than
was observed with those who received the alternate Theratope program.

Since receiving the analysis of the data, Biomira has been consulting with
clinical investigators and scientists about these results and will be
contacting regulatory officials in the U.S., Canada and Europe to discuss
their recommendations for the next steps to take Theratope therapeutic vaccine
to commercialization for women who suffer from metastatic breast cancer.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Influenza
Killer Flu Expected


Influenza could develop a new form and trigger a worldwide epidemic at any
time, experts caution.

At a conference of more than 200 infectious disease specialists, work has
started on a plan to prepare for what some believe is an inevitable pandemic,
or worldwide epidemic, of killer flu.

John LaMontagne of the U.S.  National Institutes of Health (NIH) said at the
conference that the flu virus is "dynamic and very resourceful" and can change
rapidly into forms that overwhelm natural human defenses.  "We anticipate we
will have another pandemic, but we don't know when," he said.

Dr.  Dominick Iacuzio of the U.S.  National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases (NIAID) said concern about another pandemic led to his
organizing the conference.  "It has happened before, and it can happen again,"
he said.

The last major worldwide flu epidemic was in 1968, the so-called "Hong Kong
flu."  New strains of the flu virus typically sweep through the international
population every ten to 40 years.

"Some experts say we are overdue," said Iacuzio.

Alan Hansen of the World Health Organization (WHO) said modern transportation
makes it possible for new flu viruses to touch every continent within a matter
of weeks - it once took many months.

In 1918-1919, a new viral strain infected more than 2 billion people and
killed an estimated 20 million to 40 million.  The "Asian flu" in 1957 was
also new and caused 750,000 deaths in the United States alone.

Iacuzio said the Bethesda, Maryland, conference was called to help
international experts identify the gaps in what is known about the flu virus
and its control.

A formal report is being prepared, but these findings will be among the
conclusions, he said:

* Increased surveillance, particularly in remote Asian areas, is needed for
early detection of new flu viral strains.  If a potentially new form of the
flu is found early enough, said Iacuzio, the pandemic could be blunted by
rapidly producing a new vaccine.

* Some experts believe the concentration of proteins used in the flu vaccine
could be reduced, thus making more doses available.  "We don't know the
answers to this," said Iacuzio, and that knowledge could be critical if there
is a sudden, worldwide need for vaccine.

* Final work on vaccines that can be applied as nose spray or nose drops must
be completed.  These so-called "cold-adapted vaccines" use modified live virus
and have been shown to be effective in some studies.  Iacuzio said their
availability in a pandemic could save many lives by protecting people against
the disease.

* Antivirals, drugs used to treat the flu infections, could provide physicians
with important new weapons in treating patients already infected.  Iacuzio
said candidate drugs are being tested, but are not available.  Such drugs need
to be speedily developed, he said.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Malaria Vaccines
SPf66 Vaccine Candidate Is Produced Under GMP Criteria


The malaria vaccine candidate SPf66 can be reproducibly manufactured, which is
essential for performing large-scale trials.

For large morbidity and mortality trials to study SPf66 (being considered for
the World Health Organization) to be interpretable, the product must be well
characterized, meet standardized release criteria and perform consistently,
noted W.R.  Ballou, Department of Immunology, Walter Reed Army Institute of
Research, Washington, D.C., and colleagues.

Ballou et al.  presented their findings at the 44th Annual Meeting of the
American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, San Antonio, Texas,
November 17-21, 1995 ("Characterization of the Peptide Polymer SPf66 Malaria
Vaccine, abstract 325, American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene,
1995;53(2):194-195).

"Our data indicate that SPf66 can be reproducibly manufactured and provide a
rational basis for developing reference standards for in-process and final
product release criteria," wrote Ballou et al.  in their presentation
abstract.

The methods of analysis the researchers used included the following:  mass
spectroscopy, reverse phase high performance liquid chromatography, size
exclusion chromatography, polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, amino acid
analysis, sequence analysis, assessment of free thiols and determination of
counter ions.

"These analyses indicate that SPf66 exists as a mixture of monomeric and
multimeric species, but in our hands, the ratios of these species are
remarkably consistent from lot to lot," Ballou et al.  wrote.

Although the manufacturing process for SPf66 has the potential to produce
peptide with substantial variability from lot to lot, Ballou et al.  produced
several lots of SPf66 under good manufacturing practices (GMP) for the
specific purpose of product characterization and to establish standardization
criteria.

In a related report, Ballou et al.  said they established an assay that may be
applicable in making sure that vaccine lots are uniform ("Analysis of Potency
of the SPf66 Malaria Vaccine," abstract 324, American Journal of Tropical
Medicine and Hygiene, 1995;53(2):194).

The assay also may be suitable for comparing differences with new SPf66
formulations.

Data about immunogenicity from numerous clinical trials of SPf66 have had
seroconversion rates that varied significantly.  This variability could not be
easily explained by differences in the populations that were vaccinated, noted
Ballou et al.

"We have established a potency assay in BALB/c mice in which the read out is
antibody response following intraperitoneal immunization at various dilutions
of vaccine," wrote Ballou et al.  "SPf66 can be shown to have a very steep
dose response curve in this system which permits comparison among various
vaccine formulations."

Using this model, the researchers showed that a low molecular weight component
purified from SPf66 peptide by size exclusion chromatography essentially is
nonimmunogenic.  The low molecular weight component does not bind well to
aluminum hydroxide and comprises a substantial portion of SPf66.  The
variability in its content among clinical lots may have contributed to the
disparate results obtained in human vaccine studies, Ballou et al.  said.

"Whether vaccine potency as measured by this assay in any way correlates with
efficacy has not been established, but this system may be useful as a release
assay to insure comparability among vaccine lots and to compare differences
with new SPf66 formulations," wrote Ballou et al.

 - by Cathy Clark




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Respiratory Syncytial Virus
Human RSV Succumbs to Bioengineering Techniques


Bioengineered production of infectious human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
provides immediate applications for the development of a live attenuated
vaccine.

RSV is considered the most important pediatric viral respiratory pathogen
worldwide.  It is responsible for considerable morbidity and mortality and
lacks an approved vaccine or effective antiviral therapy.  In addition to the
lack of a good animal model (other than the chimpanzee), RSV does not grow
well in culture.  Both of these problems have impeded research, making the
development of a vaccine difficult.

Peter L.  Collins et al.  produced infectious human RSV from cloned cDNA
particles in vitro paving the way for development of live attenuated vaccine
strains ("Production of Infectious Human Respiratory Syncytial Virus from
Cloned cDNA Confirms an Essential Role for the Transcription Elongation Factor
from the 5' Proximal Open Reading Frame of the M2 mRNA in Gene Expression and
Provides a Capability for Vaccine Development," Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, December 5, 1995;92(25):11563-67).

"An exciting possibility is that RSV might be engineered in ways that enhance
its immunogenicity and induce a level of protection greater than that provided
by natural infection," noted Collins et al.  In addition "RSV can be evaluated
as a possible vector for protective antigens of other respiratory tract
pathogens.  An RSV vector also might have utility in transient gene therapy of
the respiratory tract."

The cloned RSV was produced by the intracellular coexpression of five
plasmid-born cDNAs.  One encoded a complete positive-sense version of the RSV
genome, and each of the other four encode a separate RSV protein.  If any of
these were deleted, RSV was not produced.  The cDNA segments were synthesized
by reverse transcription (RT)-coupled PCR (RT-PCR) from intracellular RSV mRNA
or virion-derived genome RNA.

They noted that the strategy for producing infections RSV from cDNA-express
antigenome involved its coexpression with those RSV proteins that were
necessary and sufficient to complete two important processes:  1) the ability
to produce an antigenomic nucleocapsid capable of RNA replication and 2) to
render the progeny genomic nucleocapsid competent for both RNA replication and
transcription.  Transcription by the genomic nucleocapsid would then provide
all of the other RSV proteins and initiate a productive infection.

Recently, this approach was successfully accomplished with two rhabdoviruses,
rabies and vesicular stomatitis virus, by M.J.  Schnell et al.  (EMBO J.,
1994;13:4195-4203) and N.D.  Lawson et al.  (PNAS, 1995;92:4477-81).

The possibility also exists that defined mutations can be introduced into
these infectious RSV clones.  This could have multiple applications toward the
understanding of the molecular biology and pathogenesis of this particularly
difficult to study virus.

"It may be possible to insert foreign sequence into the RSV genome for
coexpression," concluded Collins et al.  "Genes of interest for evaluation
include those encoding cytokines, antagonists thereof, or proteins rich in
T-helper-cell epitopes.  This offers the possibility of modifying and
improving the immune response quantitatively and qualitatively."

The corresponding author for this study is Peter L.  Collins, Laboratory of
Infectious Disease, 7 Center Drive, MSC 0720, NIAID, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0720, USA.

 - by Michelle Marble




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Cancer Vaccines
"Gene Therapy for Brain Tumors by Autologous Vaccination with Engineered
GM-CSF Secreting Tumor Cells."  J.S.  Yu, J.A.  Butwick, G.  Dkanoff, E.A.
Chiocca and X.O.  Breakefield.  Neurosurgery Service and Molecular

Neurogenetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown,
Massachusetts; Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.

According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 25th Annual Meeting
of the Society for Neuroscience, held November 11-16, 1995, in San Diego,
California, "We have developed an ex vivo gene therapy paradigm for the
treatment of brain tumors using granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor (GM-CSF).  The murine B16 melanoma and the GL 261 glioma lines were
infected with MFG recombinant retrovirus containing the mouse GM-CSF cDNA.
The tumor lines were confirmed to secrete GM-CSF by ELISA.  Subcutaneous
vaccination of syngeneic mice with irradiated GM-CSF-secreting B16 melanoma
cells completely protected animals from subsequent intracranial B16 tumor
inoculation.  Histologic evaluation revealed the presence of neutrophils,
eosinophils and lymphocytes in the intracerebral inoculation site.  In
contrast, animals vaccinated with irradiated B16 cells or not vaccinated
succumbed to intracranial tumor within 3 weeks after inoculation.  Treatment
of established intracranial B16 melanoma tumors with subcutaneous injection of
irradiated GMCSF secreting B16 cells increased median survival as compared to
injection of irradiated B16 cells or no treatment.  In addition, treatment of
intracerebral glioma with subcutaneous vaccination with irradiated,
GM-CSF-secreting autologous cells also increased survival compared to
controls.  Histologic examination revealed a dramatic perivascular lymphocytic
infiltrate beginning 3 days after treatment with GM-CSF transduced cells which
was not found in controls."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Immunology
"Immunization and Ganciclovir Treatment Delay the Formation of HSV-TK
Expressing Brain Tumors in Rats Through Immunologic Suppression."  U.  Blomer,
D.  Barha, D.A.  Petersen and F.H.  Gage.  Department of Neurosurgery

University of California at San Diego, San Diego, California; The Salk
Institut, La Jolla, California.

According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 25th Annual Meeting
of the Society for Neuroscience, held November 11-16, 1995, in San Diego,
California, "Immunity to tumors develops following ganciclovir (GCV) treatment
of brain tumors expressing the Herpes Simplex Virus-thymidine kinase (HSV-TK)
gene.  To study if HSV-TK by itself might contribute to the anti-tumor
immunogenicity, the growth of non-immunogenic D74 tumors, wild type (D74-w.t.)
and TK-modified D74 (D74-TK) brain tumor cells, were studied in naive rats and
rats previously treated and cured of 9L, tumors by HSV-TK and GCV treatments.
Formation of the D74-TK tumors were significantly reduced in both naive and
pretreated rats, even though the in vitro growth rate of these tumors was
similar.  Analysis of immune cells infiltrating the tumors revealed a
significant increase in the CD4 positive cells in TK-modified tumor cells in
the previously treated rats.  Furthermore the regression of the D74-TK tumors
was greater in the previously treated rats.  These findings suggest that even
in non immunogenic tumors, the expression of HSV-TK slows the tumor formation,
that can be associated with the immune response.  This immunity could be
exploited by vaccination strategies to increase tumor regression seen with
HSV-TK and GCV treatments.  Supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(BL-389 1/1)."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Malaria Vaccines
"DNA Vaccines Against Malaria Based on the SSP2 Antigen."  R.C.  Hedstrom, M.
Sedegah, H.  Wang, M.  Kaur, P.  Hobart and S.L.  Hoffman.  Malaria Program,
Naval Medical Research Institute, Bethesda, Maryland; Vical Incorporated, San

Diego, California.

According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 44th Annual Meeting
of the American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, held November 17-21,
1995, in San Antonio, Texas, "We recently reported that Plasmodium yoelii CSP
DNA vaccines induced specific antibodies and nearly complete CD8(+)
CTL-dependent protection against sporozoite challenge in BALB/c mice.
Preliminary studies have now shown that a full-length P.  yoelii SSP2 (PySSP2)
DNA vaccine protected approximately 50% of A/J mice.  In an effort to improve
upon the results with PySSP2, we constructed two DNA vaccine plasmids both of
which contained a truncated PySSP2 gene lacking the 5' terminal region of the
gene thought to encode the native signal peptide:  one contained an in-frame
fusion with a mammalian (tPA) signal peptide while the other one remained
signal minus.  The ability of both plasmids to express PySSP2 in vitro was
demonstrated by immunoblot analysis of the cell pellet and culture supernatant
material from transiently transfected COS-7 cells.  An immunoreactive band of
an expected molecular mass was detected with anti-PySSP2 Mab (NYS4) in both
fractions from cells transfected with the tPAPySSP2 plasmid but only in the
cell pellet material of the COS-7 cell cultures transfected with the signal
minus plasmid.  The ability of these plasmids to induce protective immunity is
being evaluated in multiple strains of mice.  So far, both BALB/c and A/J mice
have produced antibodies after a single immunization with the tPA-PySSP2 DNA
vaccine as determined by IFAT; the immunoreactive pattern on sporozoites was
similar in appearance to that obtained with NYS4.  Mice immunized with the
signal minus construct have not yet produced measurable antibodies to
sporozoites.  Initial protection studies and the results of the ongoing
immunogenicity and protection studies will be presented."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Malaria Vaccines
"Malaria Vaccine Trials Against Preerythrocytic Stages of Plasmodium
Falciparum in Chimpanzees:  1) Effect on Parasitemia Elicited by Four Vaccine
Candidates."  P.  Millet, A.  Luty, G.  Dubreuil, E.  LeRoy, A.  Tartar, W.M.

Eling, A.J.  Georges and P.  Druilhe.  Centre International de Recherche
Medicale de Franceville (CIRMF), Franceville, Gabon; Institut Pasteur, Roux,
Paris, France; University Hospital Nijmegen, Department of Parasitology,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 44th Annual Meeting
of the American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, held November 17-21,
1995, in San Antonio, Texas, "We report here the effect on blood stage
development of the vaccination of 5 non-splenectomized chimpanzees with 4
Plasmodium falciparum liver stage proteins:  Liver Stage Antigen 1 (LSA-1) and
3 (LSA-3), Sporozoite Threonine and Asparagin Rich Protein (STARP), and
Sporozoite And Liver Stage Antigen (SALSA).  LSA-1 is specific to liver stages
while LSA-3, SALSA, and STARP are also expressed by the sporozoite.  To
activate multiple immune mechanisms using the same antigen, 3 types of
immunization per chimpanzee were used:  immunization by lipopeptides only, by
peptides associated with the adjuvant Moutaulde ISA 31 (SEPIC, Paris France),
and by recombinant proteins associated with the some adjuvant.  One chimpanzee
per vaccine candidate was used; a control animal was immunized with adjuvant
only.  After the course of vaccination each chimpanzee received a dose
containing 120,000 sporozoites intravenously at day 0.  The control animal
developed a parasitemia of 270 parasites/(micro)l at day 7.  Parasitemia
decreased rapidly to 15 parasites/(micro)l the next day, and no parasites were
detectable at day 10.  The 2 chimpanzee vaccinated with LSA-1 and SALSA
developed identical parasitemias (270 parasites/(micro)l at day 7).
Interestingly, the chimpanzee vaccinated with STARP developed a 3 fold greater
parasitemia at day 7.  In marked contrast, the chimpanzee vaccinated with
products from the protein LSA-3 developed a 3 times lower parasitemia than the
non-protected animals at day 7 (80 parasites/(micro)l).  According to the time
of maturation of liver stage of P.  falciparum (minimum of 6 days),
parasitemia observed 7 days after sporozoite inoculation is directly linked
with merozoites from the hepatic stage, and not from blood-stage
multiplication.  Thus, the decreased parasitemia observed for the LSA-3
vaccinated animal could be linked with a protective immune mechanism.
Although this experiment does not allow to prove vaccine efficacy, interest of
such research using limited a number of Apes will be discussed with reference
to these observation."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Malaria Vaccines
"Optimization of Immune Responses to a Plasmodium DNA Vaccine in Aotus
Monkeys."  R.A.  Gramzinski, D.C.  Maris, N.  Obaldia, R.  Rossan, M.
Sedegah, B.  Wang, P.  Hobart, M.  Margalith and S.L.  Hoffman.  Malaria

Program, Naval Medical Research Institute, Bethesda, Maryland; ProMed/Gorgas
Memorial Laboratory, Panama City, Panama; Vical Incorporated, San Diego,
California.

According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 44th Annual Meeting
of the American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, held November 17-21,
1995, in San Antonio, Texas, "We have demonstrated that intramuscular (IM)
immunization with a plasmid DNA vaccine encoding the Plasmodium yoelii CSP
protein (PyCSP) induces high antibody levels and cytotoxic T cells against
PyCSP, and induces a CD8(+) T-cell dependent protection in 85% of BALB/c mice.
In preparation for development of DNA vaccines designed to produce protective
antibodies against P.  falciparum erythrocytic stage antigens, we conducted
studies to optimize antibody responses in Aotus monkeys after immunization
with the PyCSP DNA vaccine.  Groups of 3 monkeys were immunized at 3 week
intervals with 125, 500, or 2000 (micro)g PyCSP DNA.  IM alone (tibialis
anterior), IM after pre-treatment with 0.25% bupivacaine, and intradermal (ID)
routes were compared.  Only monkeys immunized by the ID route produced
antibodies against sporozoites.  Antibody titers, obtained by indirect
fluorescent antibody test (IFAT) against air-dried sporozoites and by ELISA
using a PyCSP recombinant protein, peaked at 3 weeks after the third ID dose
and were reduced 50% by 7 weeks after the third dose.  There was a trend
toward a dose response with peak geometric mean IFAT titers of 806, 508, and
403 for the 2000, 500, and 125 (micro)g doses respectively.  In a second
experiment antibody responses to a 500 (micro)g dose at multiple sites (2 or
6) were found superior to responses generated by a single site administration.
These data clearly demonstrate that ID immunization generates significantly
better antibody responses to the PyCSP DNA vaccine than IM immunization, and
support the use of the ID route for the initial studies of the efficacy of DNA
vaccines in inducing protective antibodies against P.  falciparum erythrocytic
stage antigens."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Malaria Vaccines
"Protective Efficacy Against Sporozoite Challenge With a Combination
Sporozoite and Erythrocytic Stage Malaria Vaccine."  Y.  Charoenvit, R.  Wang,
T.M.  Daly, C.A.  Long, G.P.  Corradin and S.L.  Hoffman.  Malaria Program,

Naval Medical Research Institute, Bethesda, Maryland; Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Hahnemann University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania;
Institute of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, Epalinges, Switzerland.

According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 44th Annual Meeting
of the American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, held November 17-21,
1995, in San Antonio, Texas, "Recent reports indicated that immunization of
mice with GST-PYCI, a recombinant protein based on the Plasmodium yoelii MSP-1
protects against challenge with infected erythrocytes, and immunization of
mice with MAP4 (QGPGAP)4 P2P30, a multiple antigen peptide based on the P.
yoelii CS protein protects against sporozoite challenge.  The current studies
were designed to determine if:  (1) GST-PYC2 (a modified GST PYC1) protects
against sporozoite challenge, and (2) if immunization with GST-PYC2 plus MAP4
(OGPGAP)4 P2P30 would provide additive or synergistic protection.  Groups of
10 mice were immunized with individual or combined vaccine emulsified in
TiterMax adjuvant and challenged with P.  yoelii sporozoites.  One of 10 mice
immunized with GSTPYC2 was completely protected against sporozoite challenge.
The remaining nine mice had significantly lower levels of parasitemia on the
last day of follow up (day 14) than did control mice (P<0.01 ).  Immunization
with the combined vaccine reduced by 50% the level of parasite specific
antibodies as compared to that induced by the individual components.
Nonetheless, 50% of the mice immunized with the combined vaccine, 40% of the
mice immunized with MAP4 (QGPGAP)4 P2P30 vaccine, and 10% of the mice
immunized with the GST-PYC2 vaccine were fully protected.  This modest
increase in protection in the combination group was not statistically
significant, but may have been a reflection of additive activity of antibodies
against each immunogen.  These studies provide a foundation and direction for
work designed to optimize the construction, delivery, and assessment of
multicomponent malaria vaccines."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Cancer Vaccines
Duda, R.B.; Yang, H.; Dooley, D.D.; Abujawdeh, G.  "Recombinant BCG Therapy
Suppresses Melanoma Tumor Growth."  Annals of Surgical Oncology, November
1995;2(6):542-549.


According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Annals of
Surgical Oncology, "BACKGROUND:  Melanoma is the fastest rising cancer in the
United States.  Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) has been genetically engineered
to actively express and secrete the cytokine interleukin-2 (IL-2).  Both BCG
and IL-2 have known potent antitumor and immunomodulatory properties.
METHODS:  This recombinant BCG (rBCG 3A) has been tested as an intratumoral
injection and a vaccine therapy in conjunction with irradiated tumor cells
against melanoma in the murine B16 melanoma model.  RESULTS:  The transfection
process did not adversely alter the function of the wild-type (WT) BCG.  rBCG
3A and WT BCG are equally effective intratumoral and vaccine therapies against
melanoma when compared with normal saline control groups.  Tumor burdens were
significantly smaller (P less than or equal to 0.01 and 0.05) for the
treatment groups for both intratumoral and vaccine administration of therapy.
Immunization with rBCG 3A and WT BCG 14 days before a B16 challenge resulted
in an similar to 45% smaller tumor burden when compared with controls.
CONCLUSIONS:  Novel therapies based on the immunogenic properties of melanoma
combined with molecular technologies may offer promise for an effective and
safe treatment of melanoma."  The corresponding author for this study is:  RB
Duda, Harvard Univ, Beth Israel Hosp, Sch Med, Div Surg Oncol, 330 Brookline
Ave, Boston, MA 02215 USA.  For subscription information for this journal
contact the publisher:  Raven Press, 227 East Washington Sq, Philadelphia, PA
19106.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

HIV Vaccines
Honda, M.; Matsuo, K.; Nakasone, T.; Okamoto, Y.; Yoshizaki, H.; Kitamura, K.;
Sugiura, W.; Watanabe, K.; Fukushima, Y.; Haga, S.; Katsura, Y.; Tasaka, H.;
Komuro, K.; Yamada, T.; Asano, T.; Yamazaki, A.; Yamazaki, S.  "Protective

Immune Responses Induced by Secretion of a Chimeric Soluble Protein from a
Recombinant Mycobacterium bovis Bacillus Calmette-Guerin Vector Candidate
Vaccine for Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1 in Small Animals."
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, November 7, 1995;92(23):10693-10697.

According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, "A
recombinant Mycobacterium bovis bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vector-based
vaccine that secretes the V3 principal neutralizing epitope of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) could induce immune response to the epitope and
prevent the viral infection.  By using the Japanese consensus sequence of
HIV-1, we successfully constructed chimeric protein secretion vectors by
selecting an appropriate insertion site of a carrier protein and established
the principal neutralizing determinant (PND)-peptide secretion system in BCG.
The recombinant BCG (rBCG)-inoculated guinea pigs were initially screened by
delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) skin reactions to the PND peptide,
followed by passive transfer of the DTH by the systemic route.  Further,
immunization of mice with the rBCG resulted in induction of cytotoxic T
lymphocytes.  The guinea pig immune antisera showed elevated titers to the PND
peptide and neutralized HIVMN, and administration of serum IgG from the
vaccinated guinea pigs was effective in completely blocking the HIV infection
in thymus/liver transplanted severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID)/hu or
SCID/PBL mice.  In addition, the immune serum IgG was shown to neutralize
primary field isolates of HIV that match the neutralizing sequence motif by a
peripheral blood mononuclear fell-based virus neutralization assay.  The data
support the idea that the antigen-secreting rBCG system can be used as a tool
for development of HIV vaccines."  The corresponding author for this study is:
M Honda, Natl Inst Hlth, Ctr AIDS Res, Shinjuku Ku, Tokyo 162, Japan.  For
subscription information for this journal contact the publisher:  Natl Acad
Sciences, 2101 Constitution Ave NW, Washington, DC 20418.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Haemophilus influenzae
Frasch, C.E.  "Haemophilus influenzae Type b Conjugate and Combination
Vaccines."  Clinical Immunotherapeutics, November 1995;4(5):376-386.


According to the author's abstract of an article published in Clinical
Immunotherapeutics, "Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) conjugate vaccines
represent a new technology wherein an immunogen is targeted to a specific
immune response mechanism.  Covalent attachment of the Hib polysaccharide to a
protein carrier converts the T cell-independent polysaccharide antigen into a
protein-like T cell-dependent antigen.  The polysaccharide alone is poorly
immunogenic in infants (less than or equal to 12 months old), and conjugation
to a protein carrier results in a protein-like antibody response to the Hib
polysaccharide in infants.  Conjugate vaccines induce mostly IgG antibodies
and immunological memory.  Later vaccination or natural exposure then induces
a booster response to the Hib polysaccharide.  These conjugate vaccines have
dramatically reduced the incidence of Hib disease in many industrialized
countries, and also reduce nasopharyngeal carriage of Hib in unvaccinated
children in populations in which the vaccine is used.  The Hib conjugates have
now been combined with diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and pertussis vaccine to
reduce the number of injections required for infants.  Finally, the conjugate
technology that has permitted the near elimination of Hib disease has now been
extended to other invasive encapsulated bacterial pathogens."  The
corresponding author for this study is:  CE Frasch, Ctr Biol Evaluat & Res,
Div Bacterial Prod, 1401 Rockville Pike, HFM-428, Rockville, MD 20853 USA.
For subscription information for this journal contact the publisher:  Adis
International Ltd, 41 Centorian Dr, Private Bag 65901,, Mairangi Bay, Auckland
10, New Zealand.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Herpes Simplex Virus Type 2
Heineman, T.C.; Connelly, B.L.; Bourne, N.; Stanberry, L.R.; Cohen, J.
"Immunization with Recombinant Varicella-Zoster Virus Expressing Herpes
Simplex Virus Type 2 Glycoprotein D Reduces the Severity of Genital Herpes in

Guinea Pigs."  Journal of Virology, December 1995;69(12):8109-8113.

According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Journal of
Virology, "Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) is an attractive candidate for a
live-virus vector for the delivery of foreign antigens.  The Oka vaccine
strain of VZV is safe and effective in humans, and recombinant Oka VZV (ROka)
can be generated by transfecting cells with a set of overlapping cosmid DNAs.
By this method, the herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) glycoprotein D (gD2)
gene was inserted into an intergenic site in the unique short region of the
Oka VZV genome.  Expression of gD2 in cells infected with the recombinant Oka
strain VZV (ROka-gD2) was confirmed by antibody staining of fixed cells and by
immunoblot analysis.  Immune electron microscopy demonstrated the presence of
gD2 in the envelope of ROka-gD2 virions.  The ability of ROka-gD2 to protect
guinea pigs against HSV 2 challenge was assessed by inoculating animals with
three doses of uninfected human fibroblasts, fibroblasts infected with ROka
VZV, or fibroblasts infected with ROka-gD2.  Neutralizing antibodies specific
for HSV-2 developed in animals immunized with ROka-gD2.  Forty days after the
third inoculation, animals were challenged intravaginally with HSV-2.
Inoculation of guinea pigs with ROka-gD2 significantly reduced the severity of
primary HSV 2 infection (P<0.001).  These experiments demonstrate that the Oka
strain of VZV can be used as a live virus vector to protect animals from
disease with a heterologous virus."  The corresponding author for this study
is:  J Cohen, Niaid, Clin Invest Lab, Med Virol Sect, Bethesda, MD 20892 USA.
For subscription information for this journal contact the publisher:  Amer Soc
Microbiology, 1325 Massachusetts Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20005-4171.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Immunology
Stephens, H.A.F.; Brown, A.E.; Chandanayingyong, D.; Webster, H.K.; Sirikong,
M.; Longta, P.; Vangseratthana, R.; Gordon, D.M.; Lekmak, S.; Rungruang, E.
"The Presence of the HLA Class II Allele DPB1*0501 in Ethnic Thais Correlates

with an Enhanced Vaccine-Induced Antibody Response to a Malaria Sporozoite
Antigen."  European Journal of Immunology, November 1995;25(11):3142-3147.

According to the authors' abstract of an article published in European Journal
of Immunology, "In this study, we examined the correlation between the
frequency of allelic variants of the class II human leukocyte antigen (HLA)
DR, DQ and DP gene loci and the quantitative humoral immune response observed
in 71 Thai volunteers, subsequent to vaccination with a conjugated subunit
vaccine.  This vaccine was designed to induce antibodies directed against the
immunodominant repeat region of the Plasmodium falciparum circumsporozoite
(CS) protein.  The presence of the DPB1*0501, a relatively common allele in
Asian populations, was found to be associated with high vaccine-induced CS
repeat-specific antibody responses in the volunteers.  Given the increasing
focus on the use of subunit vaccines in the control of infectious diseases,
consideration of the influence of class II allele frequencies in ethnically
diverse recipient populations may be important."  The corresponding author for
this study is:  HAF Stephens, Mahidol Univ, Siriraj Hosp & Med Sch, Dept
Transfus Med, Bangkok 10700, Thailand.  For subscription information for this
journal contact the publisher:  VCH Publishers Inc, 303 NW 12TH Ave, Deerfield
Beach, FL 33442-1788.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Listeria monocytogenes
Miller, M.A.; Skeen, M.J.; Ziegler, H.K.  "Nonviable Bacterial Antigens
Administered with IL-12 Generate Antigen-Specific T Cell Responses and
Protective Immunity Against Listeria monocytogenes."  Journal of Immunology,

November 15, 1995;155(10):4817-4828.

According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Journal of
Immunology, "The development of effective vaccine strategies for intracellular
pathogens, including bacteria, viruses, and parasites, is one of the major
frontiers of scientific research.  For the studies described here, the murine
model of Listeria infection was used to evaluate the adjuvant effects of IL-12
when used as an immunization component.  These studies revealed that typically
nonimmunogenic doses of heat-killed Listeria monocytogenes, or soluble
listerial Ag preparations, elicit intense Th1-type Listeria-specific T-cell
responses when administered i.p.  along with recombinant murine IL-12.  In
addition to the Ag-specific production of IL-2 by CD4(+) peritoneal cells that
was elicited, several other correlates of protective responses were noted,
including dramatic induction of CD3(+) and alpha beta TCR(+) cell populations
in the peritoneal cavity and increased expression of class II MHC and
production of IL-12 (upon in vitro restimulation) by peritoneal macrophages.
Protection studies demonstrated that the T-cell responses elicited by a
IL-12-potentiated, heat-killed L.  monocytogenes vaccine were sufficient to
effectively protect mice against challenge with a large dose of virulent
Listeria."  The corresponding author for this study is:  MA Miller, Emory
Univ, Sch Med, Dept Microbiol & Immunol, 1510 Clifton Rd, Rollins Res Bldg,
Atlanta, GA 30322 USA.  For subscription information for this journal contact
the publisher:  Amer Assoc Immunologists, 9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD
20814.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Pediatrics (HBV)
Hurie, M.B.; Saari, T.N.; Proctor, M.E.; Davis, J.P.  "Hospitals' Responses to
Universal Infant Hepatitis B Vaccination Recommendations."  Pediatrics,
November 1995;96(5 Part 1):875-879.


According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Pediatrics,
"OBJECTIVE:  To assess the extent to which hospitals in a midwestern state
with low acute hepatitis B virus (HBV) morbidity offered hepatitis B (Hep B)
vaccine to all infants, whether offering infants Hep B vaccine was associated
with hospital geographic location or size, as measured by the number of
births, and how hospital staff resolved key programmatic issues.  METHODS:
The managers of hospital newborn nurseries (n=110) were surveyed by mail.  The
written response rate was 72%; all of the nonresponders were interviewed by
telephone.  The outcome measured was the number of hospitals offering Hep B
vaccine to all infants by geographic region and hospital size.  RESULTS:
Sixty-five percent of the hospitals routinely offered Hep B vaccine to all
infants; these hospitals accounted far 80% of reported Wisconsin births.  In
univariate analysis, the decision to offer infants Hep B vaccine was
associated with both hospital size and hospital location.  After controlling
for size, hospitals in the northeastern region were eight times more likely
(relative risk, 8.21; 95% confidence interval, 1.30, 51.79) to offer infants
Hep B vaccine than hospitals in the southeastern (referent) region.  Regional
differences in reported rates of acute HBV infection do not explain this
finding, because morbidity in the northeastern region (1 per 100,000) is among
the lowest in Wisconsin.  Although more than 80% of hospitals with Hep B
vaccination programs required written informed consent for vaccination, had
standing orders for administering Hep B vaccine to infants whose mothers'
hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) test results were known, and had
mechanisms to notify the infants' physicians that the infants had been
vaccinated, only 38% had standing orders for testing mothers whose HBsAg test
results were unknown.  CONCLUSIONS:  Hospitals are not necessarily deterred
from implementing infant Hep B vaccination programs by low community HBV
morbidity.  Hospitals should develop policies to assure that parturient women
with unknown HBsAg status are screened and their infants are appropriately
treated."  The corresponding author for this study is:  MB Hurie, Wisconsin
Immunizat Program, 1414 E Washington Ave, Room 167, Madison, WI 53703 USA.
For subscription information for this journal contact the publisher:  Amer
Acad Pediatrics, 141 North-West Point Blvd, Elk Grove Village, IL 60007-1098.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Pediatrics (Immunization)
Askew, G.L.; Finelli, L.; Lutz, J.; Degraaf, J.; Siegel, B.; Spitalny, K.
"Beliefs and Practices Regarding Childhood Vaccination among Urban Pediatric
Providers in New Jersey."  Pediatrics, November 1995;96(5 Part 1):889-892.


According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Pediatrics,
"BACKGROUND:  In 1991, the fourth largest measles outbreak in the nation (824
cases) occurred in the Jersey City, New Jersey area.  Data from a subsequent
intervention trial in Jersey City demonstrated that vaccinations were more
likely to be delayed for children who had received care from private rather
than public clinic providers.  In addition, failure to administer multiple
indicated vaccines at a single visit was associated with vaccination delay,
and reluctance to administer multiple vaccines was more common among private
providers.  These findings prompted an investigation of vaccination beliefs
and practices among urban pediatric providers.  METHODS:  A telephone survey
of vaccination beliefs and practices was administered to all pediatric
providers in both private and public clinics in the Paterson and Jersey City
areas.  RESULTS:  Private providers were less likely than public clinic
providers to consider vaccinating children during emergency room visits
(relative risk [RR] = 2.2; 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.2-4.2) or hospital
admissions (RR = 13.2; 95% CI = 1.9-92.7) and less likely to believe that all
recommended vaccine doses should be administered simultaneously (RR =
infinite; lower 95% confidence limit = 3.0).  Private providers were less
likely to consider administering live-virus vaccines to children with minor
acute illnesses and low-grade fever (RR = 2.2; 95% CI = 1.2-3.8) or
killed-virus vaccines to children with minor acute illnesses without fever (RR
= 3.4; 95% CI = 1.4-8.5) or with low-grade fever (RR = 2.2; 95% CI = 1.2-3.9).
Private providers were more likely to believe that multiple injections should
be avoided because of potential psychological and physical trauma to the child
(RR = 4.0; 95% CI = 1.3-12.3).  CONCLUSIONS:  Adherence to Standards for
Pediatric Immunization Practices by pediatric providers could improve vaccine
coverage rates among urban children."  The corresponding author for this study
is:  GL Askew, Boston Univ, Boston City Hosp, Sch Med, Div Gen Pediat, 818
Harrison Ave-Mat 422, Boston, MA 02118 USA.  For subscription information for
this journal contact the publisher:  Amer Acad Pediatrics, 141 North-West
Point Blvd, Elk Grove Village, IL 60007-1098.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Pediatrics (TB)
Alkassimi, F.A.; Alhajjaj, M.S.; Alorainey, I.O.; Bamgboye, E.A.  "Does the
Protective Effect of Neonatal BCG Correlate with Vaccine-Induced Tuberculin
Reaction?."  American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine,

November 1995;152(5):1575-1578.

According to the authors' abstract of an article published in American Journal
of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, "A case-control study was conducted
in Saudi Arabia, where the same strain of BCG has been used and surveys had
shown that up to 88% of vaccinated children remain tuberculin negative.
Active cases were obtained by surveying the seven tuberculosis centers in 1
yr.  Control subjects were obtained from a nationwide survey of normal
individuals.  Vaccination in both groups was ascertained by history and BCG
scar.  Relative risk of contracting active tuberculosis in the vaccinated
versus unvaccinated and protection was calculated.  protection was as follows:
age group 5 to 14 yr, 82% (55 to 93%); age group 15 to 24 yr, 67% (55 to 77%);
and age group 25 to 34 yr, 20% (-6 to 37%).  We document the uninterrupted
record of protection by BCG administered in the neonatal period and discuss
the significance of vaccination timing.  We concur with other studies that
protection lapsed after about 20 yr.  More importantly, this is the first
large study that documents a lack of tuberculin sensitivity despite
protection.  This challenges the view that sensitization is essential for
protection and supports the 'two-pathway' theory that BCG vaccination could
trigger either protective (Lister type) or antagonistic (tuberculin or Koch
type) reactions and that the most protective vaccines would have little
tuberculin-sensitizing effect because the two pathways are competitive."  The
corresponding author for this study is:  FA Alkassimi, King Saud Univ, Coll
Med, Dept Med 38, POB 2925, Riyadh 11461, Saudi Arabia.  For subscription
information for this journal contact the publisher:  Amer Lung Assoc, 1740
Broadway, New York, NY 10019.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Peptide Vaccines
Mitsuda, S.; Nakagawa, T.; Nakazato, H.; Ikai, A.  "Receptor-Linked Antigen
Delivery System - Importance of Autologous Alpha 2-Macroglobulin in the
Development of Peptide Vaccine."  Biochemical and Biophysical Research

Communications, November 2, 1995;216(1):399-405.

According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Biochemical and
Biophysical Research Communications, "We have hijacked a process of the
receptor-mediated endocytosis to transport peptide antigens into antigen
presenting cells (APCs) for the purpose of increasing the level of antigen
presentation (named Receptor-Linked Antigen Delivery System (R-LADS)).  By
coupling an endogenous plasma proteinase inhibitor alpha2-macroglobulin (alpha
2M) to a synthetic peptide having a partial sequence of HIV-1 envelope
protein, alpha 2M was made to carry the peptide into APCs as a part of the
normal alpha 2M cycle, which resulted in an increased production of specific
antibodies against the peptide (Mitsuda, S., Nakagawa, T., Osada, T.,
Shimamoto, T., Nakazato, H.  and Ikai, A.  (1993) Biochem.  Biophys.  Res.
Commun.  194, 1155-1160).  We demonstrate here that this procedure becomes a
more efficient tool for antibody production when autologous transporter
protein was used.  By using murine alpha 2M (m alpha 2M) instead of
heterologous human alpha 2M (h alpha 2M) when mice were experimental animals,
we were able to dramatically enhance the production level of anti-HIV-1
peptide antibodies and shorten the period which is needed for antibody
production.  We aim to develop effective peptide vaccines by further improving
this system."  The corresponding author for this study is:  S Mitsuda, Tokyo
Inst Technol, Fac Biosci & Biotechnol, Dept Sci Biol, Midori Ku, 4259
Nagatsuta CHO, Yokohama, Kanagawa 226, Japan.  For subscription information
for this journal contact the publisher:  Academic Press Inc Jnl-Comp
Subscriptions, 525B Street, Suite 1900, San Diego, CA 92101-4495.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Pneumococcal
Shahid, N.S.; Steinhoff, M.C.; Hoque, S.S.; Begum, T.; Thompson, C.; Siber,
G.R.  "Serum, Breast Milk, and Infant Antibody after Maternal Immunisation
with Pneumococcal Vaccine."  Lancet, November 11, 1995;346(8985):1252-1257.


According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Lancet,
"Pneumococci are a leading cause of severe bacterial disease in infants and
children world wide.  A possible means of protecting infants in the first few
months of life is immunisation of the mother during prospectively assessed
pneumococcal pregnant women to determine the amount pneumococcal antibody
transmitted to the infants in serum and milk and the half-life of the
passively acquired antibody.  Healthy pregnant women in Dhaka, Bangladesh,
were randomized to receive pneumococcal or meningococcal vaccine with routine
prenatal tetanus immunisation at 30-34 weeks of gestation.  Serum and breast
milk specimens from the mothers and sera from infants were collected up to 22
weeks of age and assayed for specific serum IgG, IgG1, and IgG2 and for milk
IgA antibodies to pneumococcal serotypes 6B and 19F.  55 mothers and 56
infants were followed from birth to five months.  Women who received
pneumococcal vaccine had geometric mean antibody increases of 2.6 and 3.4 to
types 6B and 19F, respectively, The mean infant/maternal antibody ratios were
0.56 and 0.59 (range 0.11-1.46) for these serotypes.  Infant cord antibody
titres correlated with maternal titres.  Infant/maternal IgG ratios correlated
with the interval between immunisation and birth and were higher for specific
IgG1 than for IgG2.  Infants of pneumococcal vaccine recipients had geometric
mean antibody concentrations of 6.8 and 7.5 (micro)g/mL to serotypes 6B and
19F in cord blood; in cord blood and in all subsequent serum specimens the
concentrations were 2-3 fold higher than in control infants.  The median
half-life of passive antibody was about 35 days; at five months of age 63-71%
of infants of pneumococcal vaccine recipients had antibody concentrations
greater than 0.15 (micro)g/mL.  Breast milk IgA antibodies for pneumococcal
serotype 19F, but not for type 6B, were significantly higher in vaccine
recipients up to five months after delivery.  If maternal pneumococcal
polysaccharide antibodies do not interfere with active immunisation of the
infant with new glycoprotein conjugate pneumococcal vaccines, passive-active
immunisation of infants can be a feasible strategy for developing regions."
The corresponding author for this study is:  MC Steinhoff, 624 N Broadway, RM
125, Baltimore, MD 21205 USA.  For subscription information for this journal
contact the publisher:  Lancet Ltd, 42 Bedford Square, London, England WC1B
3SL.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

Varicella-Zoster Virus
Perry, C.M.; Bryson, H.M.  "Oka/Merck Varicella Vaccine:  A Review of Its
Immunogenicity and Protective Efficacy Against Varicella."  Clinical
Immunotherapeutics, November 1995;4(5):396-416.


According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Clinical
Immunotherapeutics, "Oka/Merck varicella vaccine is a live attenuated vaccine
produced from the Oka strain of the herpesvirus varicella zoster virus (VZV).
The Oka strain of VZV is recognized as having low virulence while eliciting
humoral and cell-mediated responses to VZV.  In numerous studies, Oka/Merck
varicella vaccine achieved a seroconversion rate of >95% in healthy children
and adolescents.  In immunocompromised children with leukaemia in remission,
seroconversion was achieved in 80% of vaccinees 12 months after vaccination.
Cell-mediated immune responses generally closely paralleled humoral immune
responses.  The vaccine is also immunogenic in healthy adults.  In healthy
children, a high level of protection was conferred by Oka/Merck varicella
vaccine, and in the only double-blind placebo-controlled study conducted to
date the vaccine was 98% effective in protecting healthy children against
varicella during 2 varicella seasons.  In children with leukaemia, Oka/Merck
varicella vaccine was 80% effective in protecting against mild varicella and
conferred 100% protection against moderate and severe varicella.  In healthy
adults, the rate of protection against varicella was reported to be
approximately 50%.  All observed cases of varicella in healthy and
immunocompromised vaccinees were mild and there were no reports of ay
disease-related complications.  Interestingly in children and adolescents with
leukaemia, the incidence of herpes tester was lower in children who received
Oka/Merck varicella vaccine than in similar children who had natural immunity.
Mild varicelliform rash (occasionally accompanied by fever) has been observed
in healthy children, adolescents and adults who have received Oka/Merck
varicella vaccine.  Pain at the injection site was the adverse effect most
frequently reported in one large study of the vaccine in healthy children.  In
children with leukaemia, vaccine-associated rash has been reported in up to
50% of vaccinees.  When Oka/Merck varicella vaccine was administered to
healthy children in combination with measles, mumps and rubella vaccine there
was no increase in the incidence of skin rashes compared with that caused by
measles, mumps and rubella vaccine in combination with placebo.  Thus,
Oka/Merck varicella vaccine is a highly immunogenic vaccine that confers a
high level of protection against typical varicella in healthy children and
adolescents, and in children and adolescents with leukaemia.  While results of
further long term studies investigating the persistence of protective immunity
against varicella are awaited with interest, available darn indicate that
Oka/Merck varicella vaccine is a major advance in the prevention of this
common and highly infectious disease."  The corresponding author for this
study is:  CM Perry, Adis Int Ltd, 41 Centorian Dr, Private Bag 65901,
Auckland 10, New Zealand.  For subscription information for this journal
contact the publisher:  Adis International Ltd, 41 Centorian Dr, Private Bag
65901,, Mairangi Bay, Auckland 10, New Zealand.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet
December 25, 1995 & January 1

MEETINGS REPORT
*NEW LISTINGS  .  .  .  COMPILED BY KENNETH KIMSEY


January 15-18, 1996, Washington, DC, "BioEast '96."  Information:
BioConferences International, 4405 E.  West Highway, Ste.  501, Bethesda, MD
20814, Phone 301-652-3072, Fax 301-652-4951.

January 26-27, 1996, Palmetto, FL, "7th Annual:  Until There Is a Cure."
Information:  AIDS Manasota, Inc.  Conference, 2080 Ringling Blvd., Suite 302,
Sarasota, FL 34237-7030, Phone 941-954-6011, Fax 941-951-1721.

* January 28 - February 1, 1996, Washington, DC, "3rd National Conference on
Human Retroviruses and Related Infections."  Information:  Infectious Disease
Society of America 703-299-0200.

* February 11-15, 1996, Bethesda, MD, "Advances in AIDS Vaccine Development:
Eighth Annual Meeting of the National Cooperative Vaccine Development Groups
(NCVDGs) for AIDS."  Information:  Marta Glass 303-402-0121 or Elaine Matzen
301-496-6177 or Susan Wescott 301-496-8200.

February 16-18, 1996, New York, NY, "Second Annual CME Course for the
Management of the HIV Infected Patient:  A Practical Approach for the Primary
Care Practitioner."  Information:  Center for Bio-Medical Communication, Inc.,
80 West Madison Avenue, Dumont, NJ 07628, Phone 201-385-8080, Fax
201-385-5650.

* February 26-27, 1996, Rockville, MD, "IBC's 3rd Annual Conference on
Vaccines:  New Advances in Technologies and Applications."  Information:  IBC
USA Conferences, Inc., 225 Turnpike Road, Southborough, MA 01772-1749, Phone
508-481-6400.

March 1-5, 1996, Panama City Beach, FL, "Protease and their Inhibitors in
Cancer."  Information:  American Association for Cancer Research, Public
Ledger Bldg., Ste.  816, 150 S.  Independence Mall West, Philadelphia, PA
19106-3483, Phone 215-440-9300, Fax 215-440-9313.

* March 7-8, 1996, Washington, DC, "IBC's Biennial International Conference on
Mycobacterial Infection:  Pathogenesis, Prevention and Strategies for New Drug
and Vaccine Development."  Information:  IBC USA Conferences, Inc., 225
Turnpike Road, Southborough, MA 01772-1749, Phone 508-481-6400, Fax
508-481-7911.

March 18-20, 1996, Washington, DC, "Fourth Annual Vaccines:  New Technology &
Applications."  Information:  Cambridge Healthtech Institute, 1037 Chestnut
St., Newton Upper Falls, MA 02164, Phone 617-630-1300, Fax 617-630-1325.

March 19-22, 1996, San Francisco, CA, "8th National AIDS Update Conference."
Information:  NAUC 96 Conference Registrar, c/o KREBS Convention Management
Services, 555 DeHaro Street, Suite 200, San Francisco, CA 94107-2348, Phone
415-255-1297, Fax 415-255-2244.

April 14-18, 1996, Washington, DC, "Federation of American Societies for
Experimental Biology - Annual Meeting."  Information:  Experimental Biology
1996, 9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20814-3998, Phone 301-530-7010.

April 18-19, 1996, Vancouver, BC, Canada, "Genetic Susceptibility."
Information:  Diana Berger, Conferences Services Manager, 345 Park Ave., S.,
New York, NY 10010-1707, Phone 212-726-9280, Fax 212-696-9594, Email:
conference@natureny.com.

* May 3-6, 1996, Washington, DC, "Biomedicine '96:  Medical Research from
Bench to Bedside."  Information:  Editor-in-Chief, National Office 6900 Grove
Road, Thorofare, NJ 08086-9447, Phone 609-848-1000, Fax 609-848-5274.

May 4-9, 1996, Cairns, north Queensland, Australia, "Third International
Conference in the Series 'Options for the Control of Influenza.'" Information:
Influenza '96 Conference Secretariat, GPO Box 128, Sydney, NSW, 2001,
Australia, Phone 61-2-262-2277, Fax 61-2-262-2323.

May 6-12, 1996, Taos, NM, "Discovery and Development of Tumor Vaccines."
Information:  Cambridge Symposia, 1037 Chestnut St., Newton Upper Falls, MA
02164, Phone 617-630-1399, Fax 617-630-1395.

May 15-18, 1996, Philadelphia, PA, "87th Annual Meeting American Association
for Cancer Research."  Information:  AACR, Public Ledger Bldg.  & Chestnut
St., Ste.  816, Philadelphia, PA 19106.

May 19-21, 1996, Philadelphia, PA, "32nd Annual Meeting American Society of
Clinical Oncology."  Information:  ASCO, 435 North Michigan Ave., Ste.  1717,
Chicago, IL 60611-4067.

May 19-23, 1996, New Orleans, LA, "95th American Society for Microbiology
General Meeting."  Information:  American Society for Microbiology, 1325
Massachusetts Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20005-4171, Phone 202-737-3600.

June 2-6, 1996, New Orleans, LA, "American Association of
Immunologists/American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology/American
Association of Investigative Pathology."  Information:  Mr.  Raymond Palmer,
Exec.  Dir., AAI, 9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20814-3994, Phone
301-530-7178, Fax 301-571-1816.

June 8-12, 1996, Columbia River Gorge, WA, "Inducible Genomic Responses."
Information:  American Association for Cancer Research, Public Ledger Bldg.,
Ste.  816, 150 S.  Indepndence Mall West, Philadelphia, PA 19106-3483, Phone
215-440-9300, Fax 215-440-9313.

June 10-13, 1996, Hong Kong, "7th International Congress for Infectious
Diseases:  a Collaboration of the World Health Organization, the International
Society for Infectious Diseases and the Dept.  of Microbiology, Faculty of
Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong."  Information:  Norman R.
Stein, Exec.  Dir., ISID, 180 Longwood Ave., Boston, MA 02115, Phone
617-277-0551, Fax 617-731-1541.

July 7-12, 1996, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, "XI International
Conference on AIDS."  Information:  Conference Secretariat, XI International
Conference on AIDS, P.O.  Box 48740, 595 Burrard St., Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada V7X 1T8, Phone 604-631-5210, Fax 604-631-5210, Email:
aids96@hivnet.ubc.ca.

August 11-16, 1996, Jerusalem, Israel, "10th International Congress of
Virology."  Information:  Secretariat, 10th Intl.  Cong.  of Virology, P.O.
Box 50006, Tel Aviv 61500, Israel, Phone 972-3-514-0000, Fax
972-3-5175674/514-0077, Telex 341171 KENS IL, E-mail:
virology@kenes.ccmail.compuserve.com.  (Omit final period from e-mail
address.)

August 27-30, 1996, Nagoya, Japan, "14th International Scientific Meeting of
the International Epidemiological Association:  Global Health in a Changing
Environment."  Information:  14th ISM Secretariat, Dept.  of Preventive
Medicine, Nagoya University School of Medicine, 65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku,
Nagoya 466, Japan, Phone 81-52-741-2111, ext.  2074, Fax 81-52-733-6729.

October 9-15, 1996, Hilton Head, SC, "3rd International Conference on
Engineered Vaccines for Cancer and AIDS."  Information:  Cambridge Symposia,
1037 Chestnut St., Newton Upper Falls, MA 02164, Phone 617-630-1399, Fax
617-630-1395.

October 14-16, 1996, Jerusalem, Israel, "Fifth International Conference on
Human Antibodies and Hybridomas."  Information:  John Herriot, HAH '96
Conference, Meetings Management, The Chestnuts, 1st Floor, 18 East Street,
Farnham, Surrey GU9 7SD, UK, Phone +44 (0)1252 726066, Fax +44 (0)1252 723303.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-32</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B043-21</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh74.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020641 text/html 36590
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:04:45 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:34 GMT
Content-length: 36403
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/hh74.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
WASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNet <BR>
February 26, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Insurance Bill Targeted by Opponents</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(363 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Medicaid Proposal Evolving; Medicare Reform Still&nbsp;Stalled</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(289 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Certain Nurses Can Unionize Under New NLRB Rulings</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(169 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>IRS Issues Family Leave Rule For Cafeteria Plans</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(291 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Medicare Supplemental Suit Alleges Systematic Overbilling</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(252 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Medicare to Add Procedures To Bundled Payment Pilot</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(154 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Statewide Payment Areas For Medicare Docs Eyed</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(245 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Feds Seeks Recoupment Of Provider Device Fraud</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(272 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>INSIDE THE BELTWAY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(287 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>STATE HEALTH WEEK</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>Pennsylvania to Mandate 438,000 Into Medicaid Managed&nbsp;Care</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(367 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>Arkansas Hospitals, State Agree on Medicaid Payment Hikes</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(301 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>Louisiana to Require Copayments To Help in Medicaid&nbsp;Shortfall</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(408 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>Arizona Eyes Waiver to Integrate Medicare, Medicaid&nbsp;Services</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(314 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>Maryland Hospital Cuts OK'd After Record Profits Reported</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(269 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><LI>Mass. Providers Claim Vendor Owes Millions; State to&nbsp;Intervene</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(391 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>STATE BRIEFS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(354 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
WASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Insurance Bill Targeted by Opponents


Congress returns today to tackle a spring agenda laden with health
care possibilities, the most notable being a pending Senate
insurance reform bill that conservatives are targeting for
destruction.
Conservatives wary of Sen. Nancy Kassebaum's (R-Kan) insurance bill
(S 1028), scheduled for debate later this spring, are designing a
"mutually assured destruction" campaign, says one lobbyist. They
are mulling introduction of controversial amendments such as
medical malpractice and medical savings accounts, and pushing
alternative legislation to expand COBRA or reform only the group
insurance market; S 1028 would dip into the individual market.
S 1028 opponents also may try to temper the effect of the bill by
attaching legislation (S 539) allowing tax-exempt status for state
risk pools; states with pools up and running would be exempt from
the Kassebaum insurer mandates.
In the House, GOP staffers want to move ahead with Rep. Bill
Thomas' (R-Calif) portability bill (HR 1610), but party leaders are
still deciding when to proceed, how to divide up committee
jurisdiction, and whether to add other health tax items.
S 1028's provision allowing portability for individual-market
purchasers leaving group plans is the subject of dueling actuarial
studies. The independent American Academy of Actuaries and the
non-partisan Congressional Research Service (CRS) last week said in
separate reports that the provision would hike premiums between
1%-5%, while the Health Insurance Assn. of America (HIAA), which
opposes the provision, maintained rates would rise 10%-20%.
The discrepancy is rooted in different assumptions about state
reactions to the bill. The academy and CRS assume most states will
regulate individual-market premiums to protect new entrants but let
carriers charge high-risk persons up to 100% more than the average
rate. HIAA assumes states won't allow any rate variation.
A sleeper amendment is Senate Budget Committee Chair Pete
Domenici's (R-NM) initiative to establish parity between mental
health and other health benefits. Actuaries say big bucks are at
stake, but GOP members are wary of making waves.
Meanwhile, ERISA expansion legislation is scheduled for an early
March vote; an administrative simplification bill will be marked up
in April. Those issues, as well as antitrust, could come to a head
should insurance reform gather steam, sources say. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
WASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Medicaid Proposal Evolving; Medicare Reform Still
Stalled


A month ago, Medicare reform was front and center, while Medicaid
talks were stalled. Today, the political winds are blowing in the
opposite direction.
Congressional leaders and a bipartisan group of National Governors'
Assn. (NGA) members are working to refine and expand the
NGA-approved Medicaid proposal that has quickly drawn criticism
from most Democrats and liberal interest groups. Reform proponents
are pushing GOP leaders to draft and attach Medicaid and welfare
legislation to a bill extending the debt limit, which expires March
15.
However, a bill hasn't yet been drafted, and governors already are
still tweaking the NGA outline. The original proposal would have
given states total flexibility on amount, scope and duration of
benefits, but governors are mulling floor thresholds for quality,
such as minimum HMO requirements in each state.
The governors also may also nix their proposal to reduce the
maximum state matching percentage from 50% to 40%, set some minimum
definition of "disabled," and increase the proposal's federally
defined benefits package. Also subject to discussion are the
proposed repeal of state schemes to maximize federal matching funds
(WHW 11/6/95, p. 2) and whether to repeal the existing Medicaid
statute.
Medicare reform has an outside chance of being tacked onto debt
ceiling legislation, but House leaders are said to be "skeptical"
of initiating another reform push. House leaders trying to keep the
issue alive have floated $168 billion in seven-year savings that
are more modest than previous proposals.
The latest plan would keep Part B premiums at 25%; delay the
Medicare capitation payment floor by a year; let the feds oversee
provider networks; reduce Part A payment cuts to hospitals, skilled
nursing facilities and home health providers; and exempt physician
office labs from federal standards. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
WASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Certain Nurses Can Unionize Under New NLRB Rulings


Nurses who work as professional, non-supervisory employees have the
right to unionize and engage in other concerted activity without
the fear of being fired, under two National Labor Relations Board
(NLRB) rulings issued earlier this month.
The American Nurses Assn. cheered the decisions, saying they remove
a tactic employers have used to impede union organizing by
registered nurses (RNs). The American Hospital Assn. opposes the
decisions, fearing they will encourage unions to organize nurses.
NLRB ruled that charge nurses at Providence Hospital in Anchorage,
Alaska, are not "supervisors" and therefore are protected by the
National Labor Relations Act. That law bars supervisors from
unionizing. Charge nurses are those in charge of a unit or floor.
In a companion case, NLRB ruled that licensed practical nurses at
Ten Broeck Commons, a New York nursing home, oversaw the work of
certified nursing assistants in a routine manner, without being
supervisors under the federal law.
The rulings have favorable implications for nurses about 60 other
nurses' cases before the NLRB. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
WASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

IRS Issues Family Leave Rule For Cafeteria Plans


The IRS recently proposed guidelines for employers offering
flexible benefit programs whose workers take leave under the Family
and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), as well as guidance for firms in
which ex-workers and/or dependents choose COBRA coverage.
Final regulations for FMLA, enacted in 1993, were issued in January
1995, but were generally silent on treatment of flexible benefit
programs, also called cafeteria plans. The law allows workers to
take up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave for family reasons or illness.
The new rules stipulate that firms offering Sec. 125 cafeteria
plans - in which workers are given an allotted pot of pre-tax money
to choose from an array of health plans and other benefits - can
collect health plan premium contributions from employees taking
unpaid FMLA leave in three ways: (1) pre-pay, in which workers
would pay before leave begins; (2) pay-as-you-go, in which workers
pay on the same schedule as if they were not on leave; and (3)
catch-up, in which employees pay upon returning to work.
For cafeteria plans offering flexible spending accounts (FSAs) "
into which employers put pre-tax dollars for workers' medical or
dependent-care costs - the IRS proposes FSAs be subject to the same
rules as other health plans for workers on family leave. Thus,
workers may revoke their health plan selections while on leave, but
firms must allow reinstatement upon their return. Those electing
continuation coverage during leave are subject to normal uniform
coverage laws.
Separately, the IRS specified when firms can charge COBRA
participants the family rate. The guidance says if a worker and
spouse elect COBRA together, the employer may charge 102% of the
family premium; if only a spouse or dependent child does, 102% of
the individual rate applies. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
WASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Medicare Supplemental Suit Alleges Systematic Overbilling


Asserting that hundreds of thousands of Medicare supplemental
insurance policyholders nationwide have been systematically and
intentionally overcharged, physician-patient advocates this month
filed a class action suit against the Prudential Insurance Co. Byan
v. Prudential, No. 600650/96 (N.Y. Sup.Ct., filed Feb. 8, 1996).
The case is said to be the first of its kind, but if it succeeds,
similar suits may be filed against other insurers, says Yvonne
Archer, executive director of the League of Physicians and
Surgeons, which supports the suit. Medicare supplemental insurance
provides benefits that Medicare doesn't cover, including
copayments, deductibles and prescription drugs.
At issue in the New York lawsuit are deluxe versions of policies
sponsored by the American Assn. of Retired Persons (AARP) and sold
by Prudential. Such policies allow members to see
non-Medicare-participating physicians and pay the difference
between the Medicare allowable fee and an MD's "usual and
prevailing" charge.
The plaintiffs, represented by the New York-based law firm Landy &
Seymour, say Pru didn't pay that difference and intentionally
charged it to AARP members. The amount sought in the suit is the
premium difference between the Pru plan and a less-comprehensive
version that doesn't fill the gap between Medicare payments and MD
fees, plus punitive damages and attorneys' fees.
The insurer says the suit is "without merit." AARP is not involved,
although Archer blames it for overlooking the alleged overcharges.
Still unclear is the actual number of people and dollars at stake.
That information will be determined during the discovery stage of
the suit. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
WASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Medicare to Add Procedures To Bundled Payment Pilot


HCFA plans to expand its Medicare bundled payment
"centers-of-excellence" demonstration in the next two months by
adding several orthopedic and four cardiology procedures.
The HCFA has already tested the program on bypass and cataract
surgery, but those demos are expiring this year.
Under the upcoming cardiology pilot, the agency will pay facilities
a negotiated bundled rate to cover hospital and physician services
for heart bypasses, angioplasties, valve replacements and
catheterization. The orthopedic demo will cover total hip and knee
joint replacements.
Hospitals can participate in either the cardiology or the
orthopedic demo, or both. The bundled payment will account for
outlier cases; separate payments won't be made for particularly
expensive patients.
HCFA hasn't decided on the number of sites, but most likely will
choose facilities in a region comprised of several contiguous
states. HCFA plans to select hospitals by late 1996 and have the
first sites operating by the spring of 1997.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
WASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Statewide Payment Areas For Medicare Docs Eyed


HCFA is considering moving to additional statewide payment areas
for the Medicare physician fee schedule in 1997 - a move that would
pay rural doctors higher fees, comparable to those of their city
brethren. Insiders say action appears imminent.
If HCFA proposes such a change in its annual fee update this
summer, "it will become a hot issue" for docs, says Randy Teach,
director of the Washington office of the Medical Group Management
Assn. Such a proposal would create winner and loser states, a
situation that could cause Congress to jump in and legislate a
solution.
Currently, the national fee schedule contains 210 geographic
payment areas, based on the locales Medicare claims processors used
under the old charge-based payment system. The Physician Payment
Review Commission (PPRC), which advises Congress on Medicare
physician payments, recommends revamping payment areas and creating
35 statewide fee schedules; the other 15 states should have
multiple schedules based on metropolitan areas.
HCFA may be listening. In the past, the agency claimed it didn't
have the authority to redefine payment areas across the board,
although it allowed a handful of states to establish statewide fee
schedules if widely supported by physicians.
But the agency recently decided it has such authority, and is
analyzing a just-completed study by Health Economics Research that
urges retaining current payment divisions only in areas where
medical prices are much higher than the state average. The finding:
Only 14 states would retain multiple fee schedules. G




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
WASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Feds Seeks Recoupment Of Provider Device Fraud


The providers who allegedly billed Medicare for  experimental
medical devices knowing it was illegal were undaunted by the threat
of government retaliation, a Senate panel was told this month.
A former device industry executive, suing providers on behalf of
the government under the whistleblower provision of the False
Claims Act, told the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on
Investigations that some providers risked patients' lives, tampered
with files, and lied on forms to ensure Medicare payment.
The lawsuit claims providers improperly billed Medicare for
experimental devices and related care. HCFA began officially
covering such devices last fall.
Hospital lawyers contend the whistleblower is not the originator of
the allegations - a key requirement to win such cases. The feds
denied encouraging the whistleblower to sue.
Meanwhile, some hospitals are starting to get letters from the
government demanding records of Medicare claims for experimental
devices and related medical care to figure out how much hospitals
owe Medicare, sources say.
And in a new revelation, every hospital scrutinized by the feds for
improper Medicare claims for experimental medical devices allegedly
submitted these claims, at least half knew the claims were
inappropriate, and almost 30 hospitals tried to cover it up, HHS
Deputy Inspector General Jack Hartwig told the Senate panel.
In response, he said the IG and HCFA are calculating overpayments
to providers and plan to seek repayment; evidence of alleged
criminal conduct will be investigated; fraud that has been
identified is being addressed by the Justice Department; and HHS is
addressing weaknesses in accounting and tracking of investigational
devices, in hospital oversight, and in obtaining informed patient
consent. Physicians also are being probed. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
WASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

INSIDE THE BELTWAY


        Some seniors join Medicare HMOs to
retain employer-provided health benefits, according to a GAO report
(GAO/HEHS-96-63). HMOs tend to join Medicare where HMO market
penetration is well-established and capitation payments are high,
notes GAO. Call (202) 512-6000.

        HCFA has slapped intermediate
sanctions on Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Massachusetts for
"knowingly" supplying misleading marketing information in its
Medicare HMO application. In freezing the HMO's Medicare enrollment
and marketing functions, HCFA levied its first intermediate
sanction on an HMO. Before sanction rules were issued in 1994,
HCFA's only recourse was to yank an HMO's contract.

        HHS awarded $2.5 million in grants
for childrens' emergency medical services. Call (301) 594-1364.

        Medicaid recipients reported bad
health more frequently in 1995 than the prior year, used hospital
rooms twice as often as other groups, and were at least twice as
likely than those with private insurance to have hypertension,
cancer, migraines, emphysema, diabetes and heart failure, reports
the National Health Survey. Call (610) 366-1310.

        Physicians, optometrists,
psychiatrists, labs and durable medical equipment suppliers engaged
in Medicare nursing home billing fraud on a "frequent and
widespread" basis, says a new GAO report (GAO/HEHS-96-18).
Unscrupulous providers often operate their schemes in volume,
inappropriately receive beneficiary information from nursing homes,
and are not flagged by Medicare's automated systems.

        Postpartum programs should include
stabilization in the birth location, home visits and registered
nurse case management, says the American Nurses Assn. Congress may
entertain  maternity stay legislation this spring. Call (202)
651-7023.

        Elimination of the tax subsidy for
employer-provided health benefits would hurt the oldest and sickest
workers, according to the Center for Health Expenditures and
Insurance Studies in the winter issue of Inquiry. Call (716)
264-9122.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
WASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Pennsylvania to Mandate 438,000 Into Medicaid Managed
Care


Pennsylvania this month announced plans to mandate 438,000 Medicaid
recipients into HMOs in a five-county area around Philadelphia.
The initiative, dubbed "HealthChoices," is the first step of a
statewide mandatory program to be phased in over the next three
years. The state has operated a limited mandatory managed care
program for 100,000 Philadelphia-area Medicaid recipients since
1986.
Pennsylvania received a Sec. 1915(b) Medicaid waiver from HHS to
implement "HealthChoices" in 1993 under then-Gov. Robert Casey (D).
But the plan was criticized by some groups for lacking Medicaid HMO
regulations, and its implementation was delayed. A class-action
lawsuit was filed and is still pending.
Incoming Gov. Tom Ridge (R) made a number of changes to
HealthChoices before the state issued a draft request for proposals
(RFP) this month.
HMO bids will be awarded in the summer, open enrollment will begin
Aug. 6, and the program will become operational Nov. 1.
Enrollment will be phased in, with certain groups such as AFDC
recipients joining Nov. 1; remaining eligibles will be folded in on
July 1, 1997. Medicaid recipients targeted for 1997 entry may
voluntarily join HMOs sooner.
Recipients who don't select an HMO within a certain time period
will be randomly assigned one.

Changes Made to Address Criticisms

To address a number of criticisms lobbed at the initial
HealthChoices proposal, the department will:

o       Ban HMO direct marketing, such as
door-to-door solicitation, and instead have a benefits consultant
conduct enrollment activities.
o       Carve out behavioral health services
for a separate procurement process. County governments will be
given the first rights of refusal to manage mental health-substance
abuse treatment benefits before a private capitated contractor is
picked.
o       Require HMOs to submit encounter
data and comply with Medicaid HEDIS (WHW 2/5/96, p. 2).
o       Capitate HMOs, build in an allowable
profit margin, and link performance and outcome measures to profit
levels. This addresses concerns raised about the Philadelphia

Medicaid program, whose private contractor was found by the HHS
Inspector General to have made excessive profits. That contract and
program terminates Oct. 31.

o       Make direct payments to hospitals
for disproportionate share and graduate medical education, instead
of including them in HMO capitation payments. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
WASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Arkansas Hospitals, State Agree on Medicaid Payment Hikes


Arkansas hospitals and state officials recently sidestepped a
potential Medicaid payment lawsuit by  negotiating an $11
million-$12 million payment hike that will take effect April 1,
pending HCFA's expected approval.
At the heart of the three-part deal negotiated last month is a 16%
increase in the maximum amount Medicaid pays per day for inpatient
services. The increase adds up to a $5 million hike for hospitals.
The per-diem cap has been $584 since 1991, but after the Arkansas
Hospital Assn. argued that 25% of its members' costs were above
that level, the Department of Human Services agreed to raise the
cap to $675.
Second, the agreement would reduce Medicaid hospital copayments,
which in most instances are unpaid by recipients and absorbed by
hospitals. The copayment is currently 50% of hospital costs for the
first inpatient day, but that would be lowered to 10% of each
inpatient day.
Because the average Medicaid hospital length of stay in Arkansas is
under four days, state hospitals stand to gain $6 million from the
reduction in copays. That new policy also contains an economic
incentive for hospitals to reduce inpatient stays, notes James
Teeter, president of the state hospital association.
The third part of the deal is an increase in the Medicaid payment
to hospitals for patients eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid.
Currently, Medicaid contributes the difference between the Medicare
deductible, which is $736, and 50% of the Medicaid hospital per-day
payment. The new Medicaid contribution would be the Medicare
deductible minus only 10% of the Medicaid per diem.
HCFA hasn't yet received the Arkansas Medicaid proposal, but
Teeter, who says the hospitals would sue the state otherwise, is
confident the payment hike will be approved. Arkansas Medicaid
officials, state legislators and Gov. Jim Guy Tucker (D) are all
behind the deal. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
WASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Louisiana to Require Copayments To Help in Medicaid
Shortfall


Louisiana this month proposed requiring Medicaid recipients to make
nominal copayments for all health care services to help offset a
state budget crunch.
The copayments are expected to generate $21 million annually, in
addition to $10 million currently collected in prescription drug
copayments. Louisiana's Medicaid program is projecting a $450
million shortfall this fiscal year, which ends June 30, and a $330
million shortage in the following fiscal year, says David Hood,
undersecretary of the Department of Health and Hospitals.
More than half the states have adopted cost sharing in their
Medicaid programs, sources say. Louisiana is still looking at other
cuts and savings to balance the Medicaid program budget.
The proposed copays are subject to a two-week public comment period
that began Feb. 13. State officials will make changes after that
and finalize the copayment schedule, effective May 1.
As proposed, Louisiana Medicaid recipients would begin making
sliding-scale copayments, based on ability to pay. Copays would be
$0.50 to $3 for physician office visits, labs and X-ray services;
$25 for inpatient hospital admissions; 5% coinsurance for
ambulatory surgery; and $2 for alcohol and drug abuse treatment.
Children and categorically needy HMO enrollees would be exempt from
copayments. In addition, copays would not be required for
pregnancy, emergency, hospice, family planning and nursing home
services. Thus, about 50% of the state's Medicaid population would
be exempt.
Following the lead of other states, the program will let providers
decide how to collect the copayments.

In addition to the copays, the state is addressing the Medicaid
budget crunch by:

o       Reopening prior-year cost reports
for state hospitals. The department found additional allowable
costs that state hospitals are due from Medicaid, and will get
additional federal matching federal funds for that purpose. While
this move will only provide "one-time" funds, that amount will be
sufficient to solve all but $38 million to $40 million of this
year's shortfall, according to Hood.
o       Looking at changing the way nursing
homes are reimbursed by Medicaid, a move that could save anywhere
from $45 million to $105 million in fiscal 1997, Hood says.
o       Collecting about $25 million in
overpayments to psychiatric hospitals, nursing homes and other
types of providers.

The state Medicaid program is looking at piloting a managed care
program and a separate voucher system on a regional basis for the
upcoming fiscal year, but won't move to a statewide managed care
system anytime soon, Hood adds. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
WASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Arizona Eyes Waiver to Integrate Medicare, Medicaid
Services


Arizona, the first state to develop a statewide capitated managed
care system that combines Medicaid acute and long-term care
services, is preparing to amend its existing Sec. 1115 waiver to
fully integrate Medicare and Medicaid services.
The state began its Medicaid managed care program in 1982 and added
the long-term care component in 1988. The program provides
institutional, residential and in-home services to elderly and
disabled Medicaid recipients who would normally be put in a nursing
home. Arizona contracts with counties and HMOs for the managed care
program.
As of Oct. 1, 1995, the program served 20,919 recipients. Nearly
half of those were elderly. About 97% of the Medicaid elderly
members in the long-term care program are "dual eligibles," who
also are covered by Medicare.
But coordination with Medicare services and linkages between acute
and long-term care have been hindered by conflicts between Medicare
and Medicaid regulations, says a new report by the National Academy
for State Health Policy.
Although the majority of elderly enrollees are dual eligibles and
receive Medicare services separately, some Medicaid long-term care
program contractors are also Medicare HMOs. If the long-term care
system contractor isn't a Medicare HMO, the contractor must
coordinate care with Medicare providers, the academy notes.
The state hopes HCFA approval of the waiver request will allow
integration of Medicare and Medicaid, and full integration of
acute, behavioral health and long-term care.
Arizona's capitation payment structure has created incentives for
program contractors to serve enrollees in their own homes or in
residential settings, the national academy notes.
As a result of the long-term care program's success, the
HCFA-imposed cap on the number of members who can receive home and
community-based services has been increased from 5% when the
program first began to 40% in 1995, says the academy.
For details on Managed Care & Long-Term Care: The Arizona Long-Term
Care System, call (207) 874-6524. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
WASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Maryland Hospital Cuts OK'd After Record Profits Reported


Determining that hospitals in Maryland enjoyed record profits last
year, state officials recently decided to pare back hospitals'
revenue stream in an attempt to pass on savings to patients.
Maryland is one of two states that set hospital rates for both
public and private payers.
Hospital net profits increased 93% in the state last year, from
$145.5 million in 1994 to $281.3 million in 1995, according to the
Maryland Health Services Cost Review Commission, which regulates
hospital rates. As a percentage of total revenue, net profits went
from around 3.4% to 6.2%, says the commission.
While those rewards "can be attributed, in no small way," to
increased efficiency, the numbers also suggest that the state
rate-setting system "may simply be too generous" to hospitals, says
Commission Chair Charles Fisher.
As a result, the panel engaged in what executive director Robert
Murray called a "contentious" negotiating session with hospitals
and approved a $170.5 million cut in the projected rate increase.
In other words, while hospitals had been scheduled to get a 6.5%
rate increase in April, that bump will instead be around 4.4%. Last
year the commission made a similar 1.4 percentage point baseline
reduction.

Among other commission findings:

o       Hospital costs grew 1.63% in 1995,
below the national average of 1.75%. It's the 19th straight year
Maryland hospitals have outperformed the country in holding down
costs.
o       Hospital charges per case, the
actual bill paid by patients and carriers, increased 3%.
o       The amount of uncompensated care
increased 2.1% to $404.4 million. As a percent of revenue,
uncompensated care costs fell to 8% from 8.22%. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
WASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

Mass. Providers Claim Vendor Owes Millions; State to
Intervene


Massachusetts mental health providers are prepared to sue the
state's Medicaid managed mental health contractor for $6 million to
$9 million in allegedly unpaid claims unless the providers' demands
are met. The state has promised to help the providers.
The providers, who may sue Mental Health Management of America for
breach of contract, say the vendor trapped them in a "Catch 22" to
avoid paying claims for mental health and substance abuse
treatment. The contractor required preauthorization numbers on
claims and required claims to be submitted within 90 days of
service, then allegedly didn't furnish the preauthorization numbers
promptly enough for providers to meet the 90-day deadline.
"Claims processing was not [Mental Health Management's] strength,"
admits Bruce Bullen, commissioner of the state Division for Medical
Assistance, which oversees Medicaid.
"We'll work this through with providers," he says. "We'll make sure
[the firm] is responsible for complying with the contract. But it
doesn't mean we'll pay all claims."
Bullen noted that Mental Health Management "performed in a superior
fashion in some areas, like quality management."
Nevertheless, Massachusetts didn't renew Mental Health Management's
Medicaid managed care contract. Mental Health Management, owned by
First Financial Management Corp. of Atlanta, got the Massachusetts
Medicaid contract for managed behavioral health care in 1992.
John Kahn, a lawyer representing Mental Health Corp. of
Massachusetts, an organization of 65 mental health agencies
allegedly owed money, asked the contractor to process the
providers' unpaid claims, and suspend requirements related to prior
approval, billing within 90 days, a 365-day payment appeals process
and claims identification numbers.
Kahn says Mental Health Management will meet with the providers
next week on the dispute.
Mental Health Management broke new ground in providing this type of
comprehensive managed mental health care to Medicaid, so naturally
there were growing pains, says Ron Preston, HCFA's associate
regional administrator.
But that's not why the firm's contract wasn't renewed, he
maintains. "Other applicants had more solid applications," Preston
says.
State officials say providers fear Mental Health Management will
disappear without making good on claims owed. "We want to make sure
they do everything in compliance," since the contract will be
closed out in June, says Bullen, whose agency is auditing the
company.
The Medicaid behavioral health vendor was unavailable for comment.
Mental Health Management was paid $11.5 million in administrative
expenses under the Medicaid risk-bearing contract. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
WASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNet
February 26, 1996

STATE BRIEFS


        Ten states enacted laws governing
the administration and financing of child mental health services in
1995, and 15 passed laws governing treatment, says the National
Conference of State Legislatures. For example, New Mexico
eliminated restrictions on behavior modification, Tennessee banned
release of childrens' mental health records to persons accused of
child abuse or neglect, and Missouri required school districts to
educate children placed by mental health or social service
agencies. For details on "Children, Youth and Family Issues," call
(202) 624-5400.

        D.C. Mayor Marion Barry (D) proposed
an 11% Medicaid funding cut in his fiscal 1997 budget. The district
plans to expand its use of managed care. 

        Kentucky Gov. Paul Patton (D)
proposed to phase out the state's tax on physicians. The tax is
part of the 1994 health reform statute, which some lawmakers want
to pare back this session. 

        Low-income Wisconsin residents would
receive health care coverage if they needed it while moving off of
welfare into the workforce, according to reforms proposed by Gov.
Tommy Thompson (R). The state is scheduled to replace the AFDC
welfare program with a work-based system in 1999.

        Alaska, Pennsylvania and Louisiana
could pass provider-supported medical malpractice legislation this
year, according to the American Tort Reform Assn. Meanwhile,
medical liability changes could be rolled back in New Jersey,
Florida, Rhode Island and Utah. Call (202) 682-1022.

        California Medicaid HMOs vary from
plan to plan in the amount of physician services they offer,
according to a recent report by the Center for Health Care Rights.
For example, Universal Care HMO averages 0.37 physician encounters
a year per Medicaid patient, compared with 5.14 at Kaiser
Foundation Health Plan's HMO in southern California. Call (213)
383-4519.

        Hospital spending for acute
myocardial infarction in states with medical malpractice laws, such
as non-economic damage award caps, grew 17% between 1984 and 1990,
compared with 24% in states without such laws, according to
Stanford University economists Daniel Kessler and Mark McClellan.
For ischemic heart disease, spending growth was 17% in states with
medical liability changes and 28% in states without such laws. Call
(415) 723-9193.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-33</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B043-44</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/in16.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020705 text/html 16131
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:05:11 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:30 GMT
Content-length: 15944
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/in16.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
COMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>MARKET BRIEFING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(423 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>DISCOUNTED RATES FOR TERRORISM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(57 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>FUTURE FOR CAPTIVES?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(138 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>EMSS RESEARCH BEGINS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(247 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>LONGFORD EXPANDS HELP DESK FACILITIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(56 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>SAFETY SCHEME LAUNCHED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(192 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>NEW MANAGING AGENCY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(92 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>PRINTERS' PACKAGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(97 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>SHOP AND OFFICE PACKAGES RELAUNCHED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(102 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>BUSINESS TRAVELCOVER RELAUNCHED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(318 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>HOTEL PROTECT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(157 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ABSTRACT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>CONTRACTORS LIABILITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(31 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
COMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

MARKET BRIEFING

Most insurers include employers and public liability cover as part of a
specifically designed contractor's package.  A few, such as Commercial
Union and Eagle Star, use their standard liability wordings
appropriately tailored for the risk concerned.  General Accident, which
recently introduced a combined liability policy specifically for the
construction industry, uses instead its more general combined liability
policy where the construction element of the business is less than 10%.

Most contractors' liability covers offer a wide range of extensions,
although policies designed for small businesses may be more restricted,
for example omitting overseas cover.  Some insurers also have standard
endorsements for different trades.

Following a poor safety record and a significant number of death and
injury claims, there are now signs that liability claims experience in
the UK construction industry is improving.  The 1994/95 Health and
Safety Commission annual report, published last November, stated that
fatal injuries in construction during 1994/95 continued the steady
downward trend and were expected to be the lowest in eight years.  The
provisional fatality rate for the construction workforce was 4.7 per
hundred thousand.

In a key move to reduce accidents, the Construction Design and
Management (CDM) Regulations were  introduced on 31 March 1995.  These
implement the design and management aspects of the EC Temporary or
Mobile Construction Sites Directive, placing statutory duties on all
those involved in construction work to minimise accident and health
risks.  To avoid disrupting projects already underway at 31 March,
those involved in existing projects were allowed up to nine months in
which to comply with the regulations - which means that all qualifying
construction work should now be implementing CDM.  The regulations do
not apply to

* construction work, other than demolition, that does not last longer
than 30 working days or 500 person work days and does not involve more
than four people

* construction work for a domestic client

* construction work carried out inside offices and shops or similar
premises without interrupting the normal activities of the premises and
without separating the construction activities from the other
activities

* the maintenance or removal of insulation on pipes, boilers or other
parts of heating or water systems.

Under the new rules, clients, designers, planning supervisors,
principal contractors, contractors and self-employed workers acting as
contractors have clearly defined duties which they must carry out as
far as reasonably practicable.  A key element is the provision and
implementation of a health and safety plan and construction must not
start until this has been prepared.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
COMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

DISCOUNTED RATES FOR TERRORISM

Pool Re is offering a 20% discount on premium rates for 1996.  Insureds
will be required to pay 60% of the discounted annual premium at the
beginning of the policy period.  The 40% remaining will not be
collected as long as losses are not in excess of #75m.  No claims were
made on the pool last year.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
COMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

FUTURE FOR CAPTIVES?

Following Chancellor Kenneth Clarke's decision to increase the taxation
of controlled foreign companies from 50% to 90%, AIRMIC's Captive
Special Interest Group has been considering the implications for the
viability of offshore captive insurers owned by UK companies.  It
concludes that

* risk managers are under no pressure to take drastic or immediate
action with regard to the operation of their captive insurers.  Some
major organisations are still actively considering the possibility of
setting up offshore captives

* AIRMIC members' captive insurers have not been established for purely
tax reasons, but to provide the broadest cover to their companies at
lowest prudent cost

* captives are still the critical component of their risk financing
strategies, and provide the ability to meet their needs in the face of
the unpredictability of the insurance and reinsurance markets.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
COMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

EMSS RESEARCH BEGINS

The Loss Prevention Council (LPC) is collaborating with Imperial
College London to investigate the links between Environmental
Management Systems (EMSs) and insurance.  EMSs are new tools by which
insurers may be able to assess and quantify the environmental
performance of their clients.  The LPC says that governments and
international agencies agree that continued, sustainable economic
development depends on the availability of adequate insurance cover for
environmental risks.  However, insurers are said to be wary of such
risks, particularly because of past experiences in the United States.

A three-year study entitled The Response of the Insurance Industry to
Developments in Environmental Management Systems recently began at the
Centre for Environmental Technology at Imperial College London.  The
research is aimed at analysing the response of insurers to the
introduction of EMSs as expressed in their attitudes towards their
clients' environmental performance, as well as supplying insurers with
information gathered during the study on the usefulness and benefits of
EMSs.

The study will also address the following questions.  What are the main
constraints on the environmental insurance market?  Are these caused by
uncertainties in technical assessment, or other problems such as
long-term uncertainty in legal liability?  How do insurers currently
assess the environmental performance of their clients - if at all?

In the medium term, the study aims to determine whether and to what
extent compliance with EMSs standards supports insurers' own assessment
systems, and also whether and how insurers might effectively use EMSs
in their assessments.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
COMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

LONGFORD EXPANDS HELP DESK FACILITIES

Through its "broker help desk", Longford Insurance Schemes is offering
sales visits to assist brokers with promoting Chauffeurplan.  According
to Longford, almost 60% of Chauffeurplan schemes are now sold by
intermediaries, compared with 40% two years ago.  As a special
incentive, Longford Insurance Schemes are currently offering selected
intermediaries up to 60% commission on new sales.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
COMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SAFETY SCHEME LAUNCHED

Minister for Local Transport and Road Safety Steven Norris has launched
DriveCare - a safety scheme targeted at commercial vehicles (including
heavy goods, commercial goods vehicles and coaches).  This sector is
responsible for nearly 45,000 of all road accident injuries in the UK.
Similar schemes in use in the USA over the past decade have resulted in
a 25% drop in commercial vehicle accident fatalities.

DriveCare encourages owners and operators of commercial vehicles along
with general motorists to take a pro-active approach to road safety.
Subscribing owners of commercial vehicles display a sticker which
includes a free-phone number on the rear of each vehicle in their
fleet.  Motorists who witness a driver driving dangerously, carelessly,
discourteously or speeding can telephone and lodge their complaint.
This is registered on the DriveCare database and the owner of the
vehicle is immediately faxed with the details of the incident.  The
owner is then in a position to take the necessary steps to counsel or
discipline the driver or provide further driver training.

The system originated in the USA where it is now estimated that over
80% of all commercial vehicles display the sticker.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
COMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

NEW MANAGING AGENCY

USF&G Corporation is establishing a Lloyd's syndicate and, through a
new wholly-owned subsidiary known as F&G UK Underwriters Ltd, will be
the sole corporate member of Syndicate Number 1211.  USF&G has also
formed F&G UK Agency Ltd ( a joint venture between USF&G subsidiary F&G
Holdings Ltd and managing agents Ashley Palmer) to manage the operation
of the new corporate syndicate.  USF&G plans to expand and capitalise
in speciality markets such as reinsurance and the new syndicate and F&G
UK Agency Ltd will focus on building a portfolio of international
reinsurance business.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
COMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

PRINTERS' PACKAGE

INK Underwriting Agencies has introduced a specialist package, endorsed
by The Guild of Master Printers, for smaller sized printers.  Cover
includes

* all risks insurance on trade contents, including ingress of foreign
bodies, transparencies, artwork, plates etc

* business interruption, (for twice the trade contents figure)

* glass

* inching and crawling

* employers and public liability

* libel and slander

* money

* goods in transit

A legal advice line is provided.  The scheme is underwritten by AXA
Insurance and is open to all intermediaries (brokerage 10%).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
COMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SHOP AND OFFICE PACKAGES RELAUNCHED

Countrywide Insurance Marketing has re-launched its shop and office
packages, Countrywide Tradewise and Officewise.  Additional cover such
as deterioration of stock, loss of licence, book debt and computer
cover becomes standard and is being included free for all 1996
renewals.  A Survey Guarantee has also been introduced with the
organisation's sales team surveying the risk to confirm the level of
security required; this will be guaranteed for the first year of cover.

Countrywide recently joined forces with Transamerica Insurance Finance
Company (Europe) to launch Countrywide Commercial Premium Finance.
This enables customers to settle all their commercial insurance costs
in one agreement.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
COMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BUSINESS TRAVELCOVER RELAUNCHED

BUPA has relaunched its Business TravelCover product with three levels
of cover.

* EssentialCare provides comprehensive health cover including: medical
expenses up to #1m, repatriation, a replacement service to assist with
lost drugs, glasses or contact lenses, emergency return home, legal
expenses, inconvenience benefit while in hospital, personal accident,
personal liability and replacement employee benefit, covering the
travel costs to replace an employee who has been hospitalised for three
days or more.

* TotalCare provides all the EssentialCover health cover benefits plus
provision for loss of luggage, loss of money, loss of passport, loss of
funds, cancellation or curtailment of the trip and travel and luggage
delay.

* TotalCare plus winter sports cover combines the health and travel
benefits of TotalCare with cover for lost or stolen ski equipment, cost
of hiring replacement equipment, lost or stolen ski pass, refund for
ski expenses due to injury or illness and piste closure.

Business travellers can upgrade their policy further to include leisure
as well as business trips, cover for the family and business travel
within the UK.

BUPA Business TravelCover EssentialCare costs from #34 for 12 months
cover.  With the addition of TotalCare, premiums start at #47.50 a
year.  Fully comprehensive cover including leisure and business travel
plus wintersports protection costs from #88.00 per annum.  UK business
travel cover, for protection against lost or stolen business items,
costs an additional #26.

The policy is provided in conjunction with Europ Assistance, the
world's largest emergency assistance organisation, and is available to
both members and non-members of BUPA, for groups of three or more
employees.  Should a member of staff leave, policies can be transferred
at no additional cost and new members of staff will be covered
instantly.  BUPA Business TravelCover provides protection for trips up
to a maximum of 45 days in duration and a total of 180 days in any one
insurance year.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
COMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

HOTEL PROTECT

Conference specialist Insurex Expo-Sure launches a new policy for
hoteliers in February.  Hotel Protect provides for all costs which have
been pre-booked, such as deposits, room hire, accommodation or delegate
charges, to be paid back to the conference organiser should delegates
be prevented from arriving by any reason out of their control.  The
insurance is set in place at the time of booking by the hotelier adding
a premium of #1.75 per person per night (plus the hotelier's handling
fee) to the delegate rate.

Initially the policy is available for bookings of a minimum two nights
and is aimed primarily at the conference delegate or group bookings.
The cover also includes roadside assistance whereby a delegate breaking
down en route to the hotel will be towed to the nearest garage,
provided with emergency overnight accommodation if required and given
the cost of onward travel to the original hotel.  Hotel Protect is
underwritten by Home & Overseas.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
COMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CONTRACTORS LIABILITY

An analysis of contractors liability cover available in the UK is given
on pages 4-28 of the hard copy.  The names of the insurers whose
products are reviewed are also given.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-34</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B043-60</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/in11.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020720 text/html 31356
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:05:25 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:32 GMT
Content-length: 31169
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/in11.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
DISABILITY COMPLIANCE BULLETIN via NewsNet <BR>
January 18, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>DISABILITY LAW</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Clinton Signs Bill Delaying Over-The-Road Bus Accessibility Under ADA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(519 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>WASHINGTON</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1223 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Insurer Refusing to Cover Applicant Because He Is Deaf, Suit Alleges</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(753 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>WASHINGTON</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(211 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Mason Tenders Fund Settles Landmark Case</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(874 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>In Settling Suit, City Agrees to Accelerate Installation of Curb Ramps</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(522 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>UPDATE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(462 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
DISABILITY COMPLIANCE BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 18, 1996

Clinton Signs Bill Delaying Over-The-Road Bus Accessibility Under ADA

WASHINGTON -- As the Justice Department considers one amendment to the
ADA, another has already been signed into law by President Clinton. The
National Highway System Designation Act of 1995, signed by the president
on Nov. 28, 1995, delays the date by which over-the-road buses must be
accessible under the ADA.
Original ADA regulations called for large over-the-road carriers such as
Greyhound  to be accessible by July 1996, and smaller carriers by 1997.
Those dates, however, were based on the issuance of Department of
Transportation regulations by July 1994. DOT did not release regulations
by 1994 -- in fact, it still has not.
Congress, therefore, moved to amend the ADA so that large and small
carriers have two and three years, respectively, to comply from whatever
date DOT issues its regulations.
According to Maureen McCloskey, who monitors Congress for Paralyzed
Veterans Association, the ADA amendment was placed into the
transportation bill while it was being debated in the House
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, chaired by Rep. Bud
Shuster, R-Pa.  The Senate had no ADA provision in its version of the
bill, but Senate officials receded in conference and the bill went to
the president with the ADA provision intact, McCloskey said.
"We're concerned that the disability community was not involved in the
process," McCloskey said. "We had received assurances from both the
minority and the majority that this would not be in the bill. But there
it was."
Disability-rights advocates concede that controversy about accessibility
to over-the-road buses did not cease when the ADA was signed into law in
1990. The Office of Technology Assessment was charged with doing a study
on the best way to provide accessibility to the buses; DOT was to have
based its regulations on the results of the study.
The study, completed in 1993, concluded that each vehicle should be
accessible, whether by a ramp or lift, either vehicle-based or station-
based. The controversy between advocates and bus company officials
simmered as DOT issued its notice of proposed rulemaking in 1994.
According to McCloskey, DOT was considering allowing only a percentage
of buses to be accessible. It also was considering a proposal by bus
companies to use a boarding device, placing a mobility-impaired person
into a regular bus seat and stowing the wheelchair. Advocates prefer
having the wheelchair secured within the bus -- but that tends to take
up more seats and more potential revenue from bus operators, McCloskey
said.
The 1994 deadline passed and DOT didn't issue regulations.
"I understand the bus companies' concern that they have no regulations
to comply with and their statutory deadline is in six months," McCloskey
said. "As far as the ADA being a reasonable law, the extension makes
sense. Other entities had two years after regulations came out to be in
compliance.
"On the other hand, they are the only public entity that hasn't had to
do anything under the ADA. They're being allowed to perpetuate an
inaccessible system. The technology is there. The private buses are
doing it. This is not a technological problem -- it's what the bus
industry is pushing as a financial problem."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
DISABILITY COMPLIANCE BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 18, 1996

WASHINGTON

The Department of Justice has proposed extending the deadline -- by 10
years, in some cases -- for the installation of curb ramps in cities and
towns across the U.S. The surprise announcement was made in a notice of
proposed rulemaking in the Nov. 27, 1995, Federal Register.
If Justice's proposal is realized it would become the most significant
alteration of Americans with Disabilities Act regulations since the
law's passage in 1990. Further, the proposal comes on the heels of
another rollback in ADA regulations that took disability-rights
activists by surprise: In late November President Clinton signed a
transportation bill containing a provision that extended the deadline
for accessibility to over-the-road buses. (Story on page 7.)
Public comment on the curb ramp proposal will be accepted until Jan. 26
-- and there should be plenty of it. For disability-rights advocates,
curb ramps are a basic issue: What good are other accessibility measures
if a person in a wheelchair can't get out of the street? Feelings run
equally deep in municipal governments, where officials say budgets are
being stretched to the limit to comply with this costly unfunded federal
mandate.
The proposed rule would amend Title II regulations to extend the time
period for compliance, to Jan. 26, 2000, for curb ramps serving state
and local government facilities, transportation, places of public
accommodation, other places of employment and the residences of
individuals with disabilities. It would extend the time period for
providing curb ramps at existing pedestrian walkways in other areas to
Jan. 26, 2005.
The proposed rule would not affect a public entity's obligation to
install curb ramps at all newly constructed or altered streets, roads
and highways. (28 C.F.R. Section 35.151(e)) And, public entities that
choose to take advantage of this extension of time must amend their
transition plans to establish specific schedules for meeting the new
deadlines.
What are the current deadlines for curb ramp installation? This has been
a matter of some debate. The provision of curb ramps is linked to the
Title II "program accessibility" standard -- in other words, a public
entity's programs and activities, when viewed in their entirety, must be
readily accessible to persons with disabilities. Title II required
public entities to have achieved program accessibility by Jan. 26, 1992
-- the effective date of Titles II and III. But where structural changes
-- such as curb ramps -- were required for program accessibility, the
ADA provided that such changes be made as expeditiously as possible, but
in no event later than Jan. 26, 1995, unless meeting that deadline would
result in a fundamental alteration of its program or would impose undue
financial and administrative burdens.
That Jan. 26 deadline came and went last year, and most disability-
rights advocates admitted that while some cities had made significant
progress toward full program accessibility, many -- if not most -- had
not. The Department of Justice, in explaining its reasons for proposing
the extension, stated that "it is the Department's hope that this
extension will provide the additional flexibility necessary for state
and local governments to comply with the ADA in light of strained fiscal
resources, and that it will actually increase the number  of curb ramps
that will be installed on this nation's streets." That, too, was the
stated motivation of a group of senators -- former co-sponsors of the
ADA -- who wrote the Department of Justice last year urging it to
consider the revised deadlines.
Justice Department officials could not be reached for further comment
due to the partial shutdown of the federal government, which was ongoing
at presstime.
Maureen McCloskey, who monitors Congress for the Paralyzed Veterans of
America, said members of her organization and the disability community
in general are not pleased by the proposal.
"We're real upset about this," she said. "This directly affects our
members' ability to get around. Local governments had five years since
the ADA was passed. They're not making a ruckus about this; they just
aren't doing anything. And what does this say to the communities that
have complied with the ADA's current provisions?"
Justin Dart, former chairman of the President's Committee on Employment
of People with Disabilities, sums up the arguments on both sides. On one
hand, would an extension of deadlines encourage further non-compliance?
Will further extensions of time be granted after these expire?
Conversely, he also said the revised deadlines are not unlike those
ordered by courts when communities are found to be in violation of the
ADA.
"What will we gain if we defeat the rule change?" he said. "We will
retain the right to sue now. If we sue or threaten to sue every
delinquent community and win, we will probably get court-ordered or
voluntary schedules for compliance that are very similar to the ones
required by the rule change. It will cost money and time. It could, in
some instances, create animosities that become barriers to other agenda
items -- access, programs and funding."
The genesis of the proposal was some of the ADA's staunchest and most
powerful allies in the U.S. Senate: Republican Sens. Bob Dole, John
McCain and Orrin Hatch and Democratic Sens. Tom Harkin and Edward
Kennedy. They sent a letter to the Department of Justice early last
year, stating that "it was our intent to carefully craft ADA to include
fair and balanced provisions and specific safeguards for state and local
governments regarding costs. In this regard, we have heard that curb
cuts are a unique, significant capital expense, and believe that our
intent would be more properly fulfilled over a longer time period."
It had been suggested by some advocates that the proposed rule should
require public entities to establish a formal process through which
individuals with disabilities may request installation of a ramp at
their personal residence -- and that the ramp should be installed within
one year of the request. The Justice Department, however, states that it
"is concerned that the imposition of a requirement to provide curb ramps
at private residences within a year of a request may inhibit the ability
of a public entity to give priority to installing curb ramps on more
heavily traveled routes serving public and commercial facilities."
Justice currently recommends -- but does not require -- the development
of a request procedure. The proposed rule would require public entities
to ensure that curb ramps serving the residences of individuals should
be done by Jan. 26, 2000, and before the construction of ramps at other
residential and non-commercial sites.
The Department of Justice also is seeking comments on:
Costs. Justice is hoping to get beyond anecdotal evidence from state and
local governments and receive specific curb ramp costs, including the
amount of funds used both in terms of gross numbers and percentages of
the city and state budgets.
Transportation. The lack of curb cuts could hamper the move toward
accessible transportation as some bus stops may lack curb ramps for a
longer period of time.
Comments on this rule -- due on or before Jan. 26, 1996 -- should be
sent to: John L. Wodatch, Chief, Disability Rights Section, Civil Rights
Division, U.S. Department of Justice, Rulemaking Docket 007, P.O. Box
65485, Washington, DC 20035. Comments also may be sent via e-mail to
ADA@justice.usdoj.gov
Documents by Fax #401960002. (notice of proposed rulemaking) Pages: 8.
Price: $10 subscribers, $20 nonsubscribers.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
DISABILITY COMPLIANCE BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 18, 1996

Insurer Refusing to Cover Applicant Because He Is Deaf, Suit Alleges

MINNEAPOLIS -- While most insurance-related ADA suits have so far
focused on disability-based caps or exclusions in coverage provided by
employers, a case here appears to chart new waters: Does an insurer
violate the law if it refuses to write a health insurance policy for an
individual who is deaf?
That's the allegation in a suit filed by James L. Houselog, a 30-year-
old Minnesota man who has been deaf since birth. Houselog was denied
insurance by Continental General Insurance Co. because of his hearing
loss -- even though he has no apparent health problems, said one of his
attorneys, Laura Rovner of the National Center for Law and Deafness in
Washington.
The case has obvious implications for insurers. If Continental's
decision is found to be discriminatory, insurers across the nation could
be forced to re-evaluate their policies on applicants with disabilities.
Employers should keep an eye on the case too, as they are liable if they
offer a policy to employees that is found to be discriminatory.
Access to health insurance has been a long-standing problem for people
with disabilities -- in fact, it was at the top of disability activists'
agenda during the debate for national health care reform in 1994.
However, even staunch disability-rights proponents concede that the ADA
is a civil rights law and not a blueprint for healthcare and insurance
reform. Despite this, ADA suits continue to net favorable settlements
when challenging caps or exclusions in insurance (See Mason Tenders
story on page 1.)
The Minnesota case centers on plaintiff Houselog, a financial consultant
who does not receive health benefits from an employer. He submitted an
application for health and accident insurance to Continental. According
to the suit, the application asked whether he "[e]ver had any
indication, diagnosis or treatment of eyes or ears, including: impaired
sight or hearing?" Houselog answered yes, indicating that he was born
deaf because his mother had rubella while she was pregnant.
According to the suit, Continental denied the application, stating: "In
accordance with our current medical underwriting guidelines, we do
consider applicants with deafness on a substandard basis. Unfortunately,
the state of Minnesota has passed insurance regulation that limits our
ability to offer substandard coverage in Minnesota. Therefore, we are
unable to issue a policy to you." The insurer indicated that it would
have considered Houselog on a "substandard" basis -- in other words, it
would have covered him for only those expenses not related to his
deafness. However, Minnesota recently passed a law forbidding the
writing of substandard policies, Rover said.
"This is the purest form of discrimination," Rovner said. "It's like
racial discrimination; it's like saying we're not going to cover you
because you're black. There is no reason to think that this man, who has
a totally clean health record, would incur any more expenses than a
person who is not deaf."
An official representing Continental declined comment on the case.
Rovner expects the insurer to equate its alleged denial of Houselog's
application to the more common practice of insurers not covering persons
with pre-existing conditions. Rovner also notes that the ADA at 42
U.S.C. Section 12201(c) allows insurers to classify and administer
insurance risks that are consistent with state law.
"The ADA also requires that such a decision be based on actuarial
evidence," Rovner said. "I think their justification is that there is
some kind of actuarial basis that deaf people are a greater risk. But
they haven't presented that to us.
"Plus, they haven't obtained enough information from him to know whether
he's an increased risk. They know that his mother had rubella, that he
was born deaf. The insurance company didn't even get enough information
to know whether he was  totally deaf and therefore wouldn't even need a
hearing aid."
Houselog  asked the Minnesota Department of Commerce to investigate the
alleged denial of insurance. According to the suit, a Continental
official responded to the state inquiry by writing, "Because Mr.
Houselog presented an application with the history of hearing loss, we
were unable to provide a standard policy. We consider applicants with
deafness on a substandard basis."
The state concluded its investigation by informing Houselog that "[i]t
appears that the reply addresses your concerns and answers your
questions. We have closed the file."
Rovner said that, ironically, Minnesota has a law that prohibits the
denial of insurance because of someone's blindness. The law, however,
does not address other disabilities.
(Houselog v. Continental General Insurance Co. U.S. District Court for
the District of Minnesota. Filed November 1995



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
DISABILITY COMPLIANCE BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 18, 1996

WASHINGTON

Employment of people with disabilities in the federal government remains
steady despite government-wide downsizing, according to a report just
released by the U.S. Office of Personnel Management.
"It is gratifying to see that while government continues to downsize and
hiring restrictions at many agencies remain in effect, the number of
people with disabilities in the federal executive branch has actually
risen during the Clinton Administration from 6.9 percent in 1990 to 7.4
percent in 1994," said OPM director Jim King.
The office's report will be used to give agencies up-to-date information
to develop strategic affirmative recruiting plans, and for making
informed and cost-effective human resource decisions, according to OPM.
The report names the Department of Veterans Affairs as the largest
employer of persons with disabilities, employing 22,038 people with
disabilities. This represents 8.4 percent of the work force in that
department. About 13 percent of employees with disabilities in the
federal work force are veterans who are eligible for preference because
they served in combat or suffered a service-connected disability, the
report says.
Other agencies with the best records for hiring individuals with
disabilities, according to the report, are the Navy, Army, Air Force,
Agriculture and Treasury.
Copies of the OPM report are available by calling Warren Asher at (202)
606-1800



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
DISABILITY COMPLIANCE BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 18, 1996

Mason Tenders Fund Settles Landmark Case

NEW YORK -- Mason Tenders District Council Welfare Fund will pay some $1
million to settle the government's first suit alleging unlawful ADA/HIV
insurance exclusions under the Americans with Disabilities Act. As part
of the settlement, the fund will pay back medical bills and compensatory
damages to workers with HIV or AIDS whose medical expenses were not
covered.
Terrance Donaghey, whose complaint to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission in 1992 got the case started, will receive $16,000 for
emotional distress as well as payment for past medical bills. In all,
the fund will compensate more than 10 workers who had filed complaints
with EEOC and also invite other plan members to file claims if they feel
they have been discriminated against.
The landmark settlement -- believed to be the largest yet in an
insurance exclusion case -- brings to a close the government's first
suit alleging "disability-based distinctions" under the ADA. From the
EEOC's perspective, it emphasizes to employers and insurers that
disability-based distinctions are illegal unless they can be justified.
Government regulations issued just days before Mason Tenders was sued in
1993 state that the so-called distinctions are illegal under the ADA
unless proven by actuarial evidence.
The fund, which provides health benefits to thousands of construction-
related workers in New York, amended its plan in 1991 to, among other
things, exclude coverage for expenses relating to HIV and AIDS. Union
officials had said the decision was prompted by rapidly rising health
care costs and a construction downturn related to the recession of the
early 1990s.
Nevertheless, the EEOC made the elimination of disability-based
distinctions a priority in its ADA enforcement and chose Mason Tenders
as its first target. EEOC went on to sue numerous other funds that had
excluded AIDS or HIV, but  just about all of those cases settled.
"The fact is that when the insurers were told they would have to justify
their denial of coverage, settlements came pretty quickly," said Cary
LaCheen of New York Lawyers for the Public Interest, who represented
Donaghey in his private suit against Mason Tenders. "They don't fight
these cases indefinitely."
But Mason Tenders -- unlike most of the other funds sued by EEOC ----
appeared prepared to fight back. Many thought the case would eventually
go to the U.S. Supreme Court and resolve the murky interplay between the
ADA and insurance. While the case never made it to the high court, it
did yield an important decision at the district court level. There, the
fund's motion for summary judgment was denied when a judge held that it
was a covered entity under the ADA -- even though it didn't fit the
typical definition of employer under the act. The judge held that the
fund must justify its exclusions by a sound actuarial basis. (See box on
page 11.)
"The most significant part of the Mason Tenders case, in addition to the
settlement, is the earlier ruling that the plan was covered under the
ADA," LaCheen said. "That was instrumental in leading to the settlement
of this case and probably affected other settlements as well."
The judge's oral opinion -- which was never issued in written form --
relied on a broad interpretation of "employer" in a 2nd Circuit case,
Spirt v. Teachers Insurance Annuity Association, which was brought under
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The EEOC, in its interpretive
guidance of ADA regulations, provides that the term "employer" has the
same meaning under ADA as it does under Title VII.
In a brief filed in opposition to the fund's motion for summary
judgment, the EEOC also cited the Spirt case: "In Spirt, a tenured
university professor sued the independent insurance company and pension
fund that managed the university's retirement fund to challenge under
Title VII their use of sex-based mortality tables to compute lower
annuity payments for female retirees. Although the professor was not an
employee [of the insurance company or the fund] in any commonly
understood sense, the court of appeals held that the defendants, which
exist solely for the purpose of enabling universities to delegate their
responsibility to provide retirement benefits for their employees, are
so closely intertwined with those universities ... that they must be
deemed an employer for purposes of Title VII."
The Mason Tenders judge accepted EEOC's argument that the fund, too,
exists solely for the purpose of enabling contributing employers to
delegate their responsibility to provide health benefits for their
employees.
"These settlements send a clear signal to other insurers that they
cannot discriminate on the basis of disability," LaCheen said. "People
with disabilities should come forward and file complaints with EEOC
about disability discrimination in insurance they receive through work.
You don't need a lawyer to file a complaint."
Attorneys representing the Mason Tenders fund did not return phone calls
seeking comment on the case. EEOC officials could not be reached for
comment due to the partial government shutdown, which was ongoing at
press time.
(EEOC v. Mason Tenders District Council Welfare Fund. U.S. District
Court for the Southern District of New York. Filed March 1993.
Defendant's motion for summary judgment denied November 1993. Settlement
agreement announced December 1995.)      n
Documents by Fax #401960005(consent order). Pages: 13. Price: $15
subscribers, $30 nonsubscribers.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
DISABILITY COMPLIANCE BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 18, 1996

In Settling Suit, City Agrees to Accelerate Installation of Curb Ramps

PHILADELPHIA -- The proposed deadline extension for the installation of
curb ramps appears to have come too late for the city. Then again,
perhaps that's not surprising. No other major city in the nation has
been the target of more litigation concerning the accessibility of its
streets and sidewalks under ADA's Title II.
Last year the city appealed all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court a
lower court ruling that said it must construct curb ramps on all streets
it resurfaced since Jan. 26, 1992 -- the effective date of Title II.
The high court declined to review the 3rd Circuit case, Kinney v.
Yerusalim, 4 NDLR Paragraph 278 (3rd Cir. 1993).
And just last month, in settling a suit brought by 20 persons with
mobility impairments, the city agreed to adopt a new transition plan and
accelerate its schedule for curb ramp installation citywide. Under the
new plan, the city will install curb ramps on virtually all
intersections within the Center City district by Dec. 31, 1996. The plan
also calls for the city to install curb ramps throughout all
Philadelphia by Dec. 31, 2001 -- nine years earlier than stated in the
city's pre-lawsuit transition plan.
The proposed settlement agreement will not become effective unless it is
approved by a judge in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District
of Pennsylvania. A hearing is scheduled later this month.
Persons with mobility impairments sued the city last year, alleging that
its transition plan for installing curb ramps did not give priority to
streets near state and local government offices and facilities,
transportation, places of public accommodation, and employers -- as is
required by ADA regulations at 28 C.F.R. Section 35.150(d)(2). The plan
did not identify any specific priorities nor did it identify  the date
by which curb ramps would be installed, according to the suit.
Title II regulations required all public entities to set a transition
plan -- by January 1992 -- for areas where structural changes to
existing facilities were required to comply with the ADA. In addition to
establishing a plan to install curb ramps at existing facilities, the
ADA at 28 C.F.R. Section 35.151(e) requires that all newly constructed
or altered streets must contain curb ramps.
City officials could not be reached for comment on the settlement
agreement. However, when the suit was filed last year, officials said
the city was making progress on the curb ramp project, which it said
would take 10 years and $100 million to complete. Plaintiffs' attorney
Stephen Gold said the city had spent only $1 million installing curb
ramps over the last three years.
As part of the settlement agreement, the city will provide plaintiffs
with annual status reports containing detailed information about its
compliance with the new transition plan. Plaintiffs may remedy any
violations through motions to enforce the agreement if resorting to a
dispute resolution process proves unsuccessful.
Gold said the Justice Department's proposal to extend the curb ramp
deadline should have no effect on this case.
(Koch v. City of Philadelphia. U.S. District Court for the Eastern
District of Pennsylvania. Filed July 1995. Settlement agreement December
1995



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
DISABILITY COMPLIANCE BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 18, 1996

UPDATE

CLEVELAND -- A football fan who is hearing-impaired has failed to
convince the 6th Circuit that the National Football League is violating
the ADA when it "blacks out"  local TV broadcast of home games that are
not sold out 72 hours before game time. Thomas Stoutenborough was
appealing a district court's decision to grant the NFL's motion to
dismiss. In essence, Stoutenborough alleged that the blackout unlawfully
discriminates against persons with hearing impairments because they have
no other way to access the game. Thus, they are denied the
"substantially equal" access that they claim the ADA requires. The
appeals court, however, ruled that the blackout rule is not
discriminatory because it applies equally to the hearing-impaired  and
non-hearing-impaired population. The court also called "irrelevant" the
fact that hearing individuals may be able to listen to a blacked-out
game on radio. The NFL blackout rule does not affect radio broadcasts,
according to the court.
WASHINGTON -- The Justice Department has announced two settlements
involving restaurants. In northern Michigan, the owner of the well-known
Bear Lake Tavern agreed to make its restrooms accessible to persons with
disabilities. The settlement stems from a civil suit filed by the
department against owner James O. Moyes, who allegedly refused to make
the restaurant more accessible. In addition to altering restrooms, the
restaurant installed a ramp at the entrance, designated two accessible
parking spaces and lowered the public telephone. Moyes also agreed to
pay undisclosed damages. In Ft. Lauderdale, Fla., the Raindancer
Restaurant built a ramp and made its restroom accessible. Two
complainants also received $900 worth of gift certificates for meals at
the restaurant.
CHICAGO -- The Chicago Cubs professional baseball team has agreed to
make major renovations at Wrigley Field to bring the 83-year-old stadium
into compliance with ADA's Title III.  An elevator to the stadium's
terrace level will be installed, more than doubling the number of
reserved accessible seats. Cubs officials also agreed to correct alleged
deficiencies in Wrigley's washrooms and concession stands. Accessible
parking also will be expanded. The Cubs were sued by the Legal Clinic
for the Disabled last year after people with disabilities filed
complaints. The settlement agreement was finalized just two months
before a trial was set to begin. Under terms of the agreement, Cubs
management has until April to make the stadium accessible under the ADA.
The Cubs also agreed to publish a brochure describing the facilities and
arrangements made for persons with disabilities. Finally, the club will
pay Legal Clinic for the Disabled $20,000, which includes a
reimbursement to plaintiffs for the costs of the suit.
The editors of Disability Compliance Bulletin welcome your comments,
questions and news tips via e-mail! Please send e-mail to managing
editor Marc Sugarman at msugarman@lrp.com or to legal editor Thomas
D'Agostino at tdagostino@lrp.com



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-35</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B043-96</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/in12.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020800 text/html 107083
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:05:49 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:32 GMT
Content-length: 106895
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/in12.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>CZECH MATES?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(822 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>CP PROFITS RISE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(61 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>CP INCREASES STAKE IN KREDITNI BANKA PLZEN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(43 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>EKOAGROBANKA PUT UNDER ADMINISTRATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(36 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>CR: MTPL RATES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(66 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>SR: MTPL TO BE FREED IN 1998?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(292 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>CR: NINE HEALTH FUNDS TO GO?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(147 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>CR: POOR RETURNS FOR PENSION FUNDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(244 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>BANK MERGERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(104 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>PLZENSKA BANKA SHARE OFFER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(65 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>CESKO-RAKOUSKA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(31 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>CHMELARSKA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(90 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>GRECO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(84 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>KOOPERATIVA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(95 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>HASICSKA (BRATISLAVA)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(131 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>SLAVIA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(54 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>VSZP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(89 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>COMPULSORY MTPL POSTPONED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(171 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>ESTONIA: 1995 11 MONTH DATA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(207 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>ALBA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(17 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>BRB</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(18 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>FORTUNA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(104 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>TRYGG-HANSA/HANSA KINDLUSTUS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(40 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>POOL FORMED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(124 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>OREL/BALKAN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(297 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>DZI</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(210 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>RUSSIA: AMENDMENTS VETOED AGAIN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(262 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>RUSSIA: FOREX POLICIES PERMITTED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(431 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>BELARUS: PROPOSED LEGISLATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(439 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>BELARUS: 10 INSURERS SUSPENDED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(83 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>KAZAKHSTAN: NEW LAW "IRREVERSIBLE"</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(548 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>BELARUS: CORRECTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(76 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>RUSSIA: 1995 PREMIUM ESTIMATE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(29 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#34"><LI>RUSSIA: MINCONS FAVOURED INSURERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(35 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#35"><LI>ALEXANDER HOWDEN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(39 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#36"><LI>BELINGOSSTRAKH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(214 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#37"><LI>UIIC</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(243 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#38"><LI>ZASHCHITA ST PETERSBURG</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(37 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#39"><LI>CROATIA IC</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(729 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#40"><LI>MERGER OF SUPERVISORS PLANNED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(174 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#41"><LI>NEW VMBF LAW</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(605 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#42"><LI>MTPL RATES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(156 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#43"><LI>GROWTH AND COMPETITION IN LIFE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(624 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#44"><LI>COLONIA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(109 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#45"><LI>EUROPA-GAN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(123 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#46"><LI>GARANCIA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(89 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#47"><LI>GRAZER WECHSELSEITIGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(264 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#48"><LI>HUNGARIA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(77 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#49"><LI>IFOR VEHICLE CLAIMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(37 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#50"><LI>WINTERTHUR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(125 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#51"><LI>MOTOR TPL PREMIUMS, 1996 (HUF)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(84 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#52"><LI>UNOFFICIAL LIMIT ON FOREIGN INVESTMENT?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(228 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#53"><LI>FOREIGN INVESTMENT TO BE LIBERALIZED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(66 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#54"><LI>VAT AT 7% FOR 1996</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(70 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#55"><LI>MOTOR RATES RISE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(138 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#56"><LI>INSURANCE STICKERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(35 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#57"><LI>UNINSURED CAR FINES RISE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(67 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#58"><LI>MOTOR INSURANCE FRAUD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(76 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#59"><LI>OMBUDSMAN ON PROBLEMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(94 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#60"><LI>WARNING ON EXCESSIVE COMMISSIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(61 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#61"><LI>AIG</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(43 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#62"><LI>ATU</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(23 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#63"><LI>GRYF</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(362 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#64"><LI>ELEKTRIM INCREASES STAKE IN WARTA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(21 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#65"><LI>HESTJA (POZNAN)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(207 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#66"><LI>POLISA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(434 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>OCCURRENCE AND REPORTS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#67"><LI>OCCURRENCES AND REPORTS TO 21 JANUARY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1684 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#68"><LI>ALBANIA:  FOREIGN LOAN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(30 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#69"><LI>BALTIC STATES:  FOREIGN INVESTMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(23 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#70"><LI>CIS:  JOINT VENTURES AND FOREIGN INVESTMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(363 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#71"><LI>CZECH REPUBLIC:  JOINT VENTURES AND FOREIGN INVESTMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(167 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#72"><LI>HUNGARY:  FOREIGN INVESTMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(27 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#73"><LI>POLAND:  JOINT VENTURES AND FOREIGN INVESTMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(79 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#74"><LI>ROMANIA:  JOINT VENTURES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(70 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CZECH MATES?

HARD ON THE HEELS of complex changes in the ownership of major Czech
banks in November, one of the results of which was control of Kreditni
banka Plzen by Ceska pojistovna as, Prague (EEIR061/13), came some
major changes in the shareholdings of the Czech Republic's largest
insurer itself. Just before Christmas, it was revealed that PPF
Burzovni Spolecnost as (PPF Stock Exchange Co Ltd, PPF BS), a
subsidiary of Privni Privatizacni Fond as (PPF), had acquired an 11.72%
stake from Ceska sporitelna (EEIR062/14). Shortly thereafter, it also
agreed to purchase a further 7.69% from Interbanka, and PPF announced
that it intended to make further purchases in the market to bring its
stake up to 20%, the maximum permitted in a Czech financial institution
by a single investment fund or fund group.

The price was not disclosed, but banking sources estimated a price in
the region of Kc5,000 (US$192) per share, five times nominal value and
at a premium of just over 25% to the Kc3,990 quoted on the Prague stock
exchange on 15 December, the last trading day of the year. (CP shares
were at their 1995 high of Kc6,090 in January, with a low in April of
Kc3,660). Ceska sporitelna had sold its stake, it was speculated,
because of its need for funds to make an increase of Kc7bn in bad debt
provisions to a total of Kc23bn for 1995. It also sold shares in some
of its investment fund subsidiaries to Bankers Trust for Kc6.7bn.

PPF BS director Jaromir Proks stressed that the CP stake had been
bought for long-term investment purposes, and declined to comment when
asked if talks were under way with other CP shareholders. Some
observers retain suspicions that, as with the KBP/Agrobanka share
purchases, there is a "hidden hand" involved. Initial press speculation
that this was Allianz AG Holding, Munich, was quickly denied - and
indeed represented nothing more than the rounding up of the usual
suspects. The idea that the orchestrator is Ceskoslovenska obchodni
banka (CSOB) is perhaps more plausible (EEIR060/14, EEIR056/13). It has
a 14% stake currently, and may well be interested in increasing it.
CSOB's net profit for 1995 (on preliminary unaudited figures) was
Kc4.1bn, up 115% on 1994.

Transfer to PPF BS of the majority of the CP shares from Ceska
sporitelna, and those from Interbanka, was to be approved by the
control committee of the insurer (its supervisory board) on 11 January:
the 7.69% Interbanka stake, and the same proportion of the stake held
by Ceska sporitelna, are registered shares which can only change hands
with company approval. Control Committee chairman Pavel Kavanek (a
general manager of CSOB) had indicated in December that there were no
obstacles to the transfers, but in the event the committee declined to
approve it. Officially, a discussion took place between the 12 members
of the committee (of which seven represent shareholders) on whether to
retain the present diversified shareholding structure - which most
members probably support - or whether to allow a shareholder with
greater influence. After this, "the committee unanimously concluded
that it is first of all reasonable to reach a consensus of owners and
formalise it through an agreement."

In reality, it was later suggested, the implacable opposition of a
director representing a 10% shareholder had been at the root of the
committee's refusal. The two 10% shareholders are Komercni banka and
Investicni a postovni banka (IB), and the finger was pointed at the
latter as the one mainly opposing the entry of a large shareholder.
Other sources supposedly equally close to the negotiations suggested
that all the large bank shareholders were also opposed to it. (As it
happens, IPB was also the bank which was worsted in the Agrobanka
battle.)

Of CP's total shares, 73.08% are in the form of registered shares; of
the 36.92% freely tradeable bearer shares, 15% were held by the public
at the end of 1994. The largest single shareholder remains the National
Property Fund (26.27%), followed by CSOB (14%), Komercni banka and IPB
(10% each), Restitution Fund (3%) and employees (5%). National Property
Fund chairman Roman Ceska said on 16 January that it was not opposed to
the share transfers, but the decision was up to the other shareholders.

PPF Investicni Spolecnost responded by calling an EGM with the
intention of proposing board changes, executive director Ladislav
Bartonicek said in mid-January. Although its intended stake includes a
15.4% block of bearer shares, 4% of bearer shares acquired from Ceska
sporitelna and a proxy granted by Interbanka for its 7.69% in
registered shares gave it the 10% representation required to call an
AGM, the CP board said on 17 January. The EGM will also consider
changes to the company's articles of incorporation and executive
bodies. The supervisory board will hold an extraordinary meeting of its
own prior to the EGM, for which no date had been set as EEIR went to
press.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CP PROFITS RISE

According to unaudited preliminary results released this month, CP's
net profit in 1995 was Kc405.5m, up from Kc73m in 1994, and 45% up on
the original estimate for the year. The target for 1996 is Kc470m. Non-
life reserves increased from Kc10.6bn at the end of 1994 to Kc14.1bn at
the end of 1995, and life reserves from Kc48.3bn to Kc51.9bn.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CP INCREASES STAKE IN KREDITNI BANKA PLZEN

At the end of 1995, CP increased its stake in Kreditni banka Plzen
(EEIR062/14, 061/13) from 56% to 61.26% through a further issue of new
shares. With current paid up capital of Kc1.86bn (US$71.5m), Kreditni
banka is the sixth largest in the country.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

EKOAGROBANKA PUT UNDER ADMINISTRATION

On 16 January is Ekoagrobanka as, Usti nad Labem, in which CP has a
stake of just over 10%, was put under administration by the National
Bank, the fifth against which such measures have been taken.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CR: MTPL RATES

Thanks to the Czech reader who points out that the average increase in
1996 MTPL rates for cars in the Czech Republic is not 13% (EEIR062/12),
but 29% to 40%, while rates for motorcycles are 29% to 41% lower. The
13% figure (12.7%, in fact) represents the anticipated increase in MTPL
premium for Ceska pojistovna as, Prague, as monopoly carrier, which was
Kc3.6bn (US$132.5m) in 1994.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SR: MTPL TO BE FREED IN 1998?

In an article in the local press, Imrich Fekete of the Green Card
office of Slovenska poistovna as, Bratislava, said that he expected a
new system of compulsory motor TPL open to the whole insurance market
rather than operated as a monopoly by SP, to be introduced from 1
January 1998. The need for such a slow transition was partly due to the
social consequences of the change resulting from the expected sharp
increase in MTPL costs for private cars, but also because of a daunting
list of legal and infrastructure preconditions which had to be
completed first. Mr Fekete's list is worthy of study, especially in
countries of the FSU which are considering introduction of compulsory
MTPL from scratch in a short space of time.

1) New legislation on compulsory MTPL insurance which conforms with EU
guidelines.

2) Creation of a central register of all motor vehicles in cooperation
with the police authorities, including details of the insurance
carrier, and drawing up a sanctions scheme for uninsured vehicles.

3) Legal solution as on insuring vehicles for the preliminary period
between purchase of the vehicle and signing an insurance policy.

4) Categorisation of motor vehicles for rating purposes.

5) Issuing of a Finance Ministry order supplementary to the MTPL law
setting out insurance limits, the bonus-malus system, and indemnity in
case of loss caused by an unknown or uninsured vehicle, etc.

6) Issuing of a standard form of general insurance conditions for MTPL
insurance.

7) Signing of a framework agreement between MTPL and motor damage
insurers on apportioning losses.

8) Establishment of a Green Card Office of the Slovak Republic, a
Guarantee Fund, an Association of Frontier Insurers, and securing the
finance for these.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CR: NINE HEALTH FUNDS TO GO?

On 21 December, Parliament approved the 1996 financial plans of nine of
the country's 27 health insurance funds, in addition to the five
approved in November (EEIR062/13). The additional nine were Zeleznicni
ZP Gral, Garant Hospital, Vojenska ZP, Moravska ZP, Bankovni ZP,
Stavebni ZP, Revirni ZP, Crystal ZP, and REZAPO.

Four more - ZP Ministerstva Vnitra, Mendlova ZP, ZP Atlas and ZP Prima
- secured preliminary approval from the Health Ministry this month, but
after expected Finance Ministry approval will still need that of the
final Parliamentary hearing on the matter in February. Of those which
had still not secured approval, and are therefore expected to
disappear, Prima Plzen announced plans to merge with Crystal, subject
to Health Ministry approval, as are at least five of the others. Merger
will assist some of the approved but smaller funds to meet the minimum
requirement of 50,000 insureds.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CR: POOR RETURNS FOR PENSION FUNDS

According to Czech Statistics Office figures, in Q1-Q3 1995, the 40
active pension funds made a consolidated loss of Kc244m (US$9.4m), with
total costs and expenses of Kc3.2bn, premium income of Kc3.5bn and
other income for funds' own products and services Kc109m. Consolidated
equity capital (including operating results) totalled Kc3bn and pension
reserves Kc1.7bn. Membership totalled over 1m.

Average yields for 1995 year are expected to be between 5% and 10%,
barely above an inflation rate expected to turn out at 9.1%. According
to preliminary figures, the highest yields for insureds are expected to
be achieved by

* Penzijni Fond Multi (11%)
* Penzijni Fond Energie (10.6%)
* Podnikatelsky Penzijni Fond (Entrepreneurs PF) (minimum 10%)
* Penzijni Fond Ceske Pojistovny (Ceska pojistovna as, Prague) (10%)
* Vojensky Otevreny Penzijni Fond (Military Open PF)
  (minimum 8.5% to 8.7%) and
* Penzijni Fond Winterthur (8%).

Other funds are expected to provide much lower yields, including Zemsky
Penzijni Fond (Regional PF) (6%) and Penzijni Fond Thalie (5%), and
some such as Stavebni Penzijni Fond Ceske Republicky (Construction PF
of the CR) no yield at all, since they returned a financial loss for
the year. The largest fund in this position is expected to be
Sporitelni Penzijni Fond (Savings PF).

On 21 December, an "association agreement" was signed between Penzijni
Fond Energie, Penzijni Fond Koruna and Penzijni Fond Skoda. The three
are also interested in pursuing talks about co-operation or merger with
other funds.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BANK MERGERS

On 25 January, Czech National Bank deputy governor Pavel Kysilka said
that problems in the Czech banking sector affected some large banks as
well as smaller ones. In order to meet the requirements of future EU
membership, Czech banks "must undergo a process of more fusions and
megafusions, searching for foreign partners, raising basic capital and
being more specialized in their focus," he said. The future policy of
the Central Bank would take account of these necessities, he told a
seminar in Prague on preparations for EU membership.

Four banks have failed since 1989, and a rescue plan is currently
underway for Ekoagrobanka.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

PLZENSKA BANKA SHARE OFFER

According to an opinion poll by the Institute for the Research of
Public Opinion, attempts by Plzenska banka to buy large quantities of
shares acquired by individuals during voucher privatization
(EEIR061/13) are unlikely to be very successful. It sent 5.5m letters
to shareholders. The poll found that 56% of respondents had little or
no interest in the offer, 25% some interest, and 7% very interested.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CESKO-RAKOUSKA

Cesko-rakouska pojistovna as, Prague, majority-owned by Bundeslander
Versicherungs AG, Vienna, announced on 17 January that it had
introduced motor casco policies. These cover Czech drivers throughout
Europe, with a 30% deductible.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CHMELARSKA

Chmelarska vzajemna pojistovna as (CVP) (Hopgrowers' Mutual Insurance
Co), Zatec (EEIR060/16), began operations on 1 January, initially
writing commercial property and liability. Individual property and
liability and motor will follow in July, life and accident and
agricultural risks in 1997 and motor TPL when legislation permits. Its
main office is in Pardubice, with regional offices in Prague, Zatec,
Ceske Budejovice, Hradec Kralove, Brno and Olomouc. Reinsurance is led
by Swiss Reinsurance Co, Zurich, with the remainder placed by Le Blanc
de Nicola+ Reassurance, Levallois-Perret, and Harris and Dixon Ltd,
London.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

GRECO

A new entrant to the Czech intermediary market (as well as the 43rd
subsidiary of machinery and engineering company Skoda Plzen) is Skoda
Pojistovaci Management sro, Plzen, in which the local subsidiary of
GrECo International AG, Vienna, has a 26% stake. The new entity appears
to be the first German-style captive broker to be established in
central Europe, and will act as broker and risk management consultant
to the Skoda Plzen group, employees and associated companies, which
increasingly include activities unconnected with heavy engineering.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

KOOPERATIVA

Dr Gunter Geyer, deputy general director of Wiener Stadtische
Allgemeine Versicherung, Vienna, and a board member of Kooperativa
druzstevna poistovna as, Bratislava, told the Austrian insurer's staff
magazine that Kooperativa Bratislava's premium income for 1995 would
reach approximately SK780m (US$28m), an increase of over 30% on 1994.

With reference to the 51/49 Kooperativa/Wiener Stadtische broking joint
venture InExCo, Bratislava (EEIR062/14), the same magazine noted that
it was intended to develop Kooperativa's industrial business, since
there remained a severe shortage of qualified brokers with experience
of risk management, risk analysis and loss protection in Slovakia.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

HASICSKA (BRATISLAVA)

Hasicska poistovna as (Fire Brigade Insurance Co), Bratislava, has now
begun operating, with share capital of SK118m (US$3.9m), which was
expected to be raised by a further SK20m this month, and intended to
fund entry into life as well as non-life, ceo Peter Hargas said.
Shareholders include the municipalities of Bratislava and Kosice, and
the investment fund Karpaty. It has main offices in Bratislava, Kosice,
Banska Bystrica and Presov, and plans others in Nitra and Zilina.
Distribution will include sales through voluntary fire brigade members,
which are organised into 2,800 units throughout the country. Mr Hargas
is a former Bratislava brigade commander. He said the name had been
chosen partly to thwart efforts by the Czech Hasicska vzajemna
pojistovna as (Fire Brigade Mutual Insurance Co), Prague, to enter the
Slovak market.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SLAVIA

Pojistovna Slavia as, Prague, took a stake in Brno bank Coop Banka as
part of a new issue to increase its equity from Kc500m (US$19.2m) to
Kc1.55bn. Coop Banka, a major shareholder in Moravskoslezska
Kooperativa druzstevne pojistovna as, Brno, entered the top ten Czech
banks by paid capital as a result of the issue.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

VSZP

There was general chaos in late November and early January at the
Bratislava branch of state health insurer Vseobecna Zdravotna Poistovna
(VsZP) as clients waited in long queues to obtain new registration
cards. A number of private sector health insurers complained that
clients who decided as a result to change their health insurer were
hindered by bureaucratic obstacles erected by VsZP, a fairly common
sort of complaint (EEIR059/15).

The 1996 budget of VsZP anticipates income of SK26.25bn (US$870m) and
4.1m insureds, with monthly expenditure per insured of SK850.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

COMPULSORY MTPL POSTPONED

The Latvian government has announced that the introduction of
compulsory motor TPL will be postponed until 1 July. The new
legislation is subject to a press campaign against its introduction, as
is also understood to be opposed by elements of the Finance Ministry of
the new government. A Latvian Motor Bureau has been established, headed
by representatives of Balta and BTA, both Riga.

In Lithuania, where new legislation is still being prepared, proposals
to introduce compulsory MTPL have also been put back. In Estonia, MTPL
losses ran at 120% to 130% for 1994-95, and rates have been increased
substantially this year.

The reinsurance of the Estonian Green Card Pool is probably the largest
reinsurance treaty from the region, led at Lloyd's with support from
Swiss Reinsurance Co, Zurich, Kolnische RuckversicherungsGes AG,
Cologne, and SOREMA, Paris.

The leading motor casco insurers in Latvia are Saules Laiks, Balta and
Pareks.

Motor theft in Estonia declined by 40% in the first six months of 1995
compared with the previous year.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ESTONIA: 1995 11 MONTH DATA

According to data from the Estonian insurance supervisor, non-life
premium for the first 11 months of 1995 totalled EK449.123m (US$38m),
and claims EK214.295 (47.7%). Motor TPL represented EK218.560m, 48.7%
of total premium, and MTPL claims EK129.367m, 59.2% of premium and
60.4% of total claims.

For the first ten months of 1995, for which life premium totalled
EK34.5m and non-life EK401.9m, RAS Eesti Kindlustus, Tallinn, had
premium of EK109.7m (a market share of about a quarter) and claims of
EK60.1m (54.8% of premium). ASA Kindlustus, Tallinn, was second
largest, with premium of EK82.7m (market share of 18% to 19%) and
claims of EK52.6m (63.6% of premium). ASA was partly responsible for
the scrutiny of all reinsurance contracts by the insurance superior,
following its inability to collect on a reinsurance placed with a
Florida-based company identified to EEIR as Olympia. This matter was
settled in ASA's favour by the arbitration court in Estonia, which is a
signatory to international arbitration conventions.

Commercial property market leader BK Baltic Insurance Co (BICO),
Tallinn, had premium of EK29.6m (market share of about 7%), with claims
of EK6.9m (23.3% of premium). Insurance supervisor Ellen Ridaste
estimated that non-life premium for 1995 would reach EK500m, increasing
to EK650m to EK700m in 1996.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ALBA

The Latvian Finance Ministry will shortly institute insolvency
proceedings against Alba, Riga, Neatkriga reported on 29 January.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BRB

BRB Ltd (Baltic Reinsurance Brokers), Riga, obtained a licence for BRB
Draudimas Brokers, Kaunas (Lithuania) on 1 December.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

FORTUNA

Dripdev reported just before Christmas that Fortuna Lebensversicherung
Ges, Adliswil, had acknowledged having made "regrettable mistakes" by
permitting the sale of insurance policies on an unlicensed basis in
Estonia through the Riga arm of pyramid sales intermediary Safe-Invest
(EEIR062/2, and passim). Dripdev said that the company had agreed to
cease any sales in Estonia, and make refunds on all contracts taken out
before 31 October 1995 according to Swiss law. Given the relatively
short time which the policies are likely to have been in force, the
refunds on a typical Safe-Invest-sold 10 or 15 year policy are likely
to be very small, or non-existent.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

TRYGG-HANSA/HANSA KINDLUSTUS

As expected (EEIR062/2), Sampo Insurance Group, Turku, has sold its
minority stake in Hansa Kindlustus, Tallinn, to Trygg-Hansa Group,
Stockholm. The latter now owns 90% of Hansa Kindlustus, and has
confirmed plans to establish a commercial property subsidiary in Riga.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

POOL FORMED

The 13 insurers which last May were the founding shareholders on
Bulgarski Prezastrachvatelen Ko (BPK, Bulgarian Re), Sofia (EEIR055/9,
060/6) announced in late January that they had also formed a pool aimed
primarily at insuring the property risks of companies mainly owned by
the municipality of Sofia, BPK deputy executive director Rusi Rusev
said. The pool will be led by Bulstrad and Motor Insurance Co MIC, both
Sofia, with 24.5% each, and the other members are the insurers Atlas,
Evropa, Evropeiska Zastrachovatelna Atsotsiatsiya (EZA), Granit,
Turgovsko Zastrachovanie, Vi-Vesta, Bulgarski Imoti, &M, Hemus, Trakia
and Bul Ins. Each company will be permitted to lead a given risk, with
premium distributed on a co-participation basis. Mr Rusev said that
participation was also open to other insurers.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

OREL/BALKAN

At a general meeting on 2 January, the shareholders of ZPK Orel AD,
Sofia, and SZPK Balkan AD, Sofia, a specialist insurer associated with
the Orel group, approved a merger between the two, and specialist
health insurer ZOZAD Zakrila, Sofia, approved merger with Orel life
affiliate ZPK Fenix AD, Sofia, which will vote on the proposal in
February.

The mergers are partly with the requirements of the Insurance Bill
currently being debated in Parliament in mind. This proposes an
increase in the minimum capital for insurers to Leva200m (US$2.75m) (a
figure of Leva100m is also being discussed), as well as increasing
credibility abroad: Orel, which is currently capitalised at Leva100m,
is said to be keen to secure the support of Swiss Reinsurance Co,
Zurich. Balkan began operations in 1994 with the minimum legally
required capital of Leva10m, with Orel G Holding AD, Sofia, as the
leading shareholder with 40%, along with TSBank (10%), Angel (11%), the
Sinit motor trading company, Postal Bank (2%) and some individual
investors. It was mainly aiming at the financial insurance market
(EEIR049/10), but by last Spring it had become clear that this market
was weak, and slow-growing. Nor could the shareholders reach agreement
on a development strategy, and some withdrew.

Zakrila was set up in 1993 with capital of Leva10m (EEIR026/6) by Orel
G, Sirbank, Feniks (which currently has registered capital of Leva50m)
and the Confederation of Independent Trade Unions, and planned to offer
group medical insurance. This market did not develop as hoped either,
partly because of an absence of a legislative structure.

Other similar mergers are expected to accelerate, as the "back-kitchen"
insurers unable to raise minimum capital 20 times the current level are
faced with liquidation, sale or transformation into an agency of a
larger company.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

DZI

Darshaven Zastrachovatelen Institut (DZI), Sofia, has announced its
1996 interest rates for life policies, which will be 34% for five year
policies (currently about 40% of the portfolio), 38% for six to 10 year
policies (about 30% of the portfolio) and 44% for policies over 10
years (also about 30% of the portfolio). Deputy chairman Valery Alexiev
said that such inflation-proofing could be offered because 75% to 80%
of reserves were invested in government securities. Mr Alexiev added
that the fastest-growing product is family and children's policies,
typically for terms of 14 to 18 years. In 1995 400,000 new customers
bought policies, yielding premium of Leva4.1bn (US$56m), Mr Alexiev
said. Life insurance had contributed a further Leva200m. 1995 premium
for both life and non-life is estimated to have reached Leva5bn.

DZI, as a major shareholder in Razvitie Investment Fund, announced this
month that it will set up a fund to participate in this year's voucher
privatisation programme. Other shareholders, including the State
Savings Bank, United Bulgarian Bank and the Intransmash engineering
company, are also expected to participate. Privatization funds must
have registered capital of at least Leva70m, at least Leva10m of the
total in cash. The remainder may be made up with vouchers, which have a
nominal value Leva25,000.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

RUSSIA: AMENDMENTS VETOED AGAIN

On 3 January President Boris Yeltsin vetoed the bill amending the law
On insurance for the second time, a spokesman for the presidential
press service announced. In a letter to the Duma, President Yeltsin
said that it had ignored his criticisms of the bill made in October
(EEIR061/6). He again rejected the proposed restrictions on the
corporate form of insurers on the grounds that it is inconsistent with
"the equality of participants in civil legal relations" laid down in
the Civil Code (and originally intended, no doubt, to prevent the
private sector being discriminated against to the benefit of the state
sector. It is a fundamental principle of Russian jurisprudence, on a
Napoleonic as much as a Soviet basis, that subordinate legislation
cannot amend primary legislation. Thus broadly speaking the
Constitution takes precedence, followed by international treaties,
Codes, laws, decrees and normative acts.) Nor has the President
relented in his opposition to a compulsory separation of life and non-
life insurance, which he said "disregards the condition of the Russian
insurance market" - the "special circumstances" argument familiar to
anyone who has discussed economics with a group of Russians - and will
not enable the insurers to improve their financial position, but on the
contrary, "will split numerous insurance companies and, in the last
analysis, reduce the insurance market." President Yeltsin also objected
to the restriction of reinsurance to classes for which insurers have a
primary licence, which he said "contravened the general principles of
reinsurance". He made "numerous" other additions and amendments, the
spokesman said, which were no doubt equally insightful.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

RUSSIA: FOREX POLICIES PERMITTED

From 1 February, Russian insurers will be more or less free to engage
in insurance in foreign currency both inside and outside the country,
when new procedures issued by the Central Bank come into force. The new
measures, for which insurers have been waiting for close on three
years, were announced by the Bank's head of foreign currency regulation
and control, Viktor Melnikov, in mid-December.

Insurers will be able to insure and reinsure with foreign parties free
of Central Bank restriction, and settlement in foreign currency between
insurers and resident insureds is permitted for a wide range of listed
categories of insurance. Potentially the most far-reaching change is
permission for insurers to settle claims in hard currency with resident
individual insureds for life, health, accident and voluntary medical
insurance.

For most of the other approved settlement categories, there is an
obvious foreign currency risk element. For individual resident
insureds, these categories are the luggage of individuals leaving the
RF, TPL for private vehicles going abroad, and defined real estate
outside the country.

For settlements between insurers and insured legal entities, the list
of permitted settlement categories is

* goods being imported into or exported from Russian customs territory
(the distinction may be important in view of the customs unions with
Belarus and Kazakhstan);

* ground vehicles, aircraft and river and sea vessels moved through the
customs territory of the RF and used in international transportation;

* liability to non-residents by owners of vehicles used in
international transportation;

* accidents to resident individuals leaving the country on business;

* CAR/EAR abroad;

* liability for export loans;

* transportation and storage of foreign currency, in cash or
securities;

* foreign-manufactured vehicles and equipment owned by resident
organisations and purchased for foreign currency.

At one time, insurers were permitted not only to insure foreign
equipment in hard currency, but also the loss of production from the
equipment. This appears to have been one of those areas which
subsequently became technically a breach of Central Bank instructions,
but remains unclear under the new regulations.

Mr Melnikov said the regulations had been amended partly to reflect
market developments and the introduction of new classes of business.
Some transactions had not previously been officially sanctioned, and
insurers engaged in them were technically in breach of regulations, he
said. Secondly, foreign companies had, he claimed, secured a large
share of the market, and the new rules, by putting foreign and domestic
insurers on the same footing, would help to reduce the outflow of
foreign currency.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BELARUS: PROPOSED LEGISLATION

The first meeting of the Insurance Council of the Cabinet of Ministers
of Belarus (EEIR062/5) discussed four draft government resolutions, On
Insurance Brokers, On the Investment Activities of Insurance Companies,
On Compulsory Insurance of Passengers and On Compulsory Insurance of
the Staff of the Taxation Service.

The latter two measures are both intended to apply on a temporary
basis. The Council recommended the adoption of the law on passenger
insurance, which was issued as a government resolution in mid-January.
Cover against accidental death is made mandatory for all forms of
public transport, whether state- or privately-owned introducing
mandatory, and covers all passengers in possession of a ticket from
arrival at the point of departure. The sum insured is 100 minimum
wages, or BR6m (US$520), with the premium set at 2% of the ticket price
and included in the ticket cost. The scheme will be administered by
Belgosstrakh SKARB, Minsk, but will be superceded at some point in the
future by new comprehensive legislation On Transporter's Liability.

The proposal on compulsory [life] insurance for taxation service
personnel stands in the same relationship to planned legislation On
Compulsory Insurance of Civil Servants, which will replace the
collection of measures left over from Soviet times or implemented
since, whether still put into practice or not.

A Cabinet resolution has also, as expected (EEIR062/5), instructed the
Ministries of Finance, Economy and State Property to draw up plans for
a "national system of reinsurance" in the form of a Belarussian
National Reinsurance Society (BNRS) as an open joint stock company with
minimum statutory fund of US$6m, and a state shareholding of at least
30%. Its activities will be supervised by Belgosstrakhnadsor, and
participation is planned to be open to foreign reinsurance companies.

The Council also discussed the funding of a training centre for
insurance. At the meeting of the German-Belarussian Insurance Working
Group in Berlin in November (EEIR062/5), the German government agreed
in principle to provide DM3.5m (US$2.4m) in funding, provided the
Belarus government considered it an immediate priority, Belarus Market
reported last month.

Currently, some insurance training is provided by the Minsk Academy of
Management, founded in 1991. Its two year course includes market
economics, management, the theory and classification of risks,
commercial insurance, reinsurance, the international insurance market,
regulation, and insurance company management, Vice Rector Alexander
Golovachkov told the local Insurance News. It works closely with
Belgosstrakhnadsor, which assists in course organisation and assessment
of diplomas, he added. The Academy plans in future to provide
specialist insurance education for professional in other fields, for
example so that doctors will be able to acquire expertise in medical
insurance.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BELARUS: 10 INSURERS SUSPENDED

In late 1995, there were 82 insurers operating in Belarus, according to
Belgosstrakhnadzor. Fifteen went bankrupt in 1994, and about the same
number were not expected to survive 1995. Belgosstrakhnadsor sent
letters to the owners of ten insurers ordering them to cease activity,
return their registrations and set up liquidation committees, on the
grounds of financial instability, assets below the legal minimum of
5,000 minimum salaries (BR300m, US$26,000), etc. The ten were Belavers,
Belvarta, Belvest-Grodno, Kredo, Lidors, Olimpium, Polar, Rabel, Raise
and Strakhimpeks.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

KAZAKHSTAN: NEW LAW "IRREVERSIBLE"

In an interview with Kazakhstanskaya Pravda this month, newly-appointed
chairman of Kazakhstan Gosstrakhnadzor, Oskar Ler, described the new
insurance law (EEIR060/1) as "a serious step forward" which
demonopolised the insurance industry and created the conditions for
free competition both for state and private sector and insurers. It had
been positively received by foreign companies and investors, and now
the domestic market was open to foreign insurers, they were considering
how to invest, he said.

The cynical interviewer asked whether the law would change anything, as
"It is well known that with normative acts any pro-market law can be
turned into its opposite." "That cannot be," Mr Ler replied. "Our
market needs to be integrated with the CIS economies, and enter into
the world market," he added, and the needed foreign investment would
not be forthcoming without a positive business climate, including a
fully-formed system of insurance and reinsurance. The law would
stimulate the formation of financially stable insurance reserves
companies backed by major financial and industrial groups and those
insurers which had already acquired sufficient capital, expertise and
assets. Gosstrakhnadzor would supervise, development policy and assist
with training. A seminar on insurance accounting was held in December,
and an international seminar on reinsurance was due to take place in
January.

Among Gosstraknadzor's proposals were the transfer of the guaranteeing
of financial risks from government to the insurance market. A truly
competitive environment lay in combining state and private sector,
compulsory and voluntary insurances, he said.

Insurance joint ventures and a system of reinsurance with foreign
reinsurers would enable the possibilities of the Kazakh market to cover
major risks to be utilised to the full, Mr Ler said. It was imperative
to use international professional experience to develop the market.
Local insurers would find it useful to work alongside the world's
leading insurers, consultants, brokers, and other professionals. The
entry of foreign insurers and reinsurers would, however, be conditional
on guarantees of solvency and financial stability, and before seeking
reinsurance abroad, the Kazakh market would have to be exploited to the
full through coinsurance and "other groupings of insurers".

A priority for the future was the development of long-term life and
pensions insurances, as well as compulsory motor TPL in line with
international practice, for both privately and commercially owned
vehicles. Development of compulsory medical insurance was the
responsibility of the state social insurance system, but voluntary
medical insurance would be an important complement to it, and "much
could be done" by co-operation between medical and insurance
professionals, he said. In the context of the new law the state
insurance company would also have to be reorganised to maximise the use
of professionalism and assets.

Mr Ler said that he saw the Union of Insurers of Kazakhstan as an ally,
not an opponent, since they shared mutual interests. A period of three
to five years would be needed for the formation of stable, solvent
insurers, and much depended on the progress of privatization, the
banking sector, and other factors, Mr Ler said. "We will have a
civilised insurance market, however, because there is a legal basis for
it, and a recognition of its importance. There is a great desire in the
government of Kazakhstan that we should have a normal insurance
market," he concluded.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BELARUS: CORRECTION

Due to transcription and transmission difficulties, the table in
EEIR062/6 on the availability of lines of insurance from Belarus
insurance was reproduced wrongly. An authentic version of the table did
not arrive until after EEIR had already gone to press. A corrected
version of the part of the table which was corrupted appears at the
foot of the page, and readers are requested to paste it over the
relevant part of EEIR062/6 between Belingostrakh and Ometa.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

RUSSIA: 1995 PREMIUM ESTIMATE

According to preliminary estimates announced by deputy Rosstrakhnadzor
head Valery Sukhov, premium for the Russian market in 1995 was about
R25,000bn (US$5.3bn), with claims paid of R18,000bn to R20,000bn.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

RUSSIA: MINCONS FAVOURED INSURERS

Following a competition in December, the Russian Construction Ministry
reportedly recommended for their reliability in insuring construction
work Vostochno Yevropeiskoye Strakhovoye Agentstvo LTD (VESTA), Moscow,
followed by Russkiy Strakhovoi Tsentr and SAO Energogarant, both
Moscow.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ALEXANDER HOWDEN

Alexander Howden Group Ltd, London, has opened a representative office
in Moscow, with Slava Telguin as general representative. In making the
announcement, chairman Ron Iles took the opportunity to draw attention
to AHG's capture of the 1996 Aeroflot account.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "36"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BELINGOSSTRAKH

In the November issue of Belarussian Entrepreneur, Yuri Gavrilov,
director general of Belingosstrakh, Minsk, outlined some of the
operations of the company. It writes 19 voluntary classes, of which the
most widely distributed are motor TPL, health, motor casco, and
property insurance. Major domestic clients include Belvest, BelavtoMAZ
[motor manufacturer], Belmagistralautotrans [freight], tourist
companies and foreign embassies and trade representations. Annual
claims payments total in the region of US$400,000, but reserves are
close to $4m. Belingosstrakh also accepts domestic reinsurance.

Travel health is written both individually and on a group basis. A Blue
Card for motor liability in eastern Europe costs US$20 per month,
extendible for $10. It issues policies in its own name rather than
those of foreign insurers, as in addition to its nine offices within
the country it is the only Belarus insurer with a representative office
abroad [in Vienna, in association with MACH.) For motor, it has co-
operation or average commission agreements with Moldova, the Baltic
States, Ukraine, Russia, Poland, Spain, Germany, Austria, Romania,
Hungary and Bulgaria, Mr Gavrilov said. The third meeting of the
participants in the Baltic Insurance Pool, the co-operative
organisation for insurers from Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia and Belarus
in Minsk last autumn agreed to include SAO Ingosstrakh, Moscow, as a
member, Mr Gavrilov said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "37"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

UIIC

At a press conference in Tashkent on 25 January, Uzbekinvest, Tashkent,
chairman Saidakar Abdurakhimov announced that its 80/20 joint venture
with American International Group Inc (AIG), New York, Uzbekinvest
International Insurance Co, London, had formally commenced operations,
and had underwritten four political risk policies. One of these covered
the consortium led by Technip of France which is constructing an oil
refinery in Bukhara.

Also active in Uzbekistan is Devor-Dost Insurance Co, Tashkent, founded
in April 1993 by AIZ Individual Builders' Association, Uzneftegazstroi
(state oil & gas construction company), Uzstroimaterials (state
building material manufacturing company) and Uzpromgraidanstroi (state
building company), it was re-registered in May 1994 with registered
capital of 2m som (app US$55,000). Its prime mover and managing
director, Simeon Fusman, was by training a civil engineer.

Devor-Dost specialises in insurance of construction projects, but also
underwrites cargo, liability, commercial property, and trade and bank
credit. About 60% of its portfolio is property and liability, with
annual premium in the region of US$500,000.

As well as a joint venture with Lloyd's broker Exall Warren Darby Ltd,
London, EWD-Centrasia Ltd, registered in June 1995, it has co-operation
agreements with Gosstrakh Uzbekistan, Tashkent, and Sumitomo Fire &
Marine Insurance Co Ltd, Tokyo, and is the local representative of
Ingosstrakh, Moscow, and its average commissioner in Central Asia.

Nor would any account of the Uzbekistan market be complete without
mention of the operating but underpublicized subsidiary of Alexander
Howden Group Ltd, London.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "38"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ZASHCHITA ST PETERSBURG

SAO Zashchita Peterburg, St Petersburg, became insolvent with total
debts of the order of R634 m (US$135,000) after suffering heavy losses
on covering a motor leasing scheme by the local company OGGO, Delovoi
Peterburg reported last month.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "39"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CROATIA IC

A new general manager was appointed at Croatia Osiguranje dd, Zagreb,
this month. Suad Rizvanbegovic is an expatriate Croat, who left Croatia
in 1969. By the 1980s the owner of a New York tennis club, in mid-1984
- as he told the daily Vecerni List - contacts he made as a result
enabled him to enter the insurance business. In 1987 he joined
Alexander & Alexander of New York Inc, New York, where he was appointed
vice-president the following year, and remained until very recently as
number two. A&A sources confirmed to EEIR that Mr Rizvanbegovic was a
prodigious producer of business for its New York branch office, with
excellent contacts among the Wall Street investment community.

Two factors influenced his decision to take up his new post, he told
the newspaper: the desire to return home, and his friendship with
Croatian President Franjo Tudjman. "Being an insurance expert, it was
only natural for me to come to the head of the biggest insurance
company in Croatia which covers 86% of the insurance market. Now that I
am in, I shall try to introduce the American system of doing business
in the Croatian economy," he said.

Asked whether Croatia IC should be privatised, however, his answer was
categoric. "No, it should not," he said. "I think it must remain a
state owned company. Privatisation is OK, but Croatia [Osiguranje] has
brilliant potential, so let the Croatian state get the benefit," he
added. Mass privatization throughout most of the rest of the economy
"only means that Croatia [Osiguranje] will have to be competitive. The
only strong suit it possesses and the basis on which it rests are
numerous branch offices and the strong net capital. A private owner [of
an enterprise] will have several opportunities - either to insure with
a small private company having small net capital, or to turn to a
large, strong company which will be able to cover each of his losses,
and reduce the risk of possible failure to be reimbursed. Here we shall
certainly have an advantage," Mr Rizvanbegovic continued.

Mr Rizvanbegovic said that he had already held discussions with members
of the Croatia IC supervisory board and made contact with members of
the government to inform them of his plans for the company. "I want to
revitalise Croatia [Osiguranje] and bring in young and capable people,"
he said. He also plans development of life insurance, which was what,
he said, interested him most. He was aware of specific problems in the
life sector - the "unsettled" position of Austrian insurances, for
example.

The interviewer suggested that collecting premium was not the only
problem. Local insurers suggested that government tax policy also
restricted development of the life market. "Taxes must be paid," Mr
Rizvanbegovic observed, and were paid on life and pensions insurance in
the US as well. "The essential thing is in which phase an insurance is
taxed, how it is treated," he said, adding that he was sure "this is
going to be settled in Croatia in the most satisfying way."

He was confident of the support of the Finance Ministry, he said, and
"Not only that, I am sure we shall have excellent co-operation with
both the Ministry of Finance and the government, as well as with the
rest of institutions." Mr Rizvanbegovic also made it clear that he
intended to recruit expertise from Croatians [and perhaps others] from
abroad. He already had an excellent offer on his desk from a young US
woman who was offering her knowledge to Croatia IC. She was not the
only person ready to come and help introduce new business criteria in
Croatia, and he intended to make use of such readiness, he said. A free
hand in hiring staff was one of the conditions he had made before
taking up his new post, he said, and he was counting upon "absolute
support" from government and ministries in all the developments he
planned.

The re-emerging insurance industry in Bosnia & Herzegovina - Bosnia
Reosiguranje dd, Sarajevo, announced that it would restart business
with the New Year - may also be interested in Mr Rizvanbegovic's
appointment. They will hope that the fact that he is by descent a
Muslim as well as a Croat will make the development of Croatian-B&H
Federation links in the insurance sector considerably easier to
facilitate.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "40"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

MERGER OF SUPERVISORS PLANNED

In mid-January, a government spokesman announced that during cabinet
discussion of draft credit institutions and securities legislation, the
government had accepted in principle that the banking, securities and
insurance supervisory offices should merge, possibly as early as 1
January next year, to form a new body subordinate to the government
rather than to the Finance Ministry.  As a result, sections dealing
with supervision in draft banking legislation due to be discussed by
parliament shortly will be removed, and the operation of the new
unified supervision be dealt with in separate measures yet to be
drafted, president of the Banking Supervisory Commission Tamas Rusznak
said.

The government spokesman said that a draft of the unified supervisory
legislation would be considered by cabinet before the end of February,
and that capital and reserve requirements for financial institutions
would be amended. Other draft measures include licensing of banks for
trading in government securities, new licensing procedures for credit
institutions, and abolition of the requirement for foreign investors to
obtain government authorisation for stakes in credit institutions.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "41"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

NEW VMBF LAW

In order to stimulate the development of voluntary mutual benefit funds
(VMBFs), a new law is under preparation, according to Dr Tibor
Parnitzky, deputy chairman of the supervisory body overseeing their
licensing. The changes come two years after the original legislation
came into force in November 1993, as - various optimistic announcements
notwithstanding - the growth of the movement has proved to be
disappointing (EEIR060/19), and coincide with the appointment of a new
president for the supervisory office, Dr Gyorgy Radnai.

By the end of 1995, the total number of funds was 197 (151 with
operating licences), of which 177 were pension funds, 14 mutual
assistance funds and only six health funds. The vast majority are
organised on a regional basis, 42 around individual enterprises, 14 by
economic sector and four by profession. At the end of October, total
membership was 114,610, with the end of year average likely to have
been at most 650 members per fund. Furthermore, despite the generous
tax concessions supporting VMBF contribution levels (by members and
sponsoring employers or other organisations), payments were well below
expectations. Accumulated funds of HUF5.5bn to HUF6bn (US$40m to $44m)
at the end of 1995 would have represented an average per fund of HUF28m
to HUF30.5m, or just over $200,000 each.

Dr Parnitzky told EEIR that the main aims of the proposed legislation
are to speed up the authorisation of new funds, reduce bureaucratic
burdens on their operation, tighten supervision of existing funds and
remove the contradictions between various sections of the current law.
One amendment will lift the restriction on formation of funds to a
common interest basis of workplace, profession or sector, enabling
general funds to be set up, and existing localised funds to merge.

The operation of health funds will be eased by clarifying their
relationship to the universal state health insurance system, which is
also under review. The supervisory body is also expected to take a more
pro-active educational and information role in promoting the VMBF
movement. Currently, much is done by financial institutions to spread
the concept, although in some cases the expansion is based on the
exploitation of an existing loophole which enables the largely tax-free
refund of contributions, within a short period for those who are
already past retirement age. At present pension fund members who retire
can receive their payments back while benefiting from tax allowances.
The new legislation will restrict lump sum or regular pension payments
to those who have been in the fund for two years, while permitting
those who retire to remain in membership.

It is hoped that new legislation will come before parliament during the
Spring and into force by the middle of the year. A second phase of
amendments is expected by the end of 1996 regarding VMBF fund
management activities.

The eventual rejection of a proposal contained in late drafts of the
recently passed new insurance law to bring the supervision of VMBFs
under the same office as that of insurance companies (EEIR059/20), is
regarded as a significant support for the independent development of
the movement. While insurance companies can perform services (such as
data processing, fund management, premium collection etc.) for VMBFs,
these must be performed by a separate subsidiary, such as that of AB-
Aegon tltalanos Biztosito Rt, Budapest (EEIR062/16), Aegon Nyugdijalap
Kezelo es Szolgaltato Kft (pension fund management and service co),
which will charge a fee of 5% to 15% fee, depending on the size of the
fund. Over 50 banks and consulting firms, including Budapest Bank,
Creditanstalt, ING Bank, Hungarian Foreign Trade Bank, Sedgwick Noble
Lowndes and William Mercer, offering similar services.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "42"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

MTPL RATES

On 27 December, the government determined rates for motor TPL for 1996
were published in the Official Gazette. The basic rates for passenger
cars are modified by four bonus and four malus categories, each
representing 5% of the base premium.

MTPL insurers must have been pleasantly surprised: the average increase
average for cars was 21.56%, above the average 21.11% requested by the
insurers' association MABISZ (EEIR061/18) due to the government's
granting of a increase for the largest engine power (and imported) cars
2.6 percentage points above that requested by MABISZ while slightly
cutting back on MABISZ's proposals for the smallest and mid-range
(mainly domestically-produced) ones. Rates for the smallest buses were
increased by more than MABISZ's request, and larger ones by less.
MABISZ did not secure the doubling of premium for lorries with cargo
weight of over 6 tonnes which it wanted, but the average increase of
54.27% was above the 48% it had sought.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "43"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

GROWTH AND COMPETITION IN LIFE

Premium income for the Hungarian market as a whole for 1995 would need
to be of the order of 30% above the HUF93.5bn (US$668m) total for 1994
for any growth in real terms to be achieved, Figyelo calculated late in
December. Despite the continued relative dominance of Hungaria
Biztosito Rt, Budapest, over motor and of AB-Aegon tltalanos Biztosito
Rt, Budapest, over household, a competitive market is continuing to
develop, the paper considered, predicting that Hungaria's market share
for 1995 would drop from 38% to 36% and that of AB-Aegon from 26% to
24%. Competition this year would be particularly strong in liability
and commercial property, it said.

It had been competition for the growing life market which has been
responsible for most of the shifts in company market share in 1995,
Figyelo said. Such had been the success of Nationale-Nederlanden
Magyarorszagi Biztosito Rt, Budapest, that there was a possibility of
its soon replacing Providencia Osztrak-Magyar Biztosito Rt, Budapest,
as market number three, having retained its overall share of 10% (life
only) while that of Providencia had slipped back a percentage point to
11%. Nat-Ned and AB-Aegon, at the same time, are both anxious to claim
the title of largest life insurer in Hungary.

Of the medium-sized companies, Generali Budapest Biztosito Rt,
Budapest, had around 6%, the Figyelo calculated, followed by OTP-
Garancia Biztosito Rt and Colonia Biztosito Rt, both Budapest, with 4%
to 5% each. Despite the increases in premium achieved by these
companies, however, in life they were experiencing difficulty in
competing with the market leaders, Nat-Ned and AB-Aegon, it suggested,
while in some non-life lines - motor casco for example - the market was
shrinking in real terms.

Nat-Ned's dominance, the paper said, was due to its focus on high-value
business, estimating 1995 premium at HUF12.3bn. In 1994, Nat-Ned had a
37% share of the Hungarian life market. Last year, company president
Gyorgy Bordas told EEIR, premium increased by a further 71% to
HUF12.5bn. New business written totalled HUF5bn, and the company has
253,000 policyholders. The premium target for 1996 is HUF17bn. Nat-Ned
also continues to reinsure a substantial proportion of its business
within the ING Group, mainly due to local capital adequacy
considerations, although the proportion is declining from the 79% ceded
in 1994.

While AB-Aegon continued to dominate long-standing group life business,
and was projecting HUF13bn, Figyelo suggested that business from the
CSaB group policy was dropping off rapidly, and would only be replaced
by new individual business with difficulty.

A number of other companies had been reluctant to disclose a
preliminary estimate for 1995 life premium, possibly, the paper said,
because they had concentrated on low-value life policies with premiums
between HUF10,000 and HUF15,000 annually. Those attracted by the
affordability (and tax benefits) associated with these policies were
those hardest hit by economic pressures, and cancellations were high,
it said. Providencia, for example, had once vied with AB-Aegon in terms
of new business sold, but now had difficulty generating enough to make
up for cancellations, the paper suggested, predicting life premium of
HUF5bn for 1995, at 22% up on the HUF4.1bn of 1994 below the rate of
inflation.

At Generali, the increase would be up by only 14.5% to HUF300m, mainly
group life business, it predicted. Among the smaller companies, the
increase at Europa-GAN Biztosito Rt, Budapest, from HUF349m in 1994 to
about HUF480m was, at 37.5% positive growth in real terms, but not
spectacular.

Hungaria, on the other hand, appears to have improved its position.
Having dropped to a low of HUF500m in 1992, the forecast for 1995 was
HUF1.9bn, two and a half times the 1994 total. However, Hungaria too
had targeted lower incomes, "a very volatile market", Figyelo said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "44"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

COLONIA

As expected (EEIR061/17), Colonia made a net loss last year largely as
a result of losses of its motor TPL portfolio of 130% of premium,
including expenses, Otto Csurgo, recently promoted from deputy general
manager to general manager, confirmed at the beginning of January.
Premium income increased by 48.4%, from HUF3.556bn (US$25.4m) to
HUF5.2bn, of which motor was responsible for HUF2.8bn (54%), up from
HUF1.774bn (50%) in 1994, motor TPL representing HUF1.2bn compared to
HUF863m, 23% and 24% of total premium income respectively.

Colonia Biztosito is now 51% owned by central European holding company
Nordstern Colonia Central Europe Holding AG, Vienna, and 49% by Colonia
Finance Holdings BV.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "45"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

EUROPA-GAN

Europa-GAN Biztosito Rt, Budapest, is to increase its capital by
between HUF500m and HUF1bn (US$3.5m to $7m), general manager Miklos
Szendi said in mid-January. Although both Groupe des Assurances
Nationales (GAN), Paris (currently owner of 89.4%), and Soc
Assicuratrice Industriale SpA (SAI), Turin (10%), will participate,
negotiations are also in progress with a Hungarian bank and a third
foreign investor, he added. The increased capital will be devoted to
extending its branch network and developing motor business
(EEIR058/12).

According to preliminary data, Europa-GAN's premium income last year
totalled HUF1.1bn in 1995, up 29% on the HUF893m written in 1994, and
about on a par with inflation. Life contributed HUF480m (HUF250m
individual and HUF230m group), commercial and other property HUF520m
and liability HUF100m.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "46"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

GARANCIA

OTP Bank has distributed information packs to potential investors who
have expressed preliminary interest in taking a strategic 49% stake in
its insurance subsidiary OTP Garancia Biztosito Rt, Budapest
(EEIR062/16, 061/17). The Bank is seeking a partner to help develop
bancassurance. It has also embarked on a sale and leaseback operation
affecting a number of its own major offices. "These decisions are in
line with two of the bank's major strategic objectives: the
rationalisation of its investment portfolio and the reduction of its
expenses," it said in a statement.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "47"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

GRAZER WECHSELSEITIGE

Grazer Wechselseitige Versicherung AG (GWV), Graz, has finally received
approval to establish a Hungarian subsidiary, Prima Austria Biztosito
Rt (EEIR060/20), the Official Gazette revealed at the beginning of
January. Its previous application in September 1994 was blocked
(EEIR052/13), following a dispute over capitalisation and the status of
premium on GWV policies sold in Hungary illegally by pyramid sales
agencies. According to a report by the Hungarian news agency MTI-
Econews, it appears that GVW's application was granted by the Hungarian
government shortly before the new insurance law (Law XCVI of 1995) came
into effect on 1 January.

GWV re-applied for a licence in September (EEIR060/20). Under the new
insurance law, final responsibility for licensing insurers passes from
government to the Insurance Supervisory Office, which may refuse
applications, inter alia, because a founder has an unsatisfactory
business reputation. Previously, the ISO only made recommendations to
the legal and financial departments of the Finance Ministry, which then
studied the application independently and submitted recommendations to
a ministerial committee, which sent its report to the cabinet for final
approval of the application. Econews reported that GWV's application
was classified as "strictly confidential", but quoted Finance Ministry
Legal Department head Zoltan Molnar as indicating that this was "quite
common" for government documents.

Vilaggazdasag reported on 15 January that it understood that the
insurers' association MABISZ had asked Finance Minister Lajos Bokros to
explain why the incorporation of Prima Austria had been approved.

Econews gave an estimate of total foreign currency outflow to
unlicensed life insurers of HUF70bn (US$500m) from 50,000 policies,
which seems rather high.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "48"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

HUNGARIA

An EGM of Hungaria Biztosito Rt, Budapest, on 1 February was expected
to appoint Mihaly Patai as general manager. Mr Patai, who succeeds
Hungaria's founding general manager Tamas Uzonyi, who reached
retirement age last year, was chairman and managing director of
Budapest Investment Rt.

The state property holding company will shortly sell its remaining 9.2%
stake in Hungaria, with a nominal value of HUF384.5m (US$2.8m), to
Allianz AG Holding, Munich, it confirmed early in January (EEIR060/20).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "49"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

IFOR VEHICLE CLAIMS

By 28 December, the Thursday after UN IFOR forces had begun deployment
in Bosnia & Herzegovina, the Somogy County office of Hungaria had
reportedly received 20 claims for damage as a result of collisions with
IFOR vehicles.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "50"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

WINTERTHUR

Winterthur Schweizerische Versicherungs Ges, Winterthur, received its
licence for a Hungarian subsidiary on 27 December, four days before the
entry into force of the new insurance law permitting establishment of a
composite insurer. Registered capital was the old minimum of HUF1bn
(US$7.14m) is currently held 100% by Winterthur, but the European Bank
for Reconstruction & Development (EBRD) is expected to acquire 30%
during the year (EEIR060/20, 059/19), and operations are not expected
to begin before the autumn, initially in life and pension only.
Winterthur established fund management company Winterthur
Penztarszolgaltato Rt in September, with capital of HUF370m, and into
which the parent company is expected to inject a further HUF100m and
the EBRD HUF200m, and Winterthur National Pension Fund was set up on 8
November.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "51"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

MOTOR TPL PREMIUMS, 1996 (HUF)

                        1995    1996    change    % change

Under 850cc              7,920   9,840   1,920    24.24%
851-1150cc              10,080  12,720   2,640    26.19%
1151-1500cc             12,240  16,320   4,080    33.33%
1501-2000cc             25,440  28,080   2,640    10.38%
Over 2000cc             36,960  42,000   5,040    13.64%
Buses
10-19 seats             15,840  21,504   5,664    35.76%
20-79 seats             27,960  45,996  18,036    64.51%
Over 80 seats           48,000  65,496  17,496    36.45%
Lorries
Under 2t capacity       21,696  28,620   6,924    31.91%
2-6t capacity           35,400  53,412  18,012    50.88%
Over 6t capacity        44,664  80,400  35,736    80.01%

Source:  Official Gazette/Econews

US$1 = HUF140.065 at 19.1.96



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "52"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

UNOFFICIAL LIMIT ON FOREIGN INVESTMENT?

Unnamed officials have confirmed to Rzeczpospolita that Poland is
operating an informal limit of 30% on foreign participation in local
insurers, the newspaper reported, as has long been suspected by
observers (EEIR056/4). The deputy finance minister responsible for
approving insurance company licences is apparently advised not to sign
if foreign participation exceeds this limit, the newspaper added,
suggesting that this would appear to be in contravention of the
obligations of the preliminary agreement to form the World Trade
Organisation signed by Poland last year, under which signatory
countries are not supposed to impose additional restrictions on the
activities of foreign investors in their financial services markets.

The Insurance Law, as newly amended, requires Finance Ministry approval
for insurers which are fully foreign-owned, and at six thresholds
between 15% (of voting or non-voting shares) to 75% of voting rights,
but also lays down that applications may only be refused on grounds
identical with those applied to Polish shareholders. However, these
include if "An important state economic interest is threatened"
(EEIR061/2).

Azur Ostoja SA, Warsaw, has an approved foreign shareholding of 84.6%,
the newspaper reported, and Gerling Konzern Allgemeine Versicherungs
AG, Cologne, 51.2% of TU Turystycznych ATU SA, Warsaw, but only 49% of
voting rights. Fourteen non-life insurers - one third of the total -
have an element of foreign capital, and seven out of 12 life insurers.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "53"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

FOREIGN INVESTMENT TO BE LIBERALIZED

Interestingly enough, on 15 January the government economic committee
(KERM) approved and recommended to the Cabinet a draft law liberalizing
foreign investment as part of the transitions necessary for Poland to
apply for membership of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation &
Development (OECD) this year. Among the sectors to be opened to joint
ventures are financial services, wholesale sales, real estate, port
management and armaments production.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "54"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

VAT AT 7% FOR 1996

The decree holding VAT on insurance intermediary services at 7% for
1996 (EEIR 062/17) duly appeared in the final issue of Dziennik Ustaw
(Legal Gazette) for 1995, number 154. However, as the Finance Minister
has again applied a derogation to the statute imposing VAT, leaving the
underlying statute unchanged, a further derogation will be required if
the rate is not to rise to the standard 22% on 1 January 1997.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "55"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

MOTOR RATES RISE

Powszechny Zaklad Ubezpieczen SA (PZU), Warsaw, has increased motor TPL
premiums by an average of 35% this year, its basic annual premium for a
Fiat 126 (with a 652cc engine) in Warsaw rising to ZL235 (US$94) and
for a car of 2,000cc engine capacity to ZL615. Last year, PZU sold
about 9m MTPL policies.

Other insurers are charging between ZL160 and ZL600 for the 126, and
between ZL308 and ZL919 for the 2 litre in Warsaw. Premiums for other
areas are lower: in Lublin (near the Ukrainian border), for example,
the premiums range from ZL 93 to ZL400 and ZL231 to ZL839 respectively.

No claims bonuses, and other discounts such as those for customer
loyalty or paying the annual premium in a lump sum, can yield a
reduction of up to 70% of the basic premium.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "56"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

INSURANCE STICKERS

The Finance Ministry has abolished the need to display stickers on the
windscreen as proof of insurance. Henceforth the policy itself, which
must be carried by the driver, constitutes the only proof of insurance
required.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "57"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

UNINSURED CAR FINES RISE

The Insurance Guarantee Fund, which compensates the victims of
accidents caused by uninsured drivers, has raised the fine for driving
an uninsured car from ZL800 to ZL1,100 ($440), an increase of 37.5% and
in line with that of PZU's premium increase. PZU president Roman
Fulneczek told a press conference that various estimates had suggested
that somewhere between 10% and 20% of Polish motorists drove around
without insurance.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "58"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

MOTOR INSURANCE FRAUD

About 40% of Polish motor insurance claims are fraudulent, according to
a study by Wyzsza Szkola Ubezpieczen i Bankowosci (Insurance and
Banking Institute) quoted in the recent issue of the bulletin published
by the insurance professionals' association SUP, a figure comparable to
that prepared for Germany by the Federal Criminal Office, it said. The
Polish figures showed that as many as 76% of policyholders intended to
defraud the insurers, and that 78% approved of the practice.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "59"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

OMBUDSMAN ON PROBLEMS

The main problems facing the Polish insurance market were the financial
weakness of the insurers and the excessive expectations of clients
together with their lack of knowledge and understanding of both the
insurance market and insurance law, newly-appointed Polish insurance
ombudsman Stanislaw Rogowski told a press conference. Mr Rogowski said
he intended to be a mediator between companies and their clients as
well as between the companies and the National

Insurance Supervisory Office (PUNU). Although he has no formal powers
of decision, he can draw attention to injustices being committed in the
industry.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "60"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

WARNING ON EXCESSIVE COMMISSIONS

Leon Kozicki, president of the brokers' association Stowarzyszenie
Polskich Brokerow Ubezpieczeniowych i Reasekuracyjnych, warned the
recent Insurers' Congress organised by the Polish Insurance
Professionals Association (SUP) of the dangers of excessive commissions
when competing for large clients. "If a company pays 50% commission,
the situation can last a year or two; after that the company will not
be there," he said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "61"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

AIG

Bank Polska Kasa Opieki SA (Pekao SA) will distribute insurance
policies underwritten by Amplico SA and Amplico Life SA, both Warsaw,
the American International Group Inc (AIG), New York, subsidiaries in
which it is a minority shareholder, the bank announced on 16 January.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "62"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ATU

The new president of TU Turystycznych ATU SA, Warsaw (EEIR 062/18), is
Mariusz Wichtowski, previously a vice president of TU TUK SA, Warsaw.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "63"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

GRYF

The late bid by Powszechny Zaklad Ubezpieczen SA (PZU), Warsaw, to
rescue Pomorskie TU Gryf SA, Bydgoszcz (EEIR062/1), appears to be being
still assembled, invitations to join an all-Polish consortium not being
sent out until after Christmas. A further potential obstacle remains
the attitude of the Anti-Monopoly Office, which may take a view on any
plan that involves increasing PZU's estimated 62.6% share of the Polish
non-life market, were it considered that such an increase posed a
threat to competition.

Nor is it yet clear whether other insurers which had expressed an
interest in taking over Gryf's insurance portfolio in full or in part
would still be interested if that involved joining a PZU-led
consortium. Also the subject of discussion locally is the effect of
assuming Gryf's portfolio on PZU's already-strained solvency margin,
which was still inadequate at the last count. Strictly speaking, Polish
law requires a company assuming the policies of another to have an
adequate solvency margin.

The decision by the insurance industry - formally under the auspices of
meetings of the Policyholders' Protection Fund and the Insurance
Guarantee Fund - to withdraw backing from the rescue plan formulated by
Winterthur Schweizerisches Versicherungs Ges, Winterthur, and TU PBK
SA, Warsaw, would appear to have been motivated by fear of allowing a
major foreign competitor into the market. The PZU plan may be slightly
cheaper, requiring a loan of ZL55m (US$21.7m) from the two funds (which
are due to be merged) rather ZL60m ($23.7m), but as a Winterthur
spokesman pointed out, the PZU plan did not propose to meet Gryf's
other obligations, such as those to the state, or to preserve its
network of sales offices.

At a press conference, TUiR Warta SA, Warsaw, president Henryk Chmielak
hedged when asked questions about the possibility of joining the PZU
consortium, saying only that Gryf's portfolio would be examined to see
whether there were any interesting parts. Warta would concentrate on
producing good financial results rather than chasing market share,
considering that fighting for premium without considering costs was a
short-term policy, he said, citing the experience of Pomorskie TU Gryf
SA (under administration), Bydgoszcz, and ZU Hestja SA, Poznan.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "64"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ELEKTRIM INCREASES STAKE IN WARTA

On 22 December, Elektrim SA increased its stake in Warta from 300,000
shares (8.67% of voting rights) to 400,000 shares (11.56%).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "65"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

HESTJA (POZNAN)

ZU Hestja SA, Poznan (no connection with Sopockie TU Hestia Insurance
SA, Sopot), has reportedly failed to meet an extended deadline for a
capital increase to meet own funds requirements. While management
continued to try to raise the required funds, Dariusz Blaszczuk,
director of the Finance Ministry insurance department was quoted as
indicating that a number of companies were interested in taking a
strategic stake in Hestja. One of these is said to be Bankowe TUiR
Heros SA, Warsaw, which a company spokesman would neither confirm nor
deny.

In late 1994, a net loss of over ZL10m (US$4m) wiped out Hestja's own
capital of ZL3.3m, Rzeczpospolita. The company proposed a capital
increase of ZL24m to ZL55m ($9.6m to $22m) through the issue of new
Series D and E shares, and sale of the Series D shares took place in
October 1995, bringing in a notional ZL27m of which only about a
quarter was paid up. Hestja requested an extension until 15 December,
which appears was insufficient.

Hestja's leading shareholder is reported as Centralny Fundusz
Inwestycyjny Sp.zoo (in turn owned by Solaris Holding SA and Solaris
SA, EEIR041/17), which is also a shareholder in ZUiR Polonia, Lodz, and
in Pomorskie TU Gryf SA, Bydgoszcz (under administration).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "66"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

POLISA

TU-R Polisa SA, Warsaw, has completed its new Series H share issue
(EEIR062/19), with 1,192,458 shares of up to 3.2m on offer at ZL8
(US$3.16) per ZL2.5 nominal share taken up. The main buyers appear to
have been Bel Leasing Sp zoo and Forin Sp zoo, both subsidiaries of
Bank Inicjatyw Gospodarczych SA (BIG), which took up between 500,000
and 650,000 of the shares on offer. Final details of the new
shareholders were due to be published once shareholdings had been
registered.

At one time, BIG held up to 30% of Polisa. Prior to the latest share
issue, the holdings of Bel-Leasing and Forin had been diluted to 6.4%
and 3.76% respectively. Following the stake-rebuilding, they are
expected to hold about 13%. Polisa deputy president Zygfryd Kielarski
was quoted as saying that a total of 656 individuals and companies had
taken up shares from the issue.

Polisa's share capital has therefore increased by ZL2.98m to ZL26.98m,
with the remaining proceeds of ZL6.56m earmarked for reserve capital to
obviate any difficulties with solvency margins.

Polisa may need to set aside reserves for the loss of up to ZL5.11m on
its stake in Tarpan Sp zoo, a motor company based in Poznan which
manufactures an all-terrain vehicle, and is on the verge of bankruptcy.
Polisa's shareholding was acquired when Tarpan's predecessor company,
Poznanska Fabryka Samochodow Rolniczych Polmo, failed to repay a credit
guaranteed by the insurer. The holding was originally valued at
ZL11.4m, but Polisa ceded part of it to Powszechny Zaklad Ubezpieczen
(PZU) SA, Warsaw. Even so, it accounted for a substantial slice of
Polisa's investment portfolio of ZL22.14m as of June 1995, when it
sought permission from the Finance Ministry to maintain such a high
proportion in one stock. Both Tarpan management and Polisa blamed the
failure of the motor manufacturer on indecision by the Defence
Ministry, which took a long time to decide to buy the Tarpan's Honcker
all-terrain vehicle despite the fact that it had been designed in
collaboration with the army. Polisa and PZU may secure some return if,
as is hoped, another manufacturer is found to take over manufacture of
the Honcker.

TU na Zycie Polisa-Zycie SA, Warsaw, has announced that three companies
recently bought 31% of its shares (EEIR060/22), but has not yet
revealed their identities. Since it also announced that Michal Solowow
and Wojciech Ciesielski had joined the supervisory board,
Rzeczpospolita suggested that Echo Press SA and Polish Life Improvement
SA, in which Mr Solowow has controlling interests, may be among the new
Polisa-Zycie shareholders. Mr Ciesielski is a large shareholder in Echo
Press.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "67"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

OCCURRENCES AND REPORTS TO 21 JANUARY

1.1-31.12.94, aviation, crashes, statistics

CIS: Russia: 36 aircraft destroyed following air crashes in 1994, with
over R480bn (US$102m) paid out in compensation.

1.1-31.12.95, aviation, crashes, statistics

CIS: air crashes left total 245 dead in 1995, compared with 327 dead in
20 crashes in 1994. Of these, Russia accounted for more than half, with
174 dead in 13 crashes.

1.1-31.12.95, fire, statistics

CIS: Ukraine: app 40,500 fires recorded in 1995, causing est damage of
592bn karbovantsi (US$3.2bn).

1.1-30.6.95, nps breakdowns, statistics

CIS: Ukraine: nuclear plants registered 86 breakdowns in 1995, down
from 144 in 1994. Zaporozhye nuclear station recorded highest no of
accidents at 36, down from 61 in 1994. Chernobyl nuclear plant recorded
four stoppages in 1995, down from 15 in 1994. Khmelnitskiy nps recorded
8 breakdowns, from 21 in 1994.

12.12.95, marine, sinking

South Korea: m cargo vessel `Bureya', Russian registered, owned by
Vladivostock commercial company, en route from Pusan for Vladivostok,
cargo 100 tonnes of rice, sprang a leak and sank soon after leaving
Pusan.

16.12.95, pipeline, rupture, oil spill

CIS: Russia: pipeline, Tyumen region, owner Samotlorneft Co, carrying
oil from wells to storage facilities, nr Nizhnevartovsk, rupture in
700mm pipeline led to 20-tonne oil spill. Est damage: R50m (US$10,646).

19.12.95, fire, partial shut-down

CIS: Ukraine: Khmelnitsky nuclear power plant, fire forced partial shut-
down of sole reactor.

23.12.95, fire, property damage

CIS: Ukraine: Zasyadko mine, Donbass coalfield, fire broke out in a 2km
auxiliary working, spreading to top of mine. Preliminary est damage:
1,500bn karbovantsi (over US$8m).

26.12.95, pipeline rupture, oil spill

CIS: Russia: Urals-Siberian pipeline, linking Tyimazy, Omsk and
Novosibirsk, rupture nr Ufa caused oil spill. Est 460 tonnes of crude
spilled into R Belaya.

26.12.95, pipeline rupture, oil spill

CIS: Russia: Yaroslavl-Ukhta trunk pipeline, 50-metre section of
pipeline ruptured, app 110km from Ukhta. App 400 tonnes of oil leaked
covering app 5,000sqm area, polluting R Ropcha. Oil supplies cut off.
(16.1) app 70 tonnes of crude oil leaked from Ukhta-Yaroslavl pipeline,
app 6km from Kotlas, northern Arkhangelsk region.

26.12.95, marine, sinking, fatalities

Norway: m stern trawler `Novgorodets', Russian registered, owned by
Zapryba fishing association, sank app 200km off Bear Island, Norwegian
Sea, app 0400 GMT. 1 dead, 9 missing, feared dead.

26.12.95-13.1.96, snow, property damage

Slovenia: heavy snow caused "worst damage in 30 years" to Elektro
Ljubljana electricity supply company. Power failures occurred in mains
and low-tension transmissions, affecting between 80,000 and 90,000
customers. Est direct costs: SLT600m (US$4.5m).

27.12.95, bad weather, property damage

Albania: heavy rain led to widespread flooding, northwestern Albania.
More than 5,000 hectares land submerged, 00's of houses destroyed,
Shkodra, Malesi e Madhe, Lezhe and Kruja districts.

27.12.95, bad weather, flooding, property damage

Bosnia & Herzegovina: heavy rain and melted snow led to flash flooding,
water up to two metres deep, NATO military camp, app 100 metres from R
Neretva, several km N Mostar. Dozens of vehicles lost or damaged, tents
washed away. Three pedestrian bridges, central Mostar, swept away.

28.12.95, fire, property damage

Czech Republic: Dukovany nps, nr Trebic, app 200km SE Prague, fire
started in transformer which distributes electricity to light plant,
causing minor damage.

29.12.95, aviation, crash

CIS: Russia: An-24B, on charter to Volga Cable Works, crashed 1.5km
from runway, overturned, causing left wing and undercarriage to be torn
off as it was landing, Saransk.

29.12.95, bad weather, property damage, fatalities

Romania: thaw and heavy rains led to floods, damaging crops, central
Transylvania region. More than 2,400 households affected, road and rail
links, telephone lines and power supplies cut. 7 dead. Government to
give Lei500m in aid to flood-affected areas. (6.1) Some 69,970 hectares
of agricultural fields submerged, app 507.1kms communication lines, 439
bridges and 128 social-economic units affected. (11.1) Flood damage est
at Lei132bn (US$51m).

29.12.95, explosion

CIS: Russia: gas explosion led to collapse of 105-apartment block,
Berezniki, destroying floorings in nine flats on fourth and fifth
floors. 3 dead. Cause: gas explosion in cooker, flat 57.

1.1.96, fire, property damage

Yugoslavia: car factory, operator Zastava, Kragujevac, app 60 miles S
Belgrade, fire broke out in main warehouse destroying rubber products
and technical equipment. Extensive damage to roof of 10,000sqm
warehouse. Production to resume later this month. Initial est damage:
100m dinars (app DM30m (US$20.3m)). (15.1) Repairs to be completed by
end of Q1.

1.1.96, earthquake

CIS: Russia: earthquake, measuring Richter 6, epicentre app 100kms N
Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky, struck app 2226 local.

2.1.96, nps shutdown

Lithuania: Ignalina nps, No 2 generating unit shut down, app 1230 GMT,
due to suspected leak in room housing water pipes. Suspected cause:
crack in small pipe in impulse control system.

2.1.96, earthquake

CIS: Russia: earthquake, measuring Richter 7.2, hit offshore area E
Kamchatka, app 1000 local. Earthquake led to eruption of Karymsky
volcano, Kamchatka peninsula, spewing hot ash 7km into air.

3.1.96, flooding, property damage

CIS: Russia: build-up of ice blocking river estuary, led to flooding,
Belomorsk, Karelia, flooding roads, land plots and several 00 houses.

4.1.96, bad weather, property damage, fatalities

CIS: Kazakhstan: two weeks of blizzards caused est damage of Tenge200m
(US$3m). Winds of 100kph damaged electricity and telephone lines,
several buildings. 113 dead, 5 missing.

4.1.96, bad weather, property damage

Romania: melting snow and rain flooded 25 districts, washed away app
4,000 houses, north-western areas. Est damage put at more than Lei10bn
(US$3.4m).

4.1.96, earthquake

CIS: Azerbaijan: earthquake, measuring Richter 6-7, epicentre 110km NW
Baku, struck app 1142 local.

5.1.96, nuclear, radioactive leak

CIS: Ukraine: nps, 350km S Kiev, radioactive leak in steam pipe, third
reactor, contaminated app 30sqm area. Reactor shut down.

6.1.96, structural collapse, fatalities

Bulgaria: 30m-long footbridge, Elkhovo, iron railing snapped, app 1000
GMT, causing bridge to capsize and app 200 people watching a
traditional festival from the bridge to plunge into R Toundja. At least
7 dead. Government to give Leva5m (US$70,000) to bereaved families.

5-8.1.96, theft

Slovakia: Nitra branch, VUB bank, at unknown time between 5-8.1,
cSK130m (US$4.33m) and SK40m (US$1.33m) in foreign currency stolen.
Alarm system off, safe undamaged, suspected use of duplicate keys with
inside assistance.

8.1.96, aviation, crash, fatalities

Zaire: Antonov 32 cargo aircraft, Russian-built, owned by Moscow Air
Lines, en lease to African Air, en route from Ndolo airport, failed to
gain height on take-off and ploughed app 100 metres through market,
engulfing it in flames, Kinshasa, app 1300 local. At least 350 dead,
470 injured. (9.1) Moscow Air Lines was operating in breach of an
offical ban, according to reports, after having its operations
suspended by air transport department, Ministry of Transport on 3.1 for
safety violations.

8.1.96, earthquake, property damage

CIS: Russia: earthquake, measuring Richter 6.1, struck Okha, app 50km
from Neftegorsk, app 2106 local, leaving 14 apartment blocks unstable.

10.1.96, pipeline rupture, oil spill

CIS: Russia: Samara-Kuzmichi pipeline, rupture app 4kms from R Volga,
led to spill of app 500 tonnes of oil. Some 15m of pipeline replaced,
more than 150 tonnes of oil collected and 2.07 hectares of land cleared
of oil.

11.1.96, pipeline, rupture, damage

CIS: Russia: 1,220mm Surgut-Polotsk oil pipeline, bulldozer damaged
pipeline, nr Teplaya Gora, Perm Region, 1.5km from R Koyva. Total 242
tonnes of oil spilled over 650sqm area. Est damage: R6.7bn (US$1.4m).

11.1.96, pipeline, explosion, property damage

CIS: Russia: Sintezkauchuk chemical plant, Tolyatti, high-pressure
steam pipeline exploded damaging power lines and installations. 3
injured. Cause: pressure rise in pipeline. Est damage: R230bn
(US$48.9m).

12.1.96, marine, sinking, fatalities

CIS: Russia: mrv `Sisafino-2', Russian registered, owned by private
Sakhalin company, en route from Korsakov for Nevelsk, sank during a
heavy storm, Tartar Strait, off Sakhalin Island. At least 2 dead.

12.1.96, helicopter, crash

CIS: Ukraine: Mi-2 helicopter, owner Universal-Avio enterprise, fell
from height of a few metres while landing and crashed, during pipeline
inspection flight.

12.1.96, fire

CIS: Russia: Oktyabr-Neft oil well, app 6km SE Grozny, operator AO
Yunko, fire began in output pipes before spreading to well. Fire
reported to be burning more than 1,000 tonnes of oil per day and
expected to take at least 15 days to extinguish.

15.1.96, oil spill, pollution

Latvia: Ventspils port, northwestern Latvia, leak of petroleum products
under wharf structure, reached Baltic Sea. Ventspils Nafta to be fined
as oil company responsible for pollution.

15.1.96, pipeline, rupture, oil spill

CIS: Russia: oil refinery, Angarsk petrochemical plant, Irkutsk region,
300mm underground pipeline ruptured causing app 350cum of kerosene to
spill over 700sqm area.

16.1.96, marine, holing

Canada: mv `Razboieni', Romanian registered, 15,555dwt, holed in port
bow and taking on water, on arrival Sheet Harbour, Nova Scotia, after
being damaged by ice, St Lawrence River.

16.1.96, pipeline, rupture, oil spill

CIS: Russia: Syzran-Zolnoye pipeline, leak from underwater section of
pipeline led to oil slick covering 2.5km area, R Syzranka. Suspected
cause: corrosion.

18.1.96, marine, collision, oil slick

Singapore: m tanker `Kapitan Shvetsov', Russian registered, 4,268 gt,
built 1973, en route from Bangkok for Surabaya, cargo molasses, and m
container vessel `Nanta Bhum', Singapore registered, 11,079 gt, built
1990, in collision between light buoys 26 and 27, mouth of Chao Phraya
river, Samut Prakarn province. `Kapitan Shvetsov' sank, leading to
large oil slick.

19.1.96, chemical spill

CIS: Russia: Salavat oil refinery, Bashkortostan, app 2cu m of phenol
spilt.

19.1.96, pipeline, leak, oil spill

CIS: Russia: Tikhoretsk-Tuapse pipeline, damage to pipeline, understood
caused during illegal attempt to siphon off oil, resulted in leak of
app 200 tonnes of oil, Adygeya republic, Krasnodar territory. Oil
leaked over 18 hectare area, polluting R Giaga and nearby lake.
Affected section of pipeline owned by Chernomorsktransneft (Black Sea
Petroleum Transport) company.

21.1.96, pipeline accident, fire, property damage

CIS: Russia: Punga-Ukhta gas pipeline, N Tyumen region, accident led to
fire damaging 60m section of 1,200mm pipeline. Gas pumping facility
stopped.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "68"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ALBANIA:  FOREIGN LOAN

Power generation: Overseas Economic Co-operation Fund of Japan granted
Official Development Assistance loan of US$16m for rehabilitation of
Drin River Hydroelectric Power Stations Rehabilitation Project, co-
financed with the ERBD.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "69"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BALTIC STATES:  FOREIGN INVESTMENT

Banking:  Estonia:  Swedfund, Sweden, paid EK30.5m (US$2.6m) for 16.7%
stake in Estonian United Bank, acquiring 2.5m shares with par value of
EK10 each.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "70"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CIS:  JOINT VENTURES AND FOREIGN INVESTMENT

General:  Ukraine:  direct foreign investment totalled US$595m in 1995.
 Foreign businesses put app $113.59m into Ukrainain enterprises, of
which $107 came from state-owned share sales through international
investment tenders.

Beverages:  Russia:  Hero, Germany, and food importer Soyuzkontrakt in
jv to construct US$22m plant for production of up to 60m bottles of
Herschi drinks annually.  Construction to take up to 11 months.

Construction:  Azerbaijan: Transcaucasus Development Corp (70%), US,
Baku city (25%) and property trading company NRV (5%) in jv for
construction of US$500m business and shopping complex, including 12-
storey business centre, several office blocks, a hotel, exhibition and
sports facilities, shops, apartments and cafes.  Baku World Trade
Centre jv intends to complete project in six years.

Turkmenistan:  GAP Iplik Sanahyi ve Ticaret AS (30%), Turkey, EBRD (20%
(US$17.8m)) and Turkmen government (50%) formed GAP-Turkmen, to
specialize in building and equipping textile factories.  Authorized
capital:  US$89m.  First project to re-equip a denim factory nr
Ashkhabad.

Minerals:  Azerbaijan:  National Iranian Drilling company (50%) and
Azerbaijan (50%) agreed to form drilling jv to prospect for mineral
resources.  Authorized capital:  US$100,000.

Oil and Gas Production:  Uzbekistan:  Gama Co, Turkey, started
construction of oil refinery to process gas condensate produced at
Kokdumalak oil and gas field.  Refinery operations to start by year
end, with annual capacity of 2.5m tonnes.

Russia:  Neste, Finland, and Elf Aquitaine, France, jointly to develop
Yuzhno-Shapinskiy and Shapinskiy oilfields in Nenets Autonomous Area.
neste has invested app US$5m so far, and plan further investment of app
$200-300m for a pumping system and attendant infrastructure.

Ruhrgas AG, Germany, signed agreement with Vladimir city to advise on
and install energy saving technolgies in municipal hot water and heat
supply systems.

Siberia:  BASF, Germany, and Gazprom signed US$1bn agreement to
construct gas pipelines from Yamal Peninsula to western Europe.

Shipping:  Russia:  Kvaerner, Norway, paid R414.66m (US$88,291) for 13%
stake in Vyborg shipyard, bringing total stake to 18.81%.  Kvaerner
plans to invest further US$5m over three years.

Tea Packing:  Azerbaijan:  Intersun (70%), United Arab Emirates (UAE),
and Baku Tea Packing factory formed Azersun for packing of 8,000 tonnes
of tea a year.  Charter capital of jv:  US$1.34m.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "71"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CZECH REPUBLIC:  JOINT VENTURES AND FOREIGN INVESTMENT

Electrical Equipment:  matsushita Electrical Industrial Co Ltd, Japan,
to invest between US$65-75m in Panasonic television plant, producting
300,000 sets by 1997.  Annual output to increase to 1m sets by 2001.
Minimum $54m to go into production equipment. Construction of plant to
start this year.

Power Supply:  RWE AG, Germany, subsidiary Promineral AG (50%) and CEZ
AS (50%) formed Gaprom for the processing of energo gypsum and
production of elements for building industry.

Sugar Production:  Eastern Sugar, US?, increased stake in Cukrovar
Nemcice Nad Hanou AS sugar refinery from 14% to 49%.  Eastern Sugar
intends to invest Kc50m (US$1.9m) in company, increasing its stake to
64%.

Textile Production:  Hualan Corp (50%), Taiwan, Malaysian associated
company and other small shareholders (50%) to open new textile factory,
producing 4,000-5,000 tonnes of long and short fibre yarns per year.
Hualon to invest US$20m in factory.

Banking:  Investicni a Postovni banka (IPB) and Vozrozhdeniye Trade
Bank (Russia) agreed to establish First Czech-Russian Bank Ltd, subject
to regulatory approval.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "72"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

HUNGARY:  FOREIGN INVESTMENT

Fabric Manufacture:  Amoco Corp, US, unit Amoco Fabrics Europe (AFE) to
construct new commodity carpet-backing plant to be completed by 1998.
Partial operations to start by year-end.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "73"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

POLAND:  JOINT VENTURES AND FOREIGN INVESTMENT

Banking:  Internationale Nederlanden Groep NV (ING) (50%), the
Netherlands, and Bank Slaski (50%) to form ING BSK Asset Management to
manage portfolios for private and institutional investors.  ING BSK to
set up subsidiary to manage investment funds, the first to be marketed
in second half of 1996.

Tobacco:  Seita, France, to invest US$40m in ZPT Radom tobacco plant
over next three years to upgrade its technology and distribution
network.  Seita hopes to purchase additional 32% stake in ZPT.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "74"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ROMANIA:  JOINT VENTURES

Fertiliser Manufacture:  Mannesman AG (85%), Germany, and Azochim SA
(15%) in US$58m project to upgrade ammonium plant.  Plant to produce up
to 1,000 tonnes of ammonium daily when work completed.

Oil and Gas Production:  Butan Gas SpA (56%), Italy, and Competrol SA
formed Butan Gas Romania SA in US$5m jv to bottle and distribute
liquefied petroleum gas (LPG).  Bottling capacity to be increased to
2,400 gas bottles an hour.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-36</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B043-117</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/in04.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020904 text/html 43289
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:07:00 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:33 GMT
Content-length: 43102
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/in04.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet <BR>
January 5, 1990<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>INSURERS SUE TO BLOCK PROPOSITION 103 IMPLEMENTATION IN CALIFORNIA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(866 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>INSURERS JOIN TO OPEN AN ALL-INDUSTRY "HELPLINE" FOR CONSUMERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(130 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>EVEN BEST LONG-TERM CARE POLICIES INADEQUATE, A.A.R.P. REPORTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(348 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>WORLD'S REPORTED AIDS CASES TOPPED 200,000 IN 1989</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(61 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>HEALTH COSTS CONTINUE TO OUTPACE INFLATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(82 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>TREASURY DECIDES TO SEND OUT MEDICARE REFUNDS IN FEBRUARY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(111 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>F.T.C. LETTER ON CRASH PARTS GIVES COMPETITIVENESS ARGUMENTS A BOOST</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(335 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>GOVERNMENT PROPOSES EXTENDING AIRBAG REQUIREMENT TO TRUCKS & VANS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(158 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>AGENTS & CONSUMER ADVOCATES OFFER 100 WAYS TO CUT AUTO COSTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(225 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>HARTFORD EXPANDS DISCOUNTS FOR AUTO SAFETY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(206 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* NEWS FROM THE STATES  *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>CALIFORNIA QUAKE EXPECTED TO HAVE LITTLE LASTING ECONOMIC IMPACT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(106 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>CALIFORNIA'S NEW WORKERS' COMP LAW GOES INTO EFFECT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(79 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>DELAWARE GOVERNOR RENEWS PUSH FOR BANKS IN INSURANCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(184 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>GEORGIA COMMISSIONER PROPOSES LIMITS ON AUTO PERSONAL INJURY SUITS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(318 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>ILLINOIS MANDATORY AUTO INSURANCE LAW GOES INTO EFFECT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(74 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>ILLINOIS SUPREME COURT SAYS DRUNK EMPLOYE CAN'T GET WORKERS' COMP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(165 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>MARYLAND APPROVES BLUES' PLAN TO ENCOURAGE SAFE DRIVING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(173 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>MASSACHUSETTS LIMIT ON AUTO RATE INCREASE CHALLENGED IN COURT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(66 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>MICHIGAN AGENTS SAY INCREASING SAFETY COULD REDUCE AUTO RATES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(188 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>MISSOURI SENATOR PROPOSES UPGRADING INSURANCE REGULATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(165 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>NEW JERSEY BLUES WIN APPROVAL OF RATE INCREASES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(195 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>NEW YORK GOVERNOR CALLS FOR HEALTH INSURANCE FOR ALL CHILDREN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(64 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>NORTH CAROLINA COMMISSIONER ORDERS ANOTHER AUTO RATE ROLLBACK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(162 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>NORTH CAROLINA ANTI-THEFT PROGRAM PAYS ITS FIRST REWARD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(170 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>OREGON SUPREME COURT REQUIRES BROAD COVERAGE BY AUTO POLICIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(170 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>TENNESSEE REPORTS 42% OF BIRTHS PAID FOR BY MEDICAID</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(68 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>VIRGINIA CITES LACK OF EVIDENCE THAT MANDATED BENEFITS RAISE COSTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(225 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>WISCONSIN BILL WOULD BROADEN POLICYHOLDER REDRESS AGAINST INSURERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(95 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>BUILDING CODES HELP PREVENT HURRICANE DAMAGE, STUDY FINDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(132 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

INSURERS SUE TO BLOCK PROPOSITION 103 IMPLEMENTATION IN CALIFORNIA

Insurance companies filed suit this week to block implementation of
California Insurance Commissioner Roxani Gillespie's emergency
regulations to implement Proposition 103.

The action by State Farm and Allstate marked yet another twist in the
tortuous journey to implementation of the initiative passed by voters
in November 1988.

It took more than a year for Gillespie to issue the regulations, and
in the interim she was criticized by advocates of the initiative for
delay and siding with the industry. Now the initiative's backers
accept Gillespie's rules but insurers don't.

"I view this whole thing as large insurance companies showing
themselves to the door of the California market, because they're just
infuriating the public," said Harvey Rosenfield, head of Voter Revolt
and principal sponsor of Proposition 103.

He said Jan. 5 that he hadn't seen Allstate's suit, but State Farm's
litigation is "basically a joke" that wouldn't pass scrutiny by a
first-year law student.

"This simply is another way to stall and delay," he said.

State Farm Insurance filed two suits Jan. 3, challenging not only
Gillespie's new regulations to implement Proposition 103, effective
in March, but also her decision to deny an increase in auto rates
under the state's assigned risk plan.

In a suit filed in San Francisco Superior Court, the company said the
"emergency regulations" issued last month were illegal because they
don't fairly implement the auto rate provisions of Proposition 103,
passed by voters in November 1988.

State Farm said Proposition 103 forbids rates that are inadequate,
excessive or unfairly discriminatory. But it said Gillespie's rules
would bring rates that are inadequate in some cases, excessive in
others and thus are unfairly discriminatory.

Allstate Insurance Co. filed suit Jan. 4, alleging that Gillespie's
regulations violate the state constitution and weren't supported by
substantial evidence.

It said the regulations would cost the company a 25 percent drop in
revenues and a $175 million loss during the next policy year.

The suit asks Los Angeles County Superior Court Judge Miriam Vogel to
bar enforcement of the regulations and order a return to the previous
system of setting rates.

"We're asking for a return to a cost-based system," said Michael
Carlson, an attorney for Allstate.

As in other states, insurers have based rates on motorists' place of
residence, age, gender and marital status. Gillespie's regulations
would forbid use of all those, although insurers could use other
factors that would approximate the same effect.

State Farm's second suit over the California Automobile Assigned Risk
Plan, or CAARP, was filed with Judge Vogel of Los Angeles, who
already has ruled that Allstate can raise its rates by 40 percent for
bad drivers covered under CAARP.

State Farm said it has experienced an underwriting loss of $3.5
million a week from assigned-risk coverage.

California law requires motorists to carry minimum liability coverage
and requires insurers to offer assigned-risk coverage based on their
share of the market.

But if it can't get a rate increase, State Farm is asking the right
to stop issuing the coverage.

In another development, consumer advocates and representatives of
minority groups held a news conference Jan. 3 to urge California Gov.
George Deukmejian and Assembly Speaker Willie Brown to approve a bill
offering motorists a no-frills, no-fault auto insurance policy.

"Consumers today are far worse off for auto insurance than they were
a year and a half ago," said Judith Bell of Consumers Union.

"We've watched the insurance companies figure out how they can scam
those hearings" held by the Insurance Department on implementing
Proposition 103.

The plan by Democratic Assemblyman Pat Johnston would allow victims
of auto accidents to sue only in case of serious injury. Otherwise
they would recover medical costs and lost wages up to $15,000 from
their own insurance companies.

Doctors would be held to the fee schedule set forth in the state's
workers' compensation plan.

Motorists covered by the minimum policy would have to go to small-
claims court to recover costs of property damage.

Minimum coverage under the bill would cost $180 a year. If property
damage were covered, Bell said, rates would rise to about $300 or
$400 a year.

It is supported by many, but not all, insurance companies --notable
exceptions being State Farm and Farmers.

It also is backed by some consumer advocates but opposed by those
associated with Ralph Nader, as well as by the California Trial
Lawyers Association. They say no-fault diminishes victims' rights.

Johnston, chairman of the Assembly Finance and Insurance Committee,
left his bill in committee in last year's session when he saw he
didn't have enough votes to enact it in preference to a substitute
bill offered by the Democratic speaker.

The Legislature passed Brown's bill over the vigorous opposition of
insurers, but the Republican governor vetoed it. Deukmejian said at
the time that he was willing to work with legislators to come up with
a compromise bill.

Consumers Union's Bell said Johnston's plan failed last year "due to
an extraordinary effort by the speaker and a lack of leadership by
the governor."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

INSURERS JOIN TO OPEN AN ALL-INDUSTRY "HELPLINE" FOR CONSUMERS

The life, health and property/casualty insurance industries have
joined in an unprecedented effort to establish a toll-free telephone
line to provide consumers with information.

Main sponsoring organizations for the "National Insurance Consumer
Helpline" are the American Council of Life Insurance, the Health
Insurance Association of America and the Insurance Information
Institute, which represents property/casualty companies.

Staff based in Annapolis, Md., will be expected to handle a wide
range of quesitons, refer complaints to appropriate sources and send
brochures and educational materials upon request.

Such an effort has been discussed for years, but it gained impetus
from widespread consumer dissatisfaction with the industry.

The Helpline will operate from 8:30 a.m. to 8 p.m. Eastern time
Monday through Friday, starting Jan. 2. The telephone number is 800-
942-4242.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

EVEN BEST LONG-TERM CARE POLICIES INADEQUATE, A.A.R.P. REPORTS

Even some of the best long-term care insurance policies fail to
provide adequate protection against costs of nursing home care,
according to a study released Jan. 3 by the American Association of
Retired People (AARP).

The study analyzed policies offered by 11 leading companies and
concluded many "failed to achieve the basic purpose for which they
were bought."

"Many of them failed to provide much protection against the
uncertainty of paying high out-of-pocket costs for nursing home
care," the study said.

It said there were wide variations and coverage options among the
policies, leaving "a great deal of uncertainty" over how many nursing
home costs would be covered.

Applying both strict and lenient interpretations, policies might
reduce out-of-pocket spending on nursing homes by anywhere between
12.1 to 62.6 percent, the report said.

The study was conducted by Thomas Rice and Kathleen Thomas of the
University of North Carolina and William Weissert of the University
of Michigan, under a grant from the AARP.

It analyzed policies marketed from May through July of 1988 and
acknowledged improvements in policies since then.

Most of the policies studied denied benefits to those who went into
nursing homes without first being hospitalized or provided benefits
only for skilled -- as opposed to custodial -- nursing home care.
Those findings confirm the wisdom of a December 1988 recommendation
by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners that states
prohibit sale of policies with such requirements, the report said.

It recommended that the NAIC expand its model regulations to require
that policies cover at least four years in a nursing home and offer
some kind of inflation protection.

The study named the companies whose policies were analyzed, but
didn't provide specific information on each policy.

Companies included Aetna, American Express-Fireman's Fund, American
Progressive, Bankers Life & Casualty, Blue Cross & Blue Shield of
Indiana, Equitable Life & Casualty, Great Republic, John Hancock,
Prudential, Transport Life and Travelers.

According to the Health Insurance Association of America, more than
100 companies now offer insurance covering long-term care.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

WORLD'S REPORTED AIDS CASES TOPPED 200,000 IN 1989

The number of reported AIDS cases reached 203,599 by the end of 1989,
the World Health Organization reported Jan. 3.

The total included 36,942 new victims during the year.

U.S. cases totaled 113,211 by December.

Reports to the Geneva-based WHO seriously underestimate the actual
number because many cases of acquired immune deficiency syndrome,
particularly in Africa, go undetected.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

HEALTH COSTS CONTINUE TO OUTPACE INFLATION

Standard & Poor's Corp. says medical costs rose 8 percent from
October 1988 through September 1989, compared to an overall inflation
rate of 4.3 percent.

It said inflation has slowed in dental and eye care, but costs of
hospitals and drugs rose 11.8 percent.

S&P said it expected the inflation rate for health costs to outpace
overall inflation by "a wide margin" in 1990 -- matched only by an
increase in the 10 to 12 percent range for property/casualty
premiums.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

TREASURY DECIDES TO SEND OUT MEDICARE REFUNDS IN FEBRUARY

Under pressure from members of Congress, the Treasury Department has
announced that it will send out refund checks in February and April
to nearly 27 million elderly Americans who are paying for benefits
they won't be receiving.

Congress acted late last year to repeal the Medicare Catastrophic
Coverage Act of 1988, which increased both Medicare benefits and the
premiums to pay for them.

Many Medicare premiums are paid through monthly deductions from
Social Security checks, and those deductions went up by $5.30 as of
Jan. 1. Treasury said it didn't have time to reprogram the computers
to reduce the deductions before May, but said it could refund the
money.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

F.T.C. LETTER ON CRASH PARTS GIVES COMPETITIVENESS ARGUMENTS A BOOST

A letter from Federal Trade Commission staff to an Ohio legislator
gives a boost to arguments that there are anticompetitive effects
from laws restricting use of replacement crash parts made by other
than the original manufacturers.

The argument pits auto manufacturers, who decry use of "imitation"
parts, against insurers and consumer groups, who say competition
lowers prices of replacement parts.

The letter from FTC staff to Ohio State Rep. Joseph E. Haines, came
in response to a request for comment on an Ohio bill, H.B. 302. It
appears to mark the first time a U.S. government agency has taken a
position on the issue -- even though it represents staff views and
not those of the commission.

The Dec. 27 letter suggests that the Legislature "take into account
the possibility that the bill might unreasonably restrict consumer
choice in the market for auto crash parts. The Legislature may also
wish to take into consideration the benefits and costs of mandatory
disclosure."

The Ohio bill regulates marketing and use of aftermarket crash parts,
including a requirement that installers can't charge more for parts
made by the original equipment manufacturer (OEM) than they would
have for non-OEM parts.

"This provision attempts to equalize the prices of OEM and non-OEM
parts, thus eliminating perhaps the only attraction of non-OEM
parts," the FTC staff said.

The measure also requires disclosure that non-OEM parts, "most of
which are not made in the United States, may vary in terms of
quality, fit, performance and warranty from the original parts."

The FTC staff said it wouldn't address the question of poorer
quality, but added that some consumers might be willing to accept
lower quality in order to get a lower price.

The disclosure might add to costs without providing useful additional
information to consumers, the FTC staff said. And, it said, "there is
a risk that the language of a mandatory disclosure may mislead
consumers, creating a negative public perception where none is
justified."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

GOVERNMENT PROPOSES EXTENDING AIRBAG REQUIREMENT TO TRUCKS & VANS

The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration proposed Jan. 4
that the current requirement for airbags or automatic seatbelts be
extended to light-duty trucks, vans and small buses.

The restraints would be phased in beginning with the 1994 model year
with full compliance by the 1996 model year. But vehicles with driver-
side airbags and manual passenger belts would be considered in
compliance through the 1997 model year.

Vehicles with only two seating positions also would have to be
equipped to secure a child safety seat on the passenger side.

NHTSA estimated that some 2,000 lives a year could be saved through
the proposal.

The action followed a NHTSA proposal last month to extend the door-
strength requirements for passenger cars to all minivans, small buses
and multipurpose vehicles.

NHTSA also reported that it opened a record 213 investigations into
possible auto safety defects during 1989 and influenced a record 77
percent of recalls.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

AGENTS & CONSUMER ADVOCATES OFFER 100 WAYS TO CUT AUTO COSTS

The National Association of Professional Insurance Agents and the
Consumer Insurance Interest Group joined Dec. 27 to offer more than
100 recommendations on controlling personal injury and property
damage costs.

Suggestions include ways to improve driver responsiblility, speed and
alcohol control, highway design and improved state record-keeping on
accidents.

The groups also recommended improving vehicle safety by such means as
displaying crashworthiness ratings on new vehicles, improving
steering assemblies, enhancing side-impact protection and reinstating
the 5 mph bumper standard.

The Consumer Insurance Interest Group is headed by PIA National
consumer adviser Esther Peterson and includes Joan Claybrook of
Public Citizen, Steve Brobeck of Consumer Federation of America and
J. Robert Hunter of the National Insurance Consumer Organization.

The organization was formed at the behest of PIA National in an
effort to reach agreement on issues of common interest, such as
safety, while setting aside issues that divide the two groups.

"All the recommendations in this report should be looked upon
together rather than as isolated proposals," Peterson said.

The agents and consumer advocates agreed that another issue --
insurer efficiency -- also is important, but they couldn't agree on
how to achieve it.

The 40-page report, "Factors Contributing to Auto Insurance Claims
Costs," is available from PIA National at 400 North Washington St.,
Alexandria, VA 22314, telephone 703-836-9340.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

HARTFORD EXPANDS DISCOUNTS FOR AUTO SAFETY

ITT Hartford Insurance Group, which claims credit for pioneering
discounts for airbags or automatic seatbelts in 1977, announced Jan.
4 that it is increasing those discounts.

The Hartford's discounts on personal injury coverage for occupants of
the insurance vehicles are 30 percent for automatic seatbelts, 40
percent for driver-side airbags, 50 percent for full front airbags
and 60 percent for a combination of both automatic belts and airbags.

They apply to personal injury protection (PIP) coverage in no-fault
staes and to medical payments coverage in other states.

In addition, cars with antilock brakes will get a 5 percent saving on
collision coverage.

"The discounts are substantially greater than those offered by most
auto insurers," according to Dale R. Comey, The Hartford's president
of property-casualty insurance operations.

The company said actual dollar savings will vary by state, ranging
from $102 in the no-fault state of Colorado down to $9 in Illinois,
where tort suits are allowed and first-party medical coverage is more
limited.

As of Feb. 1, the discounts will be available in 38 states on
policies sold by independent agents or through the American
Association of Retired Persons (AARP), The Travelers said. They are
under consideration in five other jurisdictions.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

CALIFORNIA QUAKE EXPECTED TO HAVE LITTLE LASTING ECONOMIC IMPACT

Last year's Loma Prieta earthquake won't have a severe lingering
economic impact and rebuilding will probably stimulate the San
Francisco Bay area, the Commission on State Finance reported
Jan. 3 in its budget projection for the 1990s.

Some businesses and households will suffer huge uninsured casualty
losses and some small retailers will go bankrupt because of a decline
in tourism, the commission said, but "the net loss in wealth and
income is not that large."

The panel estimated that the Oct. 17 earthquake will cost the state
$1.035 billion, most of it offset by a quarter-cent increase in the
sales tax enacted Dec. 1.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

CALIFORNIA'S NEW WORKERS' COMP LAW GOES INTO EFFECT

California's new workers' compensation law went into effect Jan. 1,
raising maximum weekly benefits from $224 to $266 immediately and
more in later years.

The law also imposes requirements on employers to inform injured
workers of claims procedures and act on them promptly and contains
reforms intended to reduce the amount of litigation.

Insurers' uniform provision for expenses goes down from
35 percent to 34 percent this year, 33 percent next year and
32.8 percent in 1992.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

DELAWARE GOVERNOR RENEWS PUSH FOR BANKS IN INSURANCE

Delaware Gov. Mike Castle has renewed his drive to win passage of
legislation that would allow some state banks into the insurance
business.

The Republican governor told the Wilmington Rotary Club Dec. 28 that
passage is important if Delaware is to continue to be a financial
center.

The measure would help encourage banks to stay in the state and
expand, Castle said, but he warned that California, Florida and
Illinois all are considering similar legislation.

"The first state in which national and regional banks are located, or
may locate, which grants these insurance underwriting powers to
commercial banks...will have foreclosed any need or reason for
similar action by other states," said Castle.

He said one major backer of the legislation, Citibank, has said it
would create up to 500 new jobs in Delaware if the bill passes.

Insurance agents oppose the bill, which would apply to banks
chartered in the state before 1933 and allow them both to underwrite
and sell insurance.

It was passed by the House but has been stalled in the Senate since
last summer.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

GEORGIA COMMISSIONER PROPOSES LIMITS ON AUTO PERSONAL INJURY SUITS

Georgia Insurance Commissioner Warren Evans proposed Jan. 4 that the
General Assembly revise the state's no-fault law by allowing suits
only in case of defined injuries.

Current law now calls for accident victims' insurance companies to
pay medical bills, lost wages and burial expenses regardless of who
was at fault, but injured persons may still sue
if their medical expenses exceed $500.

Evans told a House-Senate study committee that the proposal would
allow insurers to cut costs and could lead to a 20 percent reduction
in premiums.

The effort to raise the tort threshold is being led by Georgians for
Responsible Insurance Policy, an industry coalition headed by Dedley
Moore of Atlanta's Omni Insurance Group.

"The exorbitant increase in tort litigation is one of the main
reasons Georgia's insurance rates have been climbing faster than the
national average," Moore said.

But the Georgia Consumer Center says that auto rate increases in the
state have outpaced the growth of claims.

The group's executive director, Debbie Schecter, said claims only
amounted to 69.4 percent of premiums in 1988, compared to 79.3
percent in 1984.

"It's further evidence of the inefficiency in the insurance industry
in Georgia and perhaps even price-gouging," she said.

In other areas, Insurance Commissioner Evans proposed:

* Requiring health insurers to pool policies for groups with fewer
than 50 members, in order to reduce the possibility of a large rate
increase resulting from one large claim on a small group.

* Making health maintenance organizations available to those covered
by Medicare or Medicaid who now lack that option.

* Expanding the Insurance Department's ability to investigate
insurance fraud. He said it's been estimated that at least 10 to 20
percent of the cost of premiums results from fraud.

* Extending the FAIR Plan providing property insurance to high-risk
applicants who have difficulty getting commercial coverage.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

ILLINOIS MANDATORY AUTO INSURANCE LAW GOES INTO EFFECT

An Illinois law requiring motorists to carry auto insurance went into
effect Jan. 1, allowing state troopers to require motorists to prove
that they have personal injury liability coverage of at least $20,000
per person and $40,000 per accident.

The law also requires $15,000 in property damage liability.

Motorists without insurance face fines of $500 or more and vehicle
registration suspensions of at least two months. Reinstatement will
cost an additional $50.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

ILLINOIS SUPREME COURT SAYS DRUNK EMPLOYE CAN'T GET WORKERS' COMP

The Illinois Supreme Court ruled Dec. 21 that an intoxicated employee
who was critically injured in a car crash while traveling between one
business meeting and another isn't entitled to workers' compensation.

Without dissent, the court upheld the ruling of the Illinois
Industrial Commission that the employee wasn't capable of working at
the time of the accident and therefore wasn't eligible for workers'
compensation.

The case was brought by the family of Bennie Johnson, a business
agent for the International Union of Operating Engineers. He had a
blood alcohol level of nearly .24 percent, more than two times the
legal definition of drunkenness, at the time of the 1983 accident
that left him incapacitated.

"The commission was free to infer from those circumstances that the
employee was so intoxicated that he could no longer follow his
employment and thus could not be said to be engaged in his employment
at the time of the occurrence," Justice Ben Miller wrote for the
court.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

MARYLAND APPROVES BLUES' PLAN TO ENCOURAGE SAFE DRIVING

Maryland Insurance Commission John Donaho has approved a plan by Blue
Cross & Blue Shield of Maryland to encourage safe driving through
expanded benefits.

The plan applies to some 37,000 policyholders enrolled in
comprehensive major medical programs for individual consumers.

If a policyholder is injured in a traffic accident while using a
seatbelt, child restraint or motorcycle helmet, 100 percent of the
first $1,500 in covered medical costs will be paid.

Previously, the company paid 80 percent of such costs.

Donaho also approved a provision withholding benefits when a
policyholder is injured in an accident and convicted for the second
time of driving while intoxicated or under the influence of
unprescribed drugs.

Another provision extends coverage to policyholders for routine
mammography screenings.

"Our emphasis on safe driving, prevention and wellness place us and
the state of Maryland in the forefront of a national trend that
encourages people to take responsibility for actions that affect
their health," said Linda Benedict, vice president of the insurer's
individual market division.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

MASSACHUSETTS LIMIT ON AUTO RATE INCREASE CHALLENGED IN COURT

Aetna Life & Casualty Co. filed suit Jan. 3 challenging  the
Massachusetts insurance commissioner's decision last month limiting
auto rate increases to 7.9 percent.

The suit filed in Supreme Judicial Court, the state's highest, noted
that insurers had sought a 12.8 percent increase.

Aetna covers about 9.5 percent of the state's drivers, but a decision
in its favor would affect other insurers as well.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

MICHIGAN AGENTS SAY INCREASING SAFETY COULD REDUCE AUTO RATES

The Michigan Association of Professional Insurance Agents is saying
government should increase safety regulation as a means of holding
down auto premiums.

Michigan PIA's proposals include reducing the maximum speed limit
from 65 mph and more funding for highway maintenance and safer roads.
The agents also propose increased funding for insurance regulation
and a new look at the territorial rating system.

"Our recommendations are designed to provide a credible base of
information that everyone can work on to reduce accidents and
injuries and hold the line on rising auto insurance rates," said
Michigan PIA President James Alexander.

The PIA recommendations are part of an effort to divert legislative
proposals to mandate reduced auto premiums by as much as 30 percent.

Although Michigan's no-fault system is held up as a model for other
states, auto rates there have been rising -- especially in Detroit.

Michigan Citizens Lobby has been leading a campaign for rate cuts.
The group's executive director responded to the PIA proposals by
saying they're a step in the right direction but shouldn't divert
attention from the push for a rate rollback.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

MISSOURI SENATOR PROPOSES UPGRADING INSURANCE REGULATION

Missouri Senate President Pro Tem James Mathewson urged Jan. 3 that
the state constitution be amended to upgrade insurance regulation to
the status of a separate department.

"For too many years, our Division of Insurance has been the stepchild
of the Department of Economic Development," the Democratic leader
said.

"In order to assure Missouri consumers they are not paying
unreasonable rates and to make sure the insurance industry is
adequately related, we need to have a separate department in charge
of insurance regulation."

Under Mathewson's amendment, the proposed department would be
directed by a five-member commission.

"I have talked to officials with major insurance companies, fellow
lawmakers and consumer representatives," Mathewson said.

"We agree that in light of the growing public concern with insurance
rates and the increasing number of insurance company insolvencies, we
need improved regulation of the industry."

The amendment would have to be approved by both houses of the General
Assembly and then approved by voters.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

NEW JERSEY BLUES WIN APPROVAL OF RATE INCREASES

New Jersey Insurance Commissioner Kenneth Merin approved rate
increases in excess of 20 percent Jan. 4 for 600,000 residents of the
state who carry health insurance with Blue Cross & Blue Shield of New
Jersey.

Merin approved increases of 26.4 percent for 350,000 holders of
individual health insurance policies and of 21.3 percent for 250,000
who carry Medicare supplemental coverage.

The increases are expected to bring $97 million more this year to
Blue Cross & Blue Shield, which has reported a $230 million deficit.

If applied across the board, the increases would amount to about $950
above the current $3,600 annual non-group premium for family coverage
and $98 above the current Medigap average of $460. But Merin ordered
Blue Cross & Blue Shield to modify the demographic factors used in
setting rates.

The company had sought a 33.7 percent increase for individual
coverage and 28.9 percent for Medigap policies.

Merin said medical costs haven't risen as much as Blue Cross & Blue
Shield claimed.

About 3.4 million more residents of the state are covered by Blue
Cross & Blue Shield group plans, which aren't affected by the latest
decision.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

NEW YORK GOVERNOR CALLS FOR HEALTH INSURANCE FOR ALL CHILDREN

New York Gov. Mario Cuomo called Jan. 3 for universal health
insurance for all children in the state, from birth through age 17.

In his "State of the State" address, Cuomo gave few details of a
program he called New York CHILD, for Children's Health Insurance for
Lifelong Development, but said it would include coverage for primary
care, preventive care and catastrophic illness.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

NORTH CAROLINA COMMISSIONER ORDERS ANOTHER AUTO RATE ROLLBACK

North Carolina Insurance Commissioner Jim Long has ordered auto rates
rolled back by 6.2 percent, the third cut in less than two years.

"I have determined that the evidence and testimony justify a decrease
in the current rate level," Long said Dec. 28.

"Decreases are ordered for both liability and physical damage
coverage."

Long also ordered a 12.1 percent decrease for motorcycles.

The industry had requested a 4.2 percent increase.

"The order represents a 248 percent decrease from the industry's
request," Long said.

"The last six auto rate orders represent a total of $492 million less
than the increased rate levels proposed by the insurance industry."

Besides ordering three rate cuts, Long has approved three rate
increases that were smaller than those requested by the industry.

The industry has taken previous decisions to the North Carolina Court
of Appeals, and more than $115 million in premiums is being held in
escrow pending the outcome.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

NORTH CAROLINA ANTI-THEFT PROGRAM PAYS ITS FIRST REWARD

North Carolina's Stop Thefts, Assist Recoveries (STAR) program has
paid its first reward: $2,000 to an informant who helped bring about
the conviction of six persons in Brunswick County believed
responsible for $120,000 in burglaries.

"This is the first money to be paid through the industry's STAR
reward program and we believe this is only the beginning of a very
effective program to assist North Carolina law enforcement agencies
in fighting burglary rings," said William L. Pollard, executive vice
president of North Carolina Farm Bureau Mutual Insurance Co. and
chairman of the STAR reward committee.

"Our target for STAR is the thief or theft ring that commits 10 or
more burglaries or steals 10 or more vehicles. We call them high-
volume thieves," Pollard said Jan. 4.

The North Carolina Rate Bureau, made up of property/
casualty insurers, will put up as much as $20,000 a year for rewards.
Co-sponsors of the program are the North Carolina Association of
Police Chiefs and the North Carolina Sheriffs Association.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

OREGON SUPREME COURT REQUIRES BROAD COVERAGE BY AUTO POLICIES

The Oregon Supreme Court ruled Dec. 28 that auto insurers doing
business in the state must cover vehicles owned by the policy-holder
even when the vehicles are being driven by someone else.

Ruling in two different cases, both involving Viking Insurance Co. of
Wisconsin, the court said Oregon law requires policies to cover
vehicles all the time, not just when they are being driven by certain
people.

One case involved a policy held by an Oregon man, Grant Perotti, that
covered him when he was driving any vehicle but didn't cover his
truck when it was driven by someone else. An employee of Perotti's,
driving the truck with his permission, was involved in an accident
and Viking refused to cover damages.

The other case involved a policyholder who allowed his car to be
driven by a 19-year-old woman who was involved in an accident. Viking
said its policy didn't apply in this case because a clause in the
policy excluded a vehicle driven by someone under 25.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

TENNESSEE REPORTS 42% OF BIRTHS PAID FOR BY MEDICAID

Medicaid paid for 42 percent of all births in Tennessee last year and
the proportion is expected to rise above 50 percent this year, State
Health and Environment Commissioner J.W. Luna told legislators Dec.
28.

The other 58 percent of births were paid for by the parents and their
insurance or were written off by the hospitals as bad debts, Luna
told the Legislature's Fiscal Review Committee.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

VIRGINIA CITES LACK OF EVIDENCE THAT MANDATED BENEFITS RAISE COSTS

Virginia's State Corporation Commission issued a report Dec. 27
saying that it was unable to find clear evidence that removing
mandated benefits would make health insurance more affordable.

It told the General Assembly's joint subcommittee on health care that
all mandated benefits and providers account for, on average, no more
than 10 percent of the policy premium for individual coverage and 20
percent of the group premium.

The study said it's impossible to answer the crucial question of how
many people are uninsured as a result of mandated benefits, because
insurance companies don't normally keep such data.

The report was based on a survey of 100 companies.

Insurance Commissioner Steven Foster suggested that the General
Assembly enact legislation requiring insurers to keep such data for
future use, as seven other states have done.

Having such data might make it possible to consider options such as
allowing consumers to get cheaper insurance by agreeing to forgo some
kinds of treatment, such as mental health therapy.

The state now requires insurers to provide coverage, for example, for
newborn children and in-patient psychiatric services and it requires
them to offer coverage for mammograms, obstetrical care and alcohol
and drug dependency.

It also requires insurers to reimburse a variety of health-care
providers, including clinical social workers, psychologists,
chiropractors, podiatrists, optometrists and opticians.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

WISCONSIN BILL WOULD BROADEN POLICYHOLDER REDRESS AGAINST INSURERS

Wisconsin State Rep. Peter Barca introduced legislation Dec. 28 that
would call for hearing examiners to decide monetary awards in
contested cases and allow policyholders to recover attorney's fees
when they sue insurers.

The measure also would create a public intervenor in insurance cases
in the Wisconsin Justice Department as well as requiring insurers to
publish their rates and file an annual report showing premiums
collected, claims paid and court awards.

The Democratic legislator said he was introducing the bill in light
of a state audit critical of a lack of consumer protections.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet
January 5, 1990

BUILDING CODES HELP PREVENT HURRICANE DAMAGE, STUDY FINDS

Strong building codes, properly enforced, can greatly reduce damage
from hurricanes, according to a new report by the All-Industry
Research Advisory Council.

The study was undertaken in cooperation with the National Committee
on Property Insurance and covered Hurricanes Alicia (1983), Diana
(1984), Gloria (1985) and Gilbert (1988), as well as last year's
Hurricane Hugo.

It found evidence that counties with strong codes and enforcement in
some areas, such as Charleston County, held down damage. It also
found trees were a mixed blessing -- causing damage from falling
limbs but reducing the impact of hurricane-force winds.

Single copies of the study, "Surviving the Storm: Building Codes,
Compliance, and the Mitigation of Hurricane Damage," are available
free from AIRAC at 1200 Harger Road, Suite 310, Oak Brook, IL 60521,
telephone 708-572-1177.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-37</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B043-127</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/in02.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020920 text/html 15761
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:07:31 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:33 GMT
Content-length: 15574
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/in02.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
IMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>RELATIONSHIP SELLING: A NEW YEAR'S TALE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(415 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>AUTO INSURANCE CRUISES THE I-WAY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(268 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>THIRD-QUARTER EARNINGS: CAUTIOUS OPTIMISM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(172 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>BANKS IN INSURANCE: SIX THREATS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(210 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>ICBC TO EXPAND BODY SHOP NETWORK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(176 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>WHOSE BONO IS IT, ANYWAY?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(170 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>VE-MAIL: VICTORY IN COMMUNICATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(167 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* MARKETEER TIP OF THE WEEK *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>ASK AND YOU SHALL RECEIVE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(75 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>* PRODUCTS, SERVICES, AND MEMBER NEWS *</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>PAYROLL DEDUCTION: IT'S ELEMENTARY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(215 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>EMPLOYEE OF THE MONTH: DAVE WILTZ</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(131 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
IMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

RELATIONSHIP SELLING: A NEW YEAR'S TALE

IMMS would like to start off 1996 with IMMS Chairman George
Nordhaus recounting his experiences with his insurance agent:

"My agent and I have a relationship. He writes my Homeowners, my
Auto policy, the floater on my wife's wedding ring, and our Umbrella
Liability coverage. All in all, it's a pretty good account -- probably above
average, in fact. The bills arrive on a staggered basis once every quarter,
so nothing too big hits at once.

Copious Contacts

"At least once a month I hear from my agent or the companies he
represents. I get a quarterly newsletter that's full of meaningful, easy-to-
understand information -- not as good as the ones IMMS offers, but nice.
We also receive a desk calendar, birthday cards for my wife and me,
updates on insurance legislation, offers to provide other services -- and
sometimes just a personalized letter telling me that he's still aware I'm a
client. Once a year he calls to review our insurance needs for the coming
year. Although he doesn't write our Life or Health coverage, he always
asks if we'd like to discuss our needs in these areas.

Creating Karma

"Every two weeks or so I get a call from a prospective client who tells
me, 'Your agent tells me that IMMS (or the Silver Membership CD-
ROM service, or employee testing, or newsletters, or whatever) is just
what my agency needs.' There's absolutely no doubt that these referrals
generate far more business for IMMS than I pay my agent and his
companies in premiums.

Quality Conquers

"How do you think I react when I receive a solicitation in the mail asking
for a 'free quote on your insurance'? Or if I see the same type of offer
floating across my screen when I'm browsing the Internet? Or when I get
a phone call at home from some prospector looking for my X-date? Or
the next time I run across an electronic insurance kiosk or a manned
booth in a mall? What do you think I'd do if any of these price sellers
could save me 10% or 15% on my annual premiums?

"You got it. I ignore them because my agent has taken the time and
trouble to build a strong relationship with me. We at IMMS have made
our New Year's resolution to make the same commitment to you. And it's
not a bad resolution for you to make to your customers, either."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
IMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

AUTO INSURANCE CRUISES THE I-WAY

Utah consumers can use their home computers to surf the Internet for
Auto quotes from Workmen's Auto Insurance Co. through the InsWeb
marketplace gateway service. The Workmen's-InsWeb connection marks
the first Auto insurance-buying program on the I-Way. Workmen's, based
in Los Angeles, wrote $30 million in high-risk Private Passenger Auto
premium through independent agents in 10 Western states in 1995.
"We're pleased to have Workmen's on board," says InsWeb Chairman and
CEO Hussein Enan. "They understand the importance of the Internet as a
logical distribution medium for insurance, and they want to be on the
cutting edge of technology, connecting their agents with consumers in an
efficient and cost-effective way." InsWeb and Workmen's launched the
program in Utah because of the state's high rate of computer usage (51%
of households own PCs, compared to the nationwide average of 27%)
and the fact that digitized signatures are considered binding under Utah
law.

Wired for Success

Workmen's President George Nevitt sees the Internet as a low-cost
distribution medium that can strengthen direct communications between
consumers and the company's agent base. "Right now, many of our
insureds make first contact with an agent after seeing a Yellow Pages ad.
Now they will be able to go on-line and search for agents or receive
quotes more efficiently." InsWeb has a variety of irons in the Internet fire,
including a nationwide Personal Watercraft program that's up and
running. Pilot programs in the works include Auto insurance in other
states, Term Life, Accidental Death and Dismemberment, and Short-
Term Medical coverages. Several Commercial Lines programs will be on-
line early this year.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
IMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

THIRD-QUARTER EARNINGS: CAUTIOUS OPTIMISM

Net income for the P/C industry took a quantum leap in the third quarter,
hitting $5.6 billion -- more than double the $2.4 billion of the same period
last year. According to data on 96% of industry volume compiled by the
Insurance Services Office, Inc. and the National Association of
Independent Insurers, earnings for the nine months more than tripled,
skyrocketing from $4.8 billion to $14.7 billion. The combined ratio for
the quarter fell from 107.7% in the year-earlier quarter to 103.7%, a level
that Insurance Information Institute Senior Vice President and economist
Sean Mooney called the lowest he's seen in the last 10 years. Analysts
credit the upswing to the superheated stock market's boost to investment
income and the lack of megacatastrophes during the quarter.

On the other hand, Mooney expects a downswing in earnings for the
fourth quarter, when the industry will take a $2.1 billion hit in losses from
Hurricane Opal. He's also concerned about evidence of under-reserving
for future claims. We're not out of the woods yet.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
IMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BANKS IN INSURANCE: SIX THREATS

The Consumers' Association of Canada has voiced doubts about banks
getting into the insurance business. The association is concerned that
expanding the power of financial institutions into insurance marketing
might lead to: (1) overconcentration in the financial services sector, (2)
the cross-subsidizing of banks' insurance businesses by their other
operations, (3) the danger of rejecting higher-risk customers, (4)
inadequate insurance expertise, (5) the possibility of abuse in cross-selling
or "tied sales," and (6) potential loss of privacy rights in exchanging
information between a bank's lending and insurance operations.

A side note: The nation's "Big Six" banks earned a record $5.18 billion in
annual profits this year. Royal Bank and the Canadian Imperial Bank of
Commerce led the pack, earning more than $1 billion apiece.

MP Warns Against Banks

Liberal MP John Nunziata thinks the feds should block any expansion by
banks into the insurance business. "I don't think there's too much support
in Ottawa for that to happen. I believe Canadians want the banks to be
more responsible and, I think, unless the banks shape up, the government
will intervene," said Nunziata in a recent broadcast on the Baton
Broadcast System. The lawmaker also called for a government
investigation of the "outrageous" service fees charged by banks.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
IMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ICBC TO EXPAND BODY SHOP NETWORK

The Insurance Corp. of British Columbia (ICBC) will launch a province-
wide body shop accreditation program come spring. The "customer
assured repair" (c.a.r.) shops will meet industry standards, have trained
staff and up-to-date equipment, offer courtesy cars, provide customer
waiting areas -- and guarantee their work in writing. ICBC project
manager Stacey Bernier says that the program, created to meet
customers' demands for recommended repair shops, is "really trying to
build a trust relationship" with the body-shop industry, with focus on the
customer. Last year, ICBC shelled out $400 million for repair parts and
services, with policyholders often finding themselves caught in the middle
of an adversarial relationship between the insurer and a repair shop.

Kamloops has been hosting a pilot c.a.r. operation since last October,
with nine of the city's 22 body shops accredited. Policyholders are not
required to use accredited shops; unaccredited shops will still be free to
do ICBC work. Said Don Beck, the Automotive Retailers Association's
point man in developing the program, "This will lift the industry to a new
level."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
IMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

WHOSE BONO IS IT, ANYWAY?

It seems that pro bono publico ("for the public good") cases in which
attorneys provide their services to the poor free of charge often wind up
pro bono advocatorum ("for the lawyers' good"). More and more law
firms are using "fee-shifting statutes" that let the winning legal eagles bill
their opponents (usually a government entity) at their customary -- often
lucrative -- rates. The result: Taxpayers pick up the tab, which may end
up in seven figures. The partners of Wilson Sonsini Goodrich and Rosati
wound up splitting $3.5 million after the firm won a case that led to
major reforms at California's Pelican Bay State Prison. The patrician
Manhattan firm Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft sued New York State
on behalf of an inmate who was confined to his cell for four days after
snatching an extra piece of cake on the prison chow line. A court
awarded the inmate $200. The Cadwalader firm did a bit better, ending
up with $100,000. There's nothing like doing well by doing good.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
IMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

VE-MAIL: VICTORY IN COMMUNICATIONS

The same principles apply to paper memos and electronic messages alike.
Because E-mail requires speed and clarity, remember these points before
you post your cybermessage:

-- Be conversational. E-mail is much less formal than paper. Think "Post-
It" rather than executive memo.

-- Be swift. Make it a rule to answer your E-mail messages as soon as
possible. Shortcut abbreviations and images (called "emoticons") can
speed up the reply process -- and save your readers time.

-- Be colorful. Try to develop a distinctive on-line style that will make
readers more likely to remember your messages. But remember that it's
hard to convey humor in writing.

-- Be stingy with CAPS. Since most E-mail systems don't allow
underlining, italics, or boldface, you'll need to use CAPITAL LETTERS
for emphasis. But use control: Capital letters are like SHOUTING.

-- Be succinct. People don't like to read long texts on screen, so try to
keep your E-mail messages short: no longer than 24 lines.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
IMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ASK AND YOU SHALL RECEIVE

There's no such thing as asking too many questions when you're dealing
with a prospect. Questions offer a variety of benefits: (1) They make the
prospect feel important, (2) they provide vital information, (3) they allow
you to highlight your products' strengths, (4) they encourage you and
your prospect to think, (5) they allow the prospect to talk, (6) they
provide direction for your presentation, and (7) they create a positive
"yes" momentum. Any questions?



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
IMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

PAYROLL DEDUCTION: IT'S ELEMENTARY

Payroll deduction for Personal Lines is on the move. Coverages include
Auto, Homeowners, Nursing Home, and other employee-paid policies.
The antiquated direct billing system -- inflexible for the agent, customer,
and employer -- is giving way to a method that satisfies clients, simplifies
CSRs' workflow, and offers the agency a cash flow system that nearly
eliminates cancellation and reinstatement notices. Keeping customers first
means offering them a convenient payment option: in plain words, payroll
deduction. A typical family insurance program that covers the home, two
cars, and a boat, plus an Umbrella policy, would require a substantial
premium (with down payments and installments). Payroll deduction, with
its smaller, predictable payments, simplifies budgeting.

Payroll deduction lets you deliver a quality benefit at no extra cost to
employers, while strengthening relationships with your Commercial Lines
clients. The Marketing & Management Group's Benefit Innovations
operation offers a turnkey deduction program tailored for independent
agencies and brokerages. It includes a complete set of marketing
materials, communications tools, and a program manual. You may also
enjoy a discount on Insurance Deduction Services (IDS), a powerful
multicarrier payroll deduction and electronic funds transfer software
package created by Agency Management Services (AMS). For more
information on this unique profit-making program, contact Jim Higgins at
the Marketing & Management Group, (508) 760-4617.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
IMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

EMPLOYEE OF THE MONTH: DAVE WILTZ

Dave's the "Answer Man" when it comes to making the most effective
use of your IMMS Membership -- regular or Silver. Feel free to write,
fax, or call him with any and all questions from 6 a.m. to 3 p.m. (Pacific
Time) Monday through Friday. You can also reach Dave after hours or
on weekends at his pager number, (818) SKY-8888, p.i.n. 1167471. A
native Louisianian, Dave came to IMMS from the University of Southern
California, where he was a point guard for the USC basketball team and
earned a degree in communications. An avid traveler, he enjoys long
drives to the mountains with his jazz collection in the CD changer.
PUBLISHED BY INSURANCE MARKETING & MANAGEMENT
SERVICES, 12424 WILSHIRE BLVD., STE. 600, LOS ANGELES,
CA 90025, (800) 753-4467, (310) 442-6000.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-38</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B043-146</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/in01.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020936 text/html 34857
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:07:43 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:34 GMT
Content-length: 34670
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/in01.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
THE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet <BR>
January 15, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>TAX REFORM COULD BLAST BALANCE SHEETS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(814 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>FAIR VALUE OF LIABILITIES STILL A CHALLENGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(657 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>SURPLUS NOTES BACKED IN NEW REPORT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(528 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>QUESTIONS TO BE RAISED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(164 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>NEW YORK UNVEILS CROWD-PLEASING REFORM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(464 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>TEXAS TO CURB WORKERS COMP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(263 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>OCC LAYS PLANS FOR INSURANCE OVERSIGHT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(329 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>HANCOCK FINED FOR CHURNING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(289 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>WALL STREET WATCH</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>GEORGIA BLUES' CONVERSION GETS GREEN LIGHT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(276 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>KEMPER UPGRADE FOLLOWS MERGER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(91 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FOCUS ON FASB</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>FASB EXTRACTS LEASES FROM HEDGING PROJECT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(331 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>COMPREHENSIVE INCOME TAKES TINY STEP FORWARD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(318 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>ACSEC TO EXPLORE BALANCE SHEET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(135 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

TAX REFORM COULD BLAST BALANCE SHEETS

Tax simplification could have a drastic effect on corporate balance
sheets, wiping out as much as $3 trillion in equity, according to tax
experts at the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants who have
just completed a major study of alternatives to the current system.
        Many observers in Washington and on Wall Street believe that
Congress will undertake a major overhaul of the tax system by the turn of
the century. But the new AICPA study indicates that the "unintended
consequences" of some of the tax reform plans that have been put forth are
so great that the proposals will collapse of their own weight.
        "The level of discussion in the last two or three years (about tax
reform) has gotten to be significant, but once you look at some of this
information you become less certain that people will want to jump into
that," said Deborah Walker, a KPMG Peat Marwick partner and chair of the
AICPA's Tax Executive Committee.
        "The AICPA has long been an advocate of tax simplification, but
there are many, many unanswered questions," said Barry C. Melancon, AICPA
president.
        Various proposals have been made in Washington, and they differ in
many significant ways. But in general they would do away with the current
income-based system of taxation and replace it with one based on
consumption.
        Byrle M. Abbin, a retired partner and now a consultant at Arthur
Andersen, warned of "dire" effects on financial statements from tax
simplification. First, there would be some gains from the elimination of
the corporate income tax. He noted that $600 billion in deferred tax
liabilities would no longer be owed while just $100 billion in deferred tax
assets would be wiped out by a flat tax.
        But the big crunch would become with the imposition of a
consumption tax.
        "Without transition relief, deductions for depreciation of existing
assets would not be allowed under the new tax, and the entire proceeds from
a theoretical sale of assets at the end of the reporting year for the
initial application of the new tax law would be included in the tax base,"
the AICPA said in its new study, "Flat Taxes and Consumption Taxes: A Guide
to the Debate."
        Assuming a 10% tax rate and given that corporations have $20
trillion in tax basis, "it is possible that $2 trillion of deferred tax
liabilities would be created upon the enactment of this new tax," the AICPA
said.
        Under FAS 109, this entire amount, which could be higher with a
higher tax rate, would have to be booked in the year of tax change.
        "This would more than wipe out total corporate profits in any one
year and severely reduce the amount of shareholders' equity," the AICPA
warned. "Thus financial statements would have to reflect the enormous
increase in future taxes that results from lost depreciation deductions or
taxable gain on sales due to the elimination of tax basis."
        "The desire for efficiency and simplification has to be balanced
with problems of fairness," Abbin said. He acknowledged that some of these
problems could be reduced or resolved with appropriate transition rules.
But he predicted a battle royal over those rules.
        "Even if you do have transition rules, first you are going to have
strong discussions involving FASB, the SEC, the accounting profession and
Congress," he said. "It would be a tough, tough confrontation."
        Tax simplification could present additional problems for insurers.
Not the least of these would be the loss of tax advantaged status for many
life products and for policy payouts. In addition, however, insurance
companies and other financial service providers may find themselves subject
to a special tax regime.
        "Because it is difficult to identify and value services provided by
financial institutions, no country with a consumption tax has been able to
tax financial services in a manner consistent with consumption tax
principles," the AICPA said. "Exemption of financial institutions from
consumption tax generally results in overtaxation of financial services
provided to businesses and undertaxation of services provided to
consumers."
        In general the tax burden would increase for labor-intensive
businesses, such as insurers, and decrease for capital-intensive ones, the
AICPA said. While tax rates may be cut dramatically, tax outlays could
actually increase.
        "Even though the (proposed) rates sound low, you have to remember
that people don't pay rates, they pay taxes," Abbin said. "There'll be a
whole host of companies with lower rates that will have higher taxes to pay
because major components of their business cannot be deducted."
        Another area where there could be surprising consequences to tax
reform is in international operations. "The exclusion of exports from gross
receipts provides large tax benefits to those firms that export," the AICPA
said.
        In addition, Abbin said that the "U.S. could become a tax haven"
under some of the reform proposals. "This could bring retaliation from
foreign countries where we have operations." --Miles Maguire



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

FAIR VALUE OF LIABILITIES STILL A CHALLENGE

It can be done, but it won't be easy.
        That's the clear message about setting fair values of insurance
liabilities that came out of last month's conference on the subject at New
York University.
        The two key challenges are that there is no active market for
insurance liabilities and that such liabilities typically contain embedded
options, which are best estimated through complex valuation methodologies.
        On the other hand, there is a general consensus that the current
lopsided approach to marking only one side of the balance sheet to market
is creating distortions in financial statements.
        "One can conclude that the current GAAP accounting environment is
subject to ambiguity and inconsistency with regard to the underlying
economics of transactions, can result in significant volatility of earnings
and/or surplus, is losing the goals of company comparability and
comparability over time, is not capturing all the risk exposures of the
company and so is not reflecting what has really transpired and the impacts
of a company's management actions on the firm," said David N. Becker,vice
president, chief actuarial officer and appointed actuary at Lincoln
National Life Insurance Co.
        He presented a paper at the conference describing a methodology
called the "option adjusted value of distributable earnings" (OAVDE), which
can be used to find the fair value of liabilities after determining the
present value of future earnings under various scenarios.
        "Applying finance and option pricing theory directly to liabilities
is a powerful and useful, but it is not a completely valid analogy for
insurance enterprises," Becker said.
        "While market value analysis  does provide insight as to the risk
posture, it does not provide all the insight into the risk/reward posture
of the value of the firm that OAVDE analysis does," he added. "This is due
to the omission from the market value analysis of significant economic
variables and their timing that affects the value of the insurance
enterprise."
        A similar point was made by Christopher D. O'Brien, appointed
actuary of Royal Life Insurance in Liverpool, England. "We usually consider
the 'main' liabilities under a life assurance policy as being the monetary
amounts contractually payable to policyholders in specified circumstances,"
he said. "However, life assurance is a long-term contract under which there
is also a continuing obligation of the company to provide future
'services.'" These include advising, administration and investment, he
said. He also proposed a method calling for consideration of future
revenues discounted to present value.
        Dennis L. Carr, executive vice president and chief product
development officer at ARM Financial Group Inc., provide a real-life
experience of developing fair value liabilities for an insurance company.
In 1994, he said, the company had negative equity under FAS 115 and was
facing questions from rating agencies, distributors and others.
        Using a draft paper from the American Academy of Actuaries (AAA),
input from the firm's outside auditors and its internal asset/liability
management models, ARM came up with a way to show fair value of
liabilities, which used a mixture of marking to market and making value
estimations. Using this approach, the $14 million in negative GAAP equity
at the end of 1994 became $115 million in positive equity.
        "Fair value was implemented, and the results have been reasonable,"
Carr said. "Questions remain, but they are easier to answer."
        Also at the conference the AAA distributed its white paper on fair
values of liabilities. This describes two general approaches to the matter,
a constructive one that focuses on valuing liabilities and a deductive one
that first sets the overall value of the firm, such as in OAVDE.
        "While both methods are theoretically defensible and appealing,
they can produce different answers and do not yield identical answers
except in the simplest, most contrived hypothetical case," the paper says.
        It adds that the constructive approach is "more consistent with
asset valuation and reflective of valuations in the thin secondary GIC
market" while the deductive approach may be more appropriate "in the thin
company or block acquisition market."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

SURPLUS NOTES BACKED IN NEW REPORT

Duff & Phelps Credit Rating Co. says in a new report that surplus
notes spreads should narrow as investors come to understand them and their
similarity to the debt issued by insurance holding companies.
        "Understanding the similarity of 'double leverage' is important in
understanding the risk of surplus notes compared to traditional debt
instruments," the rating agency said. "Like their mutual counterparts that
have issued surplus notes in the 144a market, many stock insurers also
record equity capital on their statutory balance sheets that has been
financed in public debt markets."
        Because the market for surplus notes issued by healthy companies is
relatively young, many investors do not understand the true risk profile of
the instruments, DCR said. "Because of this, market spreads on surplus
notes appear higher than necessary," it said.
        The rating agency expects the market to grow as new risk based
capital rules are extended to the P/C sector. It also sees greater use of
the instrument by stock companies.
        "Stock insurers who have issued surplus notes have traditionally
done so privately to their holding companies for various tax reasons,
though DCR expects stock insurer issuance in the 144a market to begin
shortly," the rating agency said.
        In its view, surplus notes are very similar to holding company debt
in terms of subordination. "In a holding company structure, the insurance
company subsidiary's most junior obligation, common equity, is actually the
funding source for the holding company's senior debt," DCR said. "This
makes holding company senior debt a highly subordinated obligation from the
perspective of the organization as a whole."
        The rating agency argues that investors should evaluate surplus
notes on a company-specific basis, "by looking at both the credit rating on
the note and the claims paying ability of the issuer." DCR considers
surplus notes in much the same way it looks at debt-financed equity capital
in a holding company structure.
        "If DCR believes the positive effect on earnings, operating
leverage and RBC outweighs the future effect of debt service, the addition
of debt financed equity capital can improve an insurer's claims paying
ability," the rating agency said, adding that the same holds true with
surplus notes issued by mutuals.
        DCR acknowledges that there are some regulatory concerns that hang
over the market but says they are too often misunderstood. "Regulatory
risks can be more direct for surplus notes than for holding company debt
because of the ... ability of the regulator to directly suspend interest
and principal payments on a surplus note without putting the note into
default," the rating agency conceded.
        But it added that regulators would be mindful of the message that
such drastic measures would send in disrupting sales and the ability of an
issuer to meet policyholder obligations. It said suspension of surplus
notes payments will occur only "in extreme circumstances."
        DCR also said investors can largely disregard the NAIC's official
position, for RBC purposes, that surplus notes are equivalent to preferred
stock.  This "is not tied to the riskiness of surplus notes, but rather
reflects regulatory policy aimed at discouraging insurers from investing in
surplus notes." This could lead to an unhealthy pyramiding of capital,
regulators believe.
--Miles Maguire



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

QUESTIONS TO BE RAISED

These are questions the AICPA says businesses should be asking
about the impact of tax reform.
         What will be the new recordkeeping and reporting requirements? How
should computer software and information be changed? How will tax staffing
requirements change? How will tax staff be retrained?
         Should businesses reconfigure their multinational operations that
are structured around current rules?
         How are plans for business reorganizations affected by the change
to a replacement consumption tax?
         Given that interest is unlikely to be deductible, should
businesses consider greater use of equity financing? Should businesses
continue to provide health insurance to their employees?
         Should partnerships and sole proprietorships consider
incorporating now that they are subject to the same tax as corporations?
         With all forms of savings tax favored under a consumption tax,
should pension plans be altered?
         Will the Internal Revenue Service administer the new tax? Will its
budget over the transition have to be increased?
         What are the additional administrative costs of transitioning into
a new consumption tax?



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

NEW YORK UNVEILS CROWD-PLEASING REFORM

In an effort to open the playing field in New York, the state
Department of Insurance and the governor's office have offered up over 100,
or two-thirds, of the 150 insurance regulations to either dissolve or
partially dismantle in the largest regulatory reform effort in the
department's history.
        Superintendent of Insurance Ed Muhl and Gov. George Pataki issued a
joint release that was a celebration of the marketplace and the
possibilities repealing 24 regulations and reforming 77 of them could hold
for new, more and better insurance products.
        The reform weighed critical remarks from the industry and trade
associations in its process.
        For example, an unnamed property/casualty insurer called for
modification of the Unfair Claims Settlement Practices regulation because
"significant market conduct scrutiny" of the regulation means "insurers
doing business in New York devote inordinate resources to creating paper
files and record trails."
        Thus, the standard claims form of Regulation 64 was identified by
department staff as a subject of potential modification.
        Others were identified for reform because of the changing
marketplace, with the heavy growth of managed care being a chief element of
that change.The rule governing minimum standards for sale of health
insurance, for example, while still the "core of regulatory authority in
the oversight of accident and health insurance," must be modified to meet
the needs of an HMO environment, the department wrote.
        Regulations deemed repealable for reasons of obsolescence or burden
to insurers included those governing standard claims forms for health
insurance, investments in revenue bonds, mortgages as authorized
investments, underwriting discrimination against females, audited financial
statements and mass merchandising of personal coverage.
        The department estimated that the reform package will result in an
annual savings to the industry of $25 million to $40 million.
        "Regulation always imposes costs, both on the regulated industry
and the consumer.... Regulations that do not serve the public interest will
be either discarded or revised," Muhl stated.
        The reform effort was made at the mandate of Pataki to cut red tape
in business in an executive order early last year. The governor also
indicated then that new regulations would be subject to a "rigorous cost-
benefit analysis."
        Trade groups such as the Alliance of American Insurers are pleased
with the outcome of the governor's order.
        "We sent in quite a package of recommendations and are pleased to
say that some of them are in the areas that Pataki has slated for reform,"
said John Cucci, vice president of the northeast region for the Alliance.
        One, for example, that was of real concern was Regulation 68,
overseeing auto no-fault insurance.
        "Under the present provisions, a doctor could be treating a victim
for nine months before the insurer even knows about it. That creates room
for fraud. We suggested a 10 day report time," Cucci said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

TEXAS TO CURB WORKERS COMP

Aetna, Allstate, Zurich and 14 other insurer groups must cut their
workers comp rates or justify them to the Texas Insurance Department unless
they want to face possible rollback hearings, the TDI said.
        The TDI gave the insurers, which have a total of 74 companies
writing workers comp insurance, a Feb. 1 deadline to respond.
        Many companies cut their rates in response to savings from the 1989
reform law upheld by the Texas Supreme Court last February and losses
dropped dramatically, but some carriers have persisted in charging higher
rates, TDI Commissioner Elton Bomer charged.
        "These letters should come as no surprise to the insurance
companies. The carriers have known for months of my concern that workers'
compensation rates are too high, particularly rates for small businesses,"
Bomer said. "TDI's patience has worn thin."
        On average, rates are too high by 4% to 17% based on data from 271
companies, according to a recent analysis prepared by TDI's actuarial
consultant.But, losses in 1994 were more than half of what they would have
been without the reforms, the analysis showed. The state comp fund was also
included in the analysis.
        A Texas law that took effect in 1992 allows insurers to set their
own workers' comp rates. The law specifies, though, that rates may not
excessive, inadequate or unfairly discriminatory.
        Bomer can disapprove rates that violate that standard and can fine
a company that consistently overcharges.
        Letters were also sent to American States, General Accident, Great
American, Gulf, Houston General, Indiana Lumbermens, Nationwide, Old
Republic, Reliance, Royal, Sentry, State Farm, Tokio Marine and Unitrin.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

OCC LAYS PLANS FOR INSURANCE OVERSIGHT

The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency has created a task
force to examine how national bank insurance agency activities should be
supervised and examined if the industry wins the Barnett case, in which
oral arguments are scheduled before the high court Jan. 16.
        The OCC won banking industry support Jan. 4 to determine how it
should react if the Supreme Court determines that Section 92 of the
National Bank Act, which says banks can sell insurance from offices in
towns of 5,000 or fewer, preempts state laws barring certain banks from
conducting such activities. "They are laying the groundwork for determining
quickly how national bank insurance activities should be supervised," said
one banker familiar with the meeting, held at OCC offices.
        Among the questions asked at the session, according to one banker,
is whom the agency should consult before finalizing its rules. Among those
who should be involved, it was suggested, were state insurance
commissioners and bank and insurance trade groups
        The areas to be examined include what types of licenses should be
required of national banks selling insurance from offices in small towns.
        Another crucial area is whether the rules outlined by the OCC for
national bank insurance sales should be guidelines or regulations. The
difference is that violations of guidelines is subject to wrist-slapping;
violations of regulations bring down the whole panoply of fines, dismissals
and bank takeover mandated in potentially harsh federal bank enforcement
statutes. For example, violation of federal bank agency cease and desist
orders can bring fines of up to $1 million a day against institutions as
well as their officers and directors.
        The agency decided to proceed after a meeting with representatives
of the American Bankers Association and the Bankers Roundtable. According
to several bankers who attended the session, those briefing the bankers
included Konrad Alt, chief assistant to Comptroller Eugene A. Ludwig, and
Julie Williams, agency chief counsel. A decision on what to do next was
expected by Jan. 15.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

HANCOCK FINED FOR CHURNING

Another life insurer has joined the ranks of those that have been
accused of being tangled in a culture of improper sales practices. This
time, it's costing $1 million.
        In the shadow of the looming New York State Supreme court decision
on the settlement of New York Life's sales practices, the New York
Insurance Department fined John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co. Jan. 3
for more than a decade of numerous violations ranging from the company's
advertising practices to charges of churning.
        The Boston-based company admitted to the violations, signed a
stipulation and has paid the fine on violations occurring between 1983 to
1994. The stipulation listed violations for improper advertising, sales
practices and form filing. John Hancock also agreed to mend its ways so
such failures would not again occur. The company released a statement
saying there are now sales practice and advertising safeguards in place
that are working well.
        It also said the issues "raised by New York are no longer
problems." John Hancock tried to distance itself from the unauthorized
activities by noting they were primarily done by individual agents and
employees and "not John Hancock itself."
        The stipulation will also be provided to John Hancock's board of
directors and the company will cooperate with the department in any further
disciplinary actions against current or former agents, managers and
employees involved in the violations, according to the terms of the
stipulation.
        New York has announced a move toward deregulation, but violations
such as those identified at John Hancock are likely to come under closer
scrutiny. The department's Reg 60 is one of the few targeted for tougher
oversight by the department, which recently released a report promoting
modification or repeal of over 100 state insurance regs.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

GEORGIA BLUES' CONVERSION GETS GREEN LIGHT

The conversion plan of Blue Cross Blue Shield of Georgia Inc. has
been approved by the state insurance department with only minor adjustments
barely a month after a public hearing in November, pushing it closer to
becoming the first member plan to restructure and setting the stage for a
trip to the private placement market.
        One of the pair of conditions increases the number of directors
elected by the over 160,000 policyholders from two to six to increase their
voice, the department stated. The policyholders will become stockholders
when the conversion is completed.
        The second condition prevents the name from changing to Cerulean,
as proposed in the plan submitted by Blue Cross late in October.
        The approval of Commissioner John Oxendine, though expected, marks
one of the first approvals of a Blue Cross conversion to a for-profit. The
conversion process in other states such as California and Maryland has been
fraught with discord involving merger and acquisition terms and the use of
nonprofit funds in public charity foundations.
        "This could be the first, but we'll have to wait and see," said a
spokesperson for the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association.
        "The climate is different in each state and in every state the
entities need to look at their own climate. What works in Georgia may not
work in another place" she said.
        "The next step is the private placement, and then the registration
statement needs to be approved by the SEC," the Georgia Blues spokesperson
stated.
        "Under the plan every effort has been made to protect policyholders
while paving the way for the company to stay competitive in the ever-
changing health insurance market," Oxendine stated.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

KEMPER UPGRADE FOLLOWS MERGER

Moody's Investors Service has upgraded the senior debt rating of
Kemper Corp., to A1 from Baa2, the insurance financial strength rating of
its life subsidiaries to Aa3 from Baa1.
        The rating agency took the action after Zurich Insurance Group and
Investment Partners said it completed its acquisition of Kemper. It said
the action was based on the strength of the companies' ultimate parent,
Zurich Insurance Co., which plans to sell off Kemper's troubled commercial
real holdings.
        The two subsidiaries are Federal Kemper Life Assurance Co. and
Kemper Investors Life Insurance Co.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

FASB EXTRACTS LEASES FROM HEDGING PROJECT

The Financial Accounting Standards Board narrowed significantly the
scope of the hedging and derivatives project  Dec. 21 when it decided that
leases would not be included.
        The project, in its current form, provides the option of marking
derivative instruments or all financial instruments to market. While other
financial instruments may suffer this fate, the current method to account
for leases will not be affected by the outcome of the project.
        "One reason the Board decided not to include leases was that it
would expand the scope of the project considerably," said Jennifer Clark, a
FASB staffer. "The Board decided to remain narrower and deal with the
issues that most concern hedging and derivatives."
        Robert Conklin, one of the three FASB staffers in charge of the
project, said in the meeting that the Board previously had decided not to
include leases in the scope of two other FASB statements due to the
difficulty in separating the value of the monetary portion of the lease
from the nonmonetary portion. The same reasoning applies to the hedging
project, he said.
        He also noted that the staff was concerned about the lack of
valuation methodologies for leases, another one of the numerous complicated
issues relating to leases. So instead of including leases in the
derivatives project, the staff recommended considering a new project on the
capitalization or valuation of all leases.
        The Board also agreed that the interest component of a change in
the value of a derivative financial instrument, other than an option,
should be recognized in earnings in the period the change occurs, and that
the interest rate to be used would be the current market rate.
        In addition, the initial premium, or the time value component,
related to written or purchased options should be amortized into earnings
on a straight-line basis over the life of the option. Further, any gain on
a purchased option should be recognized in earnings to the extent that
expense has been recognized for the option premium paid.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

COMPREHENSIVE INCOME TAKES TINY STEP FORWARD

The Financial Accounting Standards Board debated Dec. 22 how to
report accounting adjustments, comprising prior-period adjustments and
cumulative-effective adjustments, and concluded that they should be
reported in the same place. Which place, however, remains unclear.
        The decision represents at least another minor step forward in
FASB's comprehensive income project, which began deliberations in late fall
and seeks to define a new location for items currently not reported in the
income statement. The board began discussing the project on Nov. 29 when it
tentatively decided that all recognized items of comprehensive income
should be reported in one or more statements of income for financial
performance.
        The Board began discussing precisely what those items are by
examining prior-period adjustments and cumulative-effect adjustments, of
which only the latter is currently included in net income. The matter
becomes complicated because some changes in principle are reported as
cumulative effect adjustments in certain situations and prior-period
adjustments in others.
        To clarify the matter, the Board requested the staff to develop
examples illustrating the three different approaches for reporting
accounting adjustments, which the staff has already outlined. The first one
is the "comprehensive income approach," which would interpret comprehensive
income strictly and exclude accounting adjustments. The second approach,
referred to as "all-inclusive income," would interpret comprehensive income
broadly, equating it with the all-inclusive income concept, and excluding
accounting adjustments. The final "compromise" approach would report both
comprehensive income and all-inclusive income, with accounting adjustments
displayed as the difference between the two.
        The staff, headed up by project manager Todd Johnson, said that any
of these three approaches would be workable if they were applied
consistently over time. The staff also said that the current status quo
approach not be adopted as an official standard, as it is not consistent
with either a strict interpretation of comprehensive income or the all-
inclusive concept.
        The Board members expressed concerns about the effects on other
financial statements.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

ACSEC TO EXPLORE BALANCE SHEET

The Accounting Standards Executive Committee, a committee of the
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, is considering a new
project to determine when various types of securities transactions should
be recorded on the balance sheet.
        Currently, these transactions can be settled in regular ways, in
accordance with normal market practice, or with delayed delivery, where the
counterparties agree on a settlement date. There are also more contingent
transactions, such as those in the mortgage market, which are referred to
as "to-be-announced" trades.
        The issue AcSEC will consider is whether each of these types of
transactions should be recorded on the balance sheet on the trade date or
on the settlement date. Until now, there has been diversity in practice as
to when these transactions are recorded, which has raised questions among
users of the instruments.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-39</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B044-9</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/in18.html 205.156.212.5 19970122021004 text/html 83753
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:08:00 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:29 GMT
Content-length: 83566
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/in18.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
INSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>ROYAL RESTRUCTURING PAVES WAY FOR MERGER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(620 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>HSBC CHANGES IMAGE IN MAJOR SHAKE-UP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(348 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>CHINESE MARKET BEGINS TO OPEN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(372 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>US INSURERS FAIL TO INVEST IN PEOPLE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(362 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>PHILIPPINES SET FOR FOREIGN FIRMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(155 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>UNITED STATES:  CHUBB TO DEVELOP INTERNET LINK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(301 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FEATURE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>LLOYDS AND TOUCHLINE TO TEAM UP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1215 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>A RISKY BUSINESS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(436 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>DARK DAYS LOOM ON UK HORIZON</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1872 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>INSURERS RUN FOR EVEN MORE COVER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1105 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>MID-OCEAN TAKES OVER BROCKBANK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(247 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>A GAME OF CRITICAL MASS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2388 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>SURVEY</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>A PICTURE OF HEALTH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2077 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FEATURE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>DIRECT WRITERS MAKE THE RUNNING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(974 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ROYAL RESTRUCTURING PAVES WAY FOR MERGER

ROYAL INSURANCE, the UK composite insurer, appears to be taking a big
step towards merging its two direct writing operations as well as
beefing up their critical mass.

Royal is transferring all its personal line motor and household
business done without intermediation of an agent into Royal Direct, the
smaller of its direct writing operations. This move places Royal Direct
on an equal footing, in terms of number of policies, with The Insurance
Services (TIS), the group's other direct operation.

The latest restructuring of the Royal group's direct activities helps
pave the way for an expected merger of its two direct operations next
year.

Apart from enjoying the benefits of having an enhanced critical mass, a
merged operation would then be in a strong position to challenge
Churchill Insurance for the number two position among the direct
writers.

In fact, Sun Alliance Connections, the direct writing operation of
composite insurer Sun Alliance, formed earlier this year, had a ready-
made customer base of motor and household policyholders that exceeded
those of Churchill. Sun Alliance transferred its non-intermediary
business into its direct writing operation which now has about 400,000
motor policies and 500,00 household policies, compared with Churchill's
600,000 in motor and 250,000 in household.

Roy Randall, a spokesman for the Royal Insurance group, explains that
the business being transferred into Royal Direct is "all the stuff we
come by directly, by people coming into one of our 60 branches around
the country or responding to one of our ads with a coupon, without the
involvement of an agency."

He adds that, once completed, it would have about 400,000 policies in
force compared with 45,000 at present, putting it on a par with TIS,
which has about 430,000 policies.

Since Royal Direct was founded in 1994, stockbrokers', analysts and the
press have queried why the group is running two separate direct writing
operations rather than one.

Randall, while acknowledging the fact that "at a certain point in time,
a decision will have to be taken," says it would not have to be in the
near future. He adds, that for the time being "we feel there is scope
for two direct brands run by Royal in the market."

He supports his statement by explaining that the two direct writers are
perceived as quite different animals by the market. TIS is seen
primarily as a motor insurer, while Royal Direct inherits its parent's
strong brand image in the household insurance segment. Randall also
points out that the operations use different marketing techniques from
each other.

While the two operations do indeed maintain distinct personalities,
although the latest move could well blur that, Randall's argument is
something of a rationalisation after the fact. Royal started TIS in
1987 when direct writing was still something of a novelty. Concerned at
the potentially negative response from insurance brokers, Royal wanted
to break into this market, while distancing the direct operation from
the rest of the group.

After market research at the start of 1994, however, showed the
strength, in terms of brand recognition of the name"Royal", Royal
Direct was born a few months later. Randall maintains that Royal Direct
has fared better nationally than its parent had foreseen. It is now
being beefed up to acquire a higher profile in the market as a whole.

With concern for broker opposition a thing of the past, and its
awareness of the value of the Royal brand name, the group has to resort
to the argument that its two direct operations serve different markets
to justify their continued separate existence. A merger seemingly looks
inevitable.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

HSBC CHANGES IMAGE IN MAJOR SHAKE-UP

THE HONGKONG and Shanghai Banking Corporation (HSBC) is undertaking a
major shake-up of its insurance activities in the Asia-Pacific region.
This move underlines the increasing importance to the HSBC group of
insurance as well as the growing importance of the region's insurance
market.

The restructuring is aimed at helping the banking group's insurance
businesses to accelerate their continuing expansion into the fast
growing markets in that region. It is also aimed at simplifying the
management of its insurance operations, yielding some cost savings.

All, bar one, of its operating insurance companies in that region are
changing their names to reflect that they form part of the HSBC group.
A new simpler corporate structure has been designed with a holding
company called HSBC Insurance formed under whose umbrella all HSBC's
insurance companies operating in the Asia- Pacific region will fall.

Directly below HSBC Insurance is now a 82.5 percent held non-life
holding company named HSBS Non-Life Holdings, previously known as
Carlingford Lombard, under which will be housed the group's five non-
life insurance operating companies.

Simon Brett, the former chief executive of Carlingford Lombard
Holdings, has been appointed chief executive of HSBC Insurance
Holdings. Brett noted that insurance was becoming an increasingly
important business for the HSBC group. He maintained that the
reorganisation will have the result of ensuring that the business rests
on a strong base, with effective control, investment and credit risk.

"Within the Asia-Pacific region, our new identity and management will
enable us to grow by drawing on Hong-kong's strengths and distribution
network. We intend to expand insurance sales both within Hong Kong,
where we are an important force in the industry, and in Southeast Asia,
where the bank continues to expand particularly in the retail sector,"
he added.

As part of the reorganisation, Kenneth Kwok is to succeed Brett as
chief executive of HSBC Non-life Holdings. He will, however, also
retain his current responsibilities as managing director of Lombard
General Insurance, which is to be renamed HSBC Lombard Insurance.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CHINESE MARKET BEGINS TO OPEN

CHINA revealed during a recent international insurance conference held
in the country that its insurance market will be opened to foreign
competition through a carefully regulated and managed process.

Wu Jie, vice minister of the State Commission for Restructuring the
Economic Systems, speaking at the conference, said that the industry
must develop in accordance with the reality and needs of China and that
liberalisation must take place under the principles of equality and
mutual benefit.

Despite having 80 international insurance companies and some 120
representative offices, China's insurance market is still dominated by
the People's Insurance Company of China (PICC). PICC controls almost 90
percent of the country's insurance business with 225,000 branches and
agencies employing hundreds of thousands of staff nationwide.

In terms of foreign competition, American International Assurance (AIA)
of the US and Tokyo Marine and Fire Insurance of Japan - have been
licensed by the People's Bank of China, the country's insurance
regulator, to conduct restricted business in the country. Both
companies are restricted in their activities to the Shanghai
municipality.

However, AIA received permission two months ago to underwrite policies
in Guangzhou. Since it began underwriting life policies in Shanghai two
years ago, AIA has been able to wrest 30 percent of the city's market
from PICC.

Yang Wenyou, director of the Foreign Financial Institutions Department
of the People's Bank of China, disclosed at the same conference that
the central bank would increase the number of cities open to foreign
insurance companies in the next couple of years. And by the turn of the
century, liberalisation would affect all major coastal cities.

China's insurance market remains vastly undeveloped. Since 1949,
insurance - along with all other social welfare benefits - was managed
within the domain of state-organised rural collectives and urban work
units. Insurance liberalisation began only in the mid-1980s, when
China's economic reforms demanded considerable availability of personal
insurance products.

Today, total insurance revenue nationwide amounts to only $8 billion a
year. National per capita life insurance expenditure is $1.40. By
comparison, per capita life insurance expenditure in India is $3.50. In
Japan, per capital life insurance expenditure is $3,457.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

US INSURERS FAIL TO INVEST IN PEOPLE

IN CORPORATE America, investment in human resources generally rivals or
exceeds capital spending. However, a recent survey has revealed that
while US insurance companies say people are critical to their success,
they rank investment in human resources well below other business
issues.

Completing a survey of 251 leading companies, the New York consultancy
of Towers Perrin found that an $80,000-per-year employee can represent
a million dollar investment over a ten- year period.

Considering the costs involved, Towers Perrin managing principal
Jeffrey Schmidt, urged companies to treat the hiring of employees as a
capital investment, evaluating the costs against the contributions of
their staff.

Schmidt warned that while people costs are a means of investing in a
company's future, few corporations actually measure the fiscal value of
their prospective employees, or consider how those same employees will
help the company reach its strategic goals.

In the insurance industry, he noted that executives fail to invest in
staff according to their perceived importance. One hundred percent of
the 300 senior insurance executives who were surveyed by Towers Perrin
said improving employee performance would improve business. Eighty-six
percent said employees are one of the most important variables in their
company's success.

However, only about one-third of those respondents listed performance
enhancement and people-related investments as key strategies.

"While executives believe that employees are critical to the execution
of their companies' strategies, other investments to enhance corporate
performance are still taking higher priority", said Towers Perrin
principal, Rick Berry.

The Towers Perrin insurance survey questioned senior line and human
resource executives from 28 leading insurance companies, who rated
customer satisfaction and financial performance as the top two
strategic issues, at 86 percent and 75 percent respectively. Meanwhile,
employee investment in people ranked third and fourth in importance, at
39 percent and 36 percent, respectively.

Berry warned that insurers may be overlooking the connection between
employee performance and customer satisfaction and financial success.

"To achieve their goals, insurance companies must have the right people
in the right places, doing the right things, at the right cost," said
Berry.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

PHILIPPINES SET FOR FOREIGN FIRMS

FOLLOWING AN enlargement of the banking sector earlier this year, the
Philippines will open its insurance market to foreign companies from
next year.

Insurance Commissioner Eduardo Malinis has said that the opening of the
industry is part of the Filipino government's economic liberalisation
policy and is an effort taken towards complying with World Trade
Organisation rules.

The government amended its Foreign Investment Act a year ago to allow
ten new life insurance licences and ten new general insurance licences
to foreign firms. The rules for investment in the insurance industry
will be reviewed again in October 1996.

No firms have yet applied for the general insurance licences, although
eight companies have indicated interest in the life insurance licences,
while one other, Aetna Life Insurance, has already been granted a
licence. There are currently about 100 general insurance companies
operating in the Philippines.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

UNITED STATES:  CHUBB TO DEVELOP INTERNET LINK

JOINING THE rush to the Internet, Chubb is working with Sun
Microsystems of California and Sedgwick, the sixth-largest US
brokerage, to develop an on-line system to link insurers with risk
managers and brokers.

According to Thomas Cornwell, a vice-president and manager of Chubb's
global electronics and technology unit, the project is still in the
pilot stage, but the three companies have agreed to work together to
develop a method of swift electronic communication that will allow them
to share claims information and other data.

They will start by sharing claims data via e-mail, according to Sun
Microsystems, which initiated the trilateral partnership based upon its
ongoing relationships with Sedgwick and New Jersey-based Chubb.

Sun, a $5.9 billion computer corporation, envisages an interactive, on-
line marketplace with a full range of insurance and risk management
products and services accessible via the Internet.

The World Wide Web has become the new marketplace of choice for
insurers, and according to Stephen Lowe, principal for Tillinghast-
Towers Perrin, electronic marketing and distribution systems will
eventually alter operation and compensation structures throughout the
industry.

Kemper and Northwestern Mutual are among the large insurers which have
recently established sites on the Web, offering information regarding
ratings, assets, products and services, the companies' organisational
structures, and agent/broker information.

Kemper, along with American RE, UNUM and several other insurers, has
established a centralised Web site, known as Insweb, which serves as an
electronic hub for multi-company services.

Cornwell noted that while Chubb is expecting to put its entire company
on the network within the next year, the insurer is moving cautiously
in terms of on-line security issues, and is currently working to devise
computer security systems that will protect its proprietary data.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

LLOYDS AND TOUCHLINE TO TEAM UP

In what is probably the first and certainly the biggest UK deal between
an independent direct writer and a banking group, Lloyds Bank has
teamed up with Touchline Insurance Company to offer private motor
insurance

THE TEMPERATURE in an already overheated, overcrowded and fiercely
competitive UK private motor insurance market is set to rise still
higher. Lloyds Bank, a major banking group that already has well in
excess of 1.2 million general insurance customers, is to enter this
market at the start of next year.

Lloyds Bank, through its insurance arm Lloyds Bank Insurance Services,
has forged a strategic partnership with Touchline, in order to extend
its product portfolio into the motor insurance market. The new product
will be marketed by Lloyds Bank Insurance Services under the Lloyds
Bank Insurance Direct brand name.

Touchline, owned by the giant French insurance group GAN, will do both
the underwriting and administration of the service, including premium
quotations and claims handling. Touchline is a direct writer in the
household market as well.

This new venture is yet another example of how increasingly banking
groups are forging new links with insurers through establishing
strategic alliances. It also underlines the trend by banking groups to
offer an ever wider range of personal insurance products to their
clients.

In one important sense, this partnership breaks new ground in the
direct writing field in the UK. It looks to be easily the most
significant, if not the only major one, judged in terms of winning
potential customers that has been struck between two independent
parties, both of which are part of unrelated financial services groups.
The partners, however, do not share in each other's profits or losses
generated by their respective operational functions.

More recently, the route chosen by other banking or building societies
is to set up joint ventures with traditional insurers to sell into the
personal lines insurance market. Moreover, as in the cases of Abbey
National, a banking group, which has teamed up with Commercial Union
and the Woolwich, a building society, with Legal & General, both have
an equity stake in the underwriting company run by their respective
insurer.

The framework does allow for these initially relatively small stakes in
the underwriting company to change markedly in the longer term.

Both the Abbey National and the Woolwich will do all the marketing, but
their customers will not be in direct contact with the insurer as in
the Lloyds/Touchline set up. But, apparently, the people employed by
Touchline to handle incoming calls re- routed from Lloyds Bank
divisions will have been partly trained by the bank to ensure they know
about the other services on offer.

According to Sandy Dunn, managing director of Touchline, no discussions
with regard to setting up an operation along similar lines of the Abbey
National and Commercial Union joint venture took place. Nor for that
matter did "we look at it." Obviously, he thinks the way the
partnership with Lloyds has been structured reflects "a sensible
strategy in a highly competitive market."

Clearly Lloyds Bank Insurance Services has decided to stick with its
preferred way of doing insurance business, in that at this stage, at
any rate, it does not want to get involved with the underwriting side.
It uses a panel of insurers for the range of insurance products,
including mortgage related products, travel insurance, but works solely
with Sun Alliance for a particularly successful contents product
offered.

The set-up with Touchline is noticeably different from its arrangement
with other insurers. Both Touchline and Lloyds Bank Insurance Services
will be competing directly with each other when it comes to winning
household business.

Naturally, Touchline is pleased that it was chosen by Lloyds Insurance
Services as the partner for this venture ahead of rivals. At first,
Lloyds Bank ran a pilot scheme with Landmark, the US giant insurance
group AIG's direct writing operation in the UK, for several months to
offer motor insurance to its customers. Landmark was the underwriter,
but there was no full marketing campaign to Lloyds' customers. In
October Landmark was replaced by Touchline. However the test runs will
continue until the end of this year before the fully-fledged operation
goes live. Dunn maintains that Touchline's own customers who were won
through its usual direct writing communication channels will "not pay
more" but "the same" for an identical policy marketed under the Lloyds
Bank Insurance Direct brand.

Understandably, no information as to how the contract between Lloyds
Insurance Services and Touchline has been structured with regard to the
terms, such as commission paid, is being divulged.

Presumably, for Touchline this deal is an attractive way of helping it
secure critical mass, estimated to be in the region of 500,000
policyholders for non-niche players. It will only have been in business
for three years by the end of this year. At present it has only 150,000
policyholders, both motor and household.

Based on the assumption that Touchline has done its homework properly,
after paying commission to Lloyds it will still be able to acquire new
customers profitably over the longer term. One advantage could be that
Lloyds Bank customers may prove, on average, to be more loyal than
those generally acquired through the normal channels by a direct
writer.

Dunn says Touchline was chosen "not on the basis of size but for the
quality of our service." In a statement issued to the press, Keith
Gibbs, marketing director at Lloyds Bank Insurance Services
comments:"Lloyds Bank aims to provide customers with quality products
and excellent customer service at competitive prices. I am delighted
that Lloyds Bank Insurance Services will be entering the motor
insurance market in partnership with Touchline, who share our focus on
quality, customer service and competitiveness."

The banking group has some 6 million customers to whom it can sell
motor insurance. In time, the marketing approach adopted as well as the
level of intensity of the advertising campaigns should become clear. No
doubt, the fact that GAN has the financial muscle and expertise to back
Touchline was viewed favourably by the Lloyds banking group. GAN, which
is undergoing restructuring, is among the world's ten largest insurers
and the third largest in Europe. In part the Lloyds/Touchline
partnership underlines a trend that is gaining momentum. More direct
writers are looking to cement links with affinity groups, such as
professional bodies, especially with competition so strong, while a
proliferation of recent entrants fight hard to achieve critical mass
with leaders determined to increase market share.

In some respects, the Lloyds/Touchline partnership does resemble that
of an affinity group type set up, acknowledges Dunn. The benefits of
picking up a large number of customers through the affinity group type
route is generally seen as attractive by direct writers.

It is certainly not going to be plain sailing for Lloyds Insurance
Services to make serious headway into the motor market. It does have a
potentially huge customer base to cross-sell into as well as an
established Lloyds Bank brand name to exploit. However, if both parties
get their act together, the Lloyds Bank Insurance Direct brand could
yet become a major force in the marketplace.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

A RISKY BUSINESS

The findings of a study completed by the Insurance Services Office does
not make pleasant reading for US property-casualty insurers

THE PROPERTY-CASUALTY insurance industry in the US appears to contain
greater risks and generate less profit than non-insurance industries,
according to a study recently completed by the Insurance Services
Office (ISO). It found that while property- casualty (PC) insurance
companies are less profitable than other firms, they share the same or
greater risks.

The ISO study measured risk as the variability in return on year- end
net worth for the 20 largest insurers and 20 largest firms in 30 non-PC
insurance groups, including life and health.

According to ISO, the 1979 to 1993 median rate of return for the 20
largest PC insurers was 9.6 percent, 1.6 percent less than the average
of the corresponding medians for the 20 largest firms in each of the
non-insurance groups.

Risk was determined to be higher among insurers than most non-
insurance groups by about three to one, based on the following three
factors: variability in rate of return; variability adjusted for
industry cycles; and an ISO composite index that measures the average
of the first two.

The ISO study also found that stockholder-owned insurers earn higher
returns but face greater risks than mutuals, that commercial lines have
been more profitable but face more risk than personal lines, and that
agency companies are generally more profitable and riskier than direct
writers.

PC companies also have a higher failure rate than other industries,
according to ISO research, which found that while the annual failure
rate for the economy as a whole averaged 0.7 percent between 1969 to
1994, the property-casualty insurer's failure rate for the same period
was 0.9. Failure rates for PC are also more variable than the general
economy, owing to catastrophe losses.

Despite the high risk factor, the ISO pointed out that the US PC
industry has enjoyed its lowest combined ratio since 1988.

According to figures just released by ISO and the National Association
of Independent Insurers (NAII), the industry's 1995 nine-month combined
ratio was 105.4, with an after-tax income of $14.7 billion for the same
period. That sum more than triples the $4.8 billion netted during the
first nine months of the previous year. While premium rates have not
risen, some of the improvement can be attributed to a reduction in CAT
losses.

Analyst Jay Cohen of Merrill Lynch noted that reduced losses,
particularly in workers' compensation claims, have also contributed to
the overall improved performance.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

DARK DAYS LOOM ON UK HORIZON

Bacon & Woodrow's analysis of the motor insurance business results of
the leading UK players is revealing. It provides both a good insight
into what has been happening in the  motor insurance market, as well as
drawing conclusions about where it is heading

THE UK motor insurance market has been enjoying the best of times as
the findings and principle figures presented by Bacon & Woodrow show.
But the market is undergoing dramatic change with dark days seemingly
looming.

Indeed, this independent firm of consulting actuaries, the largest in
Europe, expects that insurers' motor profits will plunge in 1996, with
many players racking up losses.

In the private motor insurance sector, the direct writers continue to
increase competition. Many of the traditional insurers that do both
commercial and private motor insurance have set up or are in the throes
of setting up direct writing operations to stay competitive. Moreover,
a continual trickle of new entrants, often backed by rich foreign
parents, add competitive pressure.

Bacon & Woodrow has produced a range of graphs, tables and some bullet
points under key headings in a report (containing no written
commentary) that provides a clear picture of the major aspects of the
motor insurers' business results.

It is their fifth annual in-depth analysis of the motor market that
highlights major trends, and arrives at important conclusions about the
possible future direction of the market. Naturally, there is a special
focus on 1994 figures.

Their study of the 1994 DTI returns for 43 leading companies and 28
Lloyd's Insurance Market Syndicates, showed that profitability was
marginally higher on the previous year's record profits. Companies that
did well in 1994 by improving both their profitability and market share
include Direct Line, London & Edinburgh, Preferred, Royal, CIS, GAN
Minster and Churchill.

What is surprising is that in 1994 the companies released a significant
chunk of their reserves, that boosted their profits to yet another
fresh peak. The benefits of the sharp reduction in reserves, the first
since 1987 is shown by the graph that charts the reserving effect,
measured as a percentage, on the bottom line (profit figure).

Indeed, the natural expectation is to find confirmation that companies
(no matter what type of industry or market they operate in) generally
use their reserves for claims to smooth their profit flow, and not to
accentuate the troughs and peaks. Actually, the adjustments made by the
motor insurers to reserves over the past decade largely are counter
cyclical to their profit or loss performance in many of those years.

The Bacon & Woodrow study concluded that the companies made 16 pence of
insurance profit (underwriting profit plus investment income) for every
#1 of insurance premium in 1994.

But James Rakow, an associate working in the general insurance area at
Bacon & Woodrow, points out that the equivalent of about 3 pence of
insurance profit for every #1 of earned premium came from reducing
reserves in 1994. In other words, more than a fifth of the market's
total profits were generated by writing back reserves established in
1993 and prior years.

Rakow notes that when the insurance cycle was at a bottom in 1990 and
1991, reserves were strengthened noticeably. This had the effect of
depressing really poor results even further. Most observers think there
was a general recognition by the companies at the end of 1991 that they
had not made nearly enough provisions, by way of example for bodily
injury. The sceptics argue that once the results were so awful, it did
not make much difference that they were made worse by pushing through
provisions to cushion future performance.

Rakow takes the view that what happened in 1994 "is a sound natural
release from prior years. Their reserves are really quite strong"
compared with the past, given a background of improving claims
experience.

Bacon & Woodrow has developed its own benchmark for determining the
adequacy of existing reserves. "If our benchmark is correct, there will
be future releases in future years. The motor insurance industry is
sitting comfortably above the benchmark. Against our benchmark further
reserves to the tune of seven pence (for every #1 earned insurance
premium) could be released over the next few years," maintains Rakow.

Meanwhile, the top ten players have consistently dominated in terms of
the market share they have had over the past decade. That is despite
the jockeying for leading places with Direct Line emerging from nowhere
over this period to secure pole position in the private motor market.

But in terms of net written motor insurance premiums, a few traditional
insurers that also have large books of commercial motor business wrote
more business in 1994 than did Direct Line. The leader was Eagle Star
followed by Norwich Union, although Direct Line is fast closing the
gap.

Another major underwriter of motor insurance business is a range of
syndicates at the Lloyd's insurance market, which together have about a
15 percent market share. No split between the syndicates' commercial
and private motor business is available, although some estimates
suggest that more than half is for personal motor. This implies that
the Lloyd's syndicates collective share of personal motor market is
probably a couple of percentage points more than that of Direct Line's
12 percent share.

Most, if not all, of the top ten have critical mass (for the standard
insurer it is about 0.5 million). They usually enjoy decent economies
of scale benefits that give the biggest insurers a big competitive
advantage. In a market where competition is expected to remain intense,
size will be important.

Not surprisingly, those players that can maximise cost savings, have a
strong brand and good distribution, are at a distinct competitive
advantage. One area where insurers, with critical mass, could reap
major benefits but do not at present is through using own large-scale
repair garages.

Bacon & Woodrow estimate that if insurers use their own repair garages,
annual cost savings benefits equivalent to about 11.5 percent of
premiums could be enjoyed. But it will probably take about five years
for an insurer to establish a full network of own garages.

Meanwhile, Direct Line and Churchill have taken the lead by opening own
repair centres and have plans to open several more over the next few
years. The rest of the pack have so far not announced any moves on this
front.

The idea of using own garages is borrowed from car hire firms that were
the first to go down this cost savings route. In the past, insurers
have owned garages that were not, however, exclusively for their own
repairs. This approach did not work.

Rakow admits that more research needs to be done as"the premium savings
do not necessarily take fully into account the payback on capital
investment." Nonetheless, the savings would still be significantly
higher than other approaches.

Benefit can also be gained from using a focused network approach by
using a small number of recommended repairers, equivalent to premium
savings of about 4 percent, he points out.

The class of the insurer, be it best of breed, average or poor, as well
as whether it uses the direct or broker route are key factors shaping
the cost profile of the insurer and determining success. This is put
into sharp perspective by an analysis showing the cost of buying one
policy for differently categorised insurers as well as future costs,
depending upon retention rates.

It shows on all counts that the direct route for the best of breed
enjoys a strong comparative advantage over the others with the buying
cost #45 per policy, #12 in a future year when retention is 85 percent
and #21 when 55 percent. Whereas for the best of breed via the broker
route the buying cost is #54, #40 when retention is 85 percent and #44
when 55 percent.

Interestingly, an average insurer using the broker route is generally
much better-placed than an average direct writer. Similarly, this is
the case for poor insurers using brokers compared to poor direct
writers. In fact, the cost of buying one policy for a poor direct
writer is a high #300, nearly as much as the average premium of a
comprehensive private motor policy.

Rakow estimates that on average the better-rated companies retain their
customers for between four to six years with the middle- ranked
companies keeping them on average for between two to four years.

What all of this analysis suggests is that certain insurers, especially
those some way towards achieving critical mass and achieving decent
brand awareness, are faced with making a tricky decision as what is the
best strategy to adopt. It may even be to leave the field.

As Rakow says, each company has to look at its own strategy, its
position in the marketplace, the cost of acquiring policies and expense
dynamics. Certainly, in some cases spending more money on advertising
may prove less cost effective than providing focused incentives to
retain existing customers. Rakow makes the point that niche players can
have critical mass which only amounts to a fraction of the number of
policies others need to have critical mass.

Consolidation in the industry has not as yet happened as Bacon &
Woodrow predicted. The firm still expects it to take place. Rakow notes
that one of the major reasons why this has not occurred so far, is that
there is no squeeze on with only two out of the 43 insurers monitored
making a loss in 1994.

Another reason is that different insurers have different strategies.
Some, particularly a number of new entrants, are in the market for the
long-term, despite making heavy losses in the short-term.

Rich parents, especially those foreign giants, can afford to bide their
time while absorbing the pain in the meantime. But if the bleeding gets
worse and no end is in sight, some will surely head for the exits.

As the accompanying graph for the companies' average adjusted operating
ratio (where 100 percent is a breakeven insurance result, taking
underwriting profits and investment income into account) shows,
excellent profits were made in 1993 and 1994 and bad losses in 1990 and
1991. This graph suggests that in the 1990s the swings in the cycle
have become considerably sharper.

With average premium rates down noticeably since 1994, while underlying
costs are still going up, market profitability on the underwriting side
has deteriorated considerably.

Rakow notes that underwriting profits were pretty small in 1994 with
the bulk of insurers' profits coming from their investment income.
Moreover, they can no longer rely on the claims frequency continuing to
improve, he adds.

Already the likes of Peter Wood, chief executive of Direct Line, are
sounding off about how nearly all of their competitors will be making
underwriting losses.

Against this gloomy background, there is the prospect that companies'
investment income will fall, with interest rates still heading lower. A
big dipper plunge in the insurers' profitability, with a shake-out to
come, looks to be underway.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

INSURERS RUN FOR EVEN MORE COVER

After re-evaluating their asbestos and environmental exposures, US
insurers are finding that they have to strengthen their reserves
significantly. Tess Critzer reports

TO BOLSTER its resilience to asbestos and environmental claims,
Nationwide has added $1.1 billion to its reserves. The sixth- largest
US property-casualty (PC) insurer, Ohio-based Nationwide, has become
the latest leading insurer to take stock of its asbestos and
environmental (A&E) exposures.

Earlier this year, Aetna Life and Casualty, the 12th-largest PC insurer
in the US, shook up the industry by announcing an environmental
liability of $1 billion. The insurer nearly tripled its loss reserves
for pollution claims by making a pre-tax addition of $750 million,
bringing its total environmental reserves to $1.2 billion.

Firemen's Fund and Cigna also boosted their reserves this year, by $1.4
billion and $1.2 billion respectively. According to the Insurance
Information Institute (III), insurers have begun to take on $35 billion
to $50 billion in liability.

Nationwide's $1.1 billion addition brings its total reserves to $1.5
billion, and generates a "perception of strength", according to Eric
Simpson, a spokesperson at ratings agency AM Best.

Nationwide is a mutual, like most of the other companies which have
boosted reserves this year. Its reserve enhancement is expected to
increase 1995 policyholder surplus to more than $5 billion, up $0.2
billion from last year's figure. Premium-to- surplus ratio is expected
to remain strong, increasing by 0.1 to about 1.5, according to
Nationwide.

The company boosted its reserves not only to cover possible exposures,
but to assert its position of market strength, and AM Best senior vice
president, Jack Snyder, said the insurer has the financial strength to
carry off its reserve action. However, he noted that smaller insurers
might not survive their future reserve needs.

AM Best has estimated that pollution costs in the US will top $132
billion, or 72 percent of the industry's current capital and surplus.
According to Snyder, the worst-case scenarios could see a number of
insurers experiencing surplus depletion over the next two decades, with
some being forced into insolvency or mergers with stronger companies.

Snyder noted that the US Environmental Protection Agency has identified
more than 36,000 hazardous waste sites in the country, most of which
will require remediation.

"It is hard to overstate the potential extent of the
environmental/asbestos liability problem for the insurance industry",
said Snyder, adding, "environmental liability . . . represents the
single largest threat to the property/casualty insurance industry's
financial health for the next several decades. Its financial impact
could exceed the costs of continuing natural disasters".

Indeed, the sum could equal the cost of a major catastrophe every year
for the next 30 years, according to Allan Levin, managing director of
Standard & Poor's ratings service.

Ratings companies have led the way in urging accountability of
insurance liabilities in the US pollution crisis. S&P's has conducted
studies and ratings adjustments for companies based on their pollution
exposures, noting that 39 US insurers are now carrying the greatest
percentage of those exposures.

AM Best expects environmental and asbestos exposures to total about
$260 billion, spread over 15 years for asbestos claims, and 25 years
for environmental claims. According to Snyder, these projections assume
that reserve additions will add an average of 1.8 points a year to the
industry's combined ratio.

Amy Bouska, a principal and consulting actuary for Tillinghast/Towers
Perrin, noted that insurers can expect four types of costs relating to
environmental/asbestos clean-up. Those include the actual clean-up
costs, legal costs, including costs for coverage litigation against the
potentially responsible parties (PRPs, in this case referring to
insured corporations which have generated pollution), amounts paid to
third parties claiming bodily injury, property damage or other loss,
and natural resource damage.

The Superfund solution

The 1980 Superfund Act, which heavily taxed polluters such as chemical,
mining and forest product companies, was seen as the solution to
America's pollution problem. Superfund, or CERCLA, was established in
response to the 1978 Love Canal crisis in upstate New York, where
residential ground water was contaminated by blow-off from the Hooker
Chemical Company.

CERCLA was reauthorised with more punitive changes in 1986 as the
Superfund Amendment and Reauthorization Act, SARA, and again in 1990 by
President Bush with no significant changes.

The 1990 authorisation for Superfund expired last year, but the
programme had enough surplus capital to operate until the end of 1995.
However, Congress has vowed it will not reauthorise the act unless
significant changes and reforms are made, and the Clinton
administration has called for significant cuts to the programme, which
gobbled up $1.3 billion in EPA (Environmental Protection Agency)
appropriations during 1995.

Current reform initiatives call for a reduction in 1996 spending to
$1.16 billion, based on projected costs. According to an EPA
spokesperson, up to 60 of the nearly 1,300 Superfund sites might not be
funded if the reduced budget is passed.

The December 16 shutdown of the Federal Government, due to a budget
impasse between Clinton and the Republican Congress, has further
delayed the progress of reform and reauthorisation for Superfund,
although the programme does have trust funding based on industry taxes
(85 percent of financing for the fund is gained from taxes on chemical
feed stocks).

According to Bouska, the ultimate Superfund reform bill is likely to
include increased community participation, increased certainty in
regard to share allocation, as well as implementation of a national
standard for site remediation and new guidelines for future land and
water use.

Levin is sceptical that the industry will receive significant
assistance from the government in meeting its future environmental and
asbestos claims losses."We believe right now that Congress will not
relieve insurers, though they could surprise us", he said.

Superfund ($million)

Fiscal Year   Budget Authority

1981              $75
1982             $190
1983             $210
1984             $460
1985             $606
1986             $261
1987           $1,411
1988           $1,128
1989           $1,410
1990           $1,563
1991           $1,629
1992           $1,615
1993           $1,589
1994           $1,497
1995           $1,337
Total         $14,975

Based on industry return

Asbestos and       Actual at YE 93     Normalised at YE 93
Pollution                   Net A/E    Net A/E  Adjusted  Net A/E
($'000,000)        Surplus  O/S        O/S      surplus   O/S

Aetna/AmRe(1)       7,840   645        1,567     7,218    22%
Travelers           9,326   656          826     9,211     9%
AIG                15,224   386          693    15,017     5%
CIGNA               6,575   743        1,134     6,311    18%
Hoome                 698   189          392       561    70%
Gen Re              4,761   888          945     4,723    20%

(1) Aetna and American Re results combined, based on the assumption
that historical market share is combined

Source:  Standard & Poor's

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

MID-OCEAN TAKES OVER BROCKBANK

MID-OCEAN, a large Bermudan reinsurer, has acquired 51 percent of the
equity of an enlarged Brockbank Group, one of the most successful
Lloyd's market managing agencies that also owns Admiral, the UK direct
motor insurance writer.

Mid-Ocean has invested #50 million in the enlarged group to get control
and provide capital support to the syndicates managed by Brockbank. Its
syndicate 253 provides much of its capital for underwriting UK private
motor insurance, particularly business from Admiral.

Brockbank controls 80 percent of the equity of rapidly- growing
Admiral, which expects to write more than 130,000 new motor insurance
policies in 1995. Apparently, some of the new capital from Mid-Ocean
will be used to fund the expansion of Admiral's business and Mid-Ocean
has no intention of selling Admiral.

The Mid-Ocean deal highlights that the changes made by Lloyd's to its
regulatory system are encouraging insurance companies to acquire
control of a managing agent or set up operations in the market. Mid-
Ocean, however, can unscramble the Brockbank deal if Lloyd's rescue
plans fail.

In other recent deals, that are changing the face of Lloyd's, Terra
Nova, a UK-base reinsurer, has acquired the continuing business of the
Octavian managing agency; Cox Insurance Holdings, a corporate investor,
has bought the 75 percent of the Cox managing agency it did not own; a
Bermuda-domiciled insurance company, Western General has bought the
holding company of Catlin, a managing agency.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

A GAME OF CRITICAL MASS

Churchill Insurance, one of the fastest growing UK direct motor and
household insurers, launched in June 1989 is now the second largest
direct writer in the market. III spoke to David Hiddleston, executive
director in charge of new business and sales, about Churchill's
strategy

CHURCHILL INSURANCE is determined to remain a leading player in the
intensely competitive and increasingly overcrowded direct writing
field.

The gap between it and the largest, Direct Line, is wide when it comes
both to number of policyholders and profitability. But there is a pack,
including some newcomers such as Norwich Union Direct with ready-made
customer bases, that will be chasing hard after Churchill's tail.

Armed with #65 million of capital and employing about 1,000 people, it
has quickly become the second largest direct writer in the private
motor sector, a position it intends to hold. It has the backing of a
rich parent, Winterthur, a giant Swiss-based insurance company. Last
year Churchill made profits of about #1.5 million with gross premiums
written of about #130 million on private motor and about #16 million on
household. Since start-up it has sold more than 1.5 million policies.

This insurer remains committed to a strong sales and profit growth
strategy that will keep it moving forward at a healthy pace. A two-
pronged sales growth approach is being pursued at present. The number
of its customers is moving up through both organic and acquisition
growth. The strategy is also focused on extending the range of allied
services and products provided which, in turn, helps increase profits
as well as strengthen customer loyalty.

Churchill's strategic thrust is aimed at keeping the growth momentum
going. This has recently been underlined by what appears to be well-
timed good moves on two different fronts.

Firstly, the deal to buy Refuge Insurance's household insurance
portfolio, beating Direct Line, the biggest direct writer, and others,
to the finishing line. For about #5 million Churchill expects to pick
up about 160,000 household policyholders, almost trebling the household
customer base in one fell swoop.

Secondly, the entry, the first by a direct writer, into the credit card
market. Churchill expects its card to deepen its relationship with its
policyholders and bring marketing benefits.

"Our view," says Hiddleston, " is that direct writing is a game of
critical mass. Critical mass is probably in the order of 0.5 million
policyholders." Churchill with 600,000 motor policyholders and nearly
250,000 household policyholders, post the Refuge transaction, with the
numbers still rising, has easily passed the low water critical mass
mark.

He points out that merely taking the word "direct" and adding it to the
name of a business or describing the business as a direct writing
operation is insufficient. "Direct writing, in our view, is as much a
philosophy and culture as it is just owning an operation. You need to
create a rapport with the customer. Customer service, including the
claims side, is fundamental." He notes that if the 0.5 million customer
base critical mass criterion is applied then it becomes evident that
few players have achieved this. "Everyone else is struggling."

He adds that apart from Direct Line, with 2.8 million, and Churchill,
there is only Royal Insurance's two direct writers, which together have
about 0.5 million policyholders. "The rest fall away." Royal is in the
throes of deciding whether or not to merge the two operations, namely
The Insurance Service and Royal Direct, and trade under one brand name.

There is also Sun Alliance, with a ready-made direct customer base of
about 400,000 customers in motor and about 500,000 in household.
Earlier this year Sun Alliance formed its own direct writing business
under the name Sun Alliance Connections. This is non-intermediary
business but, for Hiddleston, is does not count as most of its business
has not been won by a stand-alone direct writing operation.

In terms of Churchill's growth plans, "getting 1 million customers is
easily achievable before the turn of the century. I suspect if you add
up everyone's growth plans you probably get to about three times the
size that the direct writing market will be by 2000."

Hiddleston stresses that low premiums and better service than that
provided by competitors are of major importance to the company.
Churchill describes itself as offering "competitively- priced premiums,
often at considerably lower cost than its competitors, with the very
highest levels of customer service." But he admits that he does not
"believe we can catch up Direct Line when it comes to market share
size. We need to be better than them."

In what he sees is "a very overcrowded private motor insurance market a
number of people are not going to make it. You effectively have at
present 1992 premium levels with 1996 expenses."

He hopes as well as believes that "rates will move higher next year. As
rates rise, it should bring relief." He points out that market
conditions are so tough that it is difficult to predict what will
happen to rates, and that if they do go up whether someone will break
ranks by holding them. "There is always someone who holds back."

But whether the rate increases will be enough for hard-pressed players,
particularly the marginal ones that do not have parents with deep
pockets, is most questionable.

Hiddleston notes, that the players, have in recent times " been through
a honeymoon period with regard to their claims ratios. If we have a bad
winter it would be horrific for some new groups, as they would suffer
from sharply higher claims costs." As he says, "when the cycle changes,
then the problems surface. More people will then exit from the market
because they either get rated out, sell their portfolios or withdraw."

Moreover, when premiums begin to go up, "more people start to move
around and retention rates suffer if you are not slick." Perversely,
under this type scenario, with premium rates rising, life would
seemingly get tougher not easier for the weak.

Given the competitive state of the market, getting new customers
through advertising is proving much more expensive these days. That is
even after taking into account the fact that advertising rates are much
higher than a few years ago. With so many more competitors all trying
desperately to achieve critical mass or increase sales, " response
ratios are not as good as they were two or three years ago. People now
are ringing up many more companies. The trick is to make those people
ring us."

In this game, "retention is a key, just as important as acquisition
(winning a new customer through the traditional sources)." More so
given that the cost of getting a new customer has gone up noticeably in
recent years. At least one company is at present paying well over the
odds to buy new customers, he points out.

"Keeping a customer is critical. Our retention rates are good with
conversions holding up. In fact, our retention rate went up in October.
We are working hard at retaining our customers, and are good at keeping
customers."

Creating a strong brand name awareness helps enormously in attracting
new customers. The more established and bigger players with decent
reputations are at a distinct advantage to new entrants, as they
benefit tremendously from personal recommendations. This lowers
significantly their costs of getting a new policyholder, especially
compared to the embryonic players.

Churchill claims that " approximately 40 percent of new business now
comes from personal recommendations and its retention rate is well
above the industry average." Hiddleston maintains that Churchill is
still increasing its share of the motor market.

Churchill is on the acquisition trail and, at the right price, is keen
to snap up the right businesses. "We would be more than happy." Once
critical mass has been reached, with fixed costs acceptable and largely
static, then additional sales bought at appropriate prices can prove to
be highly profitable.

In time more companies are expected to come onto the market for sale,
especially when the expected consolidation in the personal line sector
gathers more momentum. Hiddleston says Churchill would be keen to do a
similar deal to the one struck with Refuge. He remains tight-lipped
about what prospective deals may be in the pipeline but does admit "we
are talking to all sorts of people."

In the meantime, with the going really hard in the market place,
Churchill continues to work hard at launching and developing products
that it can cross-sell to customers or be used to attract new
customers. But Hiddleston says it does not always pay off financially.
"We had a flurry into mortgages from which we learnt a lot."

But he stresses " we have a few other things we are going to test. We
have looked at a number of products and found some that look attractive
to us."

Churchill is focusing on developing further relationships and share
customer bases with other groups that are not competitors. "We are
working with car distributors." Churchill has had some good success in
recent months from the move to get new business from affinity groups.

It has built its own large-scale repair garage in Rotherham, and plans
to open several more in the next few years. These are expected to
produce significant economic benefits for Churchill. Hiddleston notes
that there are not many direct writers that have sufficient critical
mass to set up their own repair garages.

In an innovative drive to generate new business, Churchill has opened
multi-media kiosks with Camden Motors,the UK's 7th largest car retailer
and a subsidiary of Barclays Bank. These kiosks provide customers with
a wide range of information, including the cost of insurance before
deciding on their car and enabling them to obtain the best deal when
buying a car. This saves customers both time and money.

What has also helped is the greater use of more sophisticated
assessment of the insurance risk profile of customers through the use
of linear modelling, he notes.

There are figures bandied about in the marketplace that suggest that
when it comes to financial performance Churchill is performing poorly.
Churchill provides the public with little data about its financial
performance.

Indeed, included in Direct Line's returns to the DTI is an analysis
that clearly shows that of the major insurers in 1994 Churchill had the
worst private car operating ratio and worst relative operating ratio.

It did show, however, that Churchill has the fourth lowest expense
ratio. Hiddleston contends that "unless you look at the whole picture
you can not make direct comparisons. We have two companies: one is a
management company and the other an underwriting company." For people
not privy to the right information, he suggests that it is virtually
impossible for them to form a proper and complete picture as to how
Churchill is really performing.

Meanwhile, Winterthur (Churchill's parent) is looking to set up a
direct writing operation in Switzerland and is, no doubt, drawing on
Churchill's expertise. Churchill does help manage Winterthur's Danish
direct writing operation, Tell, which originally was not the case.

According to Hiddleston, Tell is now " a clone of Churchill."
Meanwhile, Tell, which has been in the private motor insurance business
for about 18 months, started selling household insurance in August.

But Hiddleston points out that Churchill, will probably only be used in
an advisory capacity should Winterthur set up more direct operations in
Europe - something that looks to be very much on the cards.

The main reason why "we have adopted an advisory role" is the danger
that "we could take our eye off the ball if we became too involved with
other operations." But a replicant type Churchill can lower the Swiss
giant's entry costs into new markets. As Hiddleston says "the formula
is here" as well as the systems, although he is not "sure the formula
does translate into every country."

He maintains that the parent "has a very hands-off management style
provided their planning requirements are complied with. We always have
performed to their requirements."

Interestingly enough, as to whether a move into the commercial
insurance sector is on the cards, Hiddleston maintains "we are not even
looking at it. We are sticking to our knitting. We know we are good at
personal products." He adds, with a twinkle in his eye,"if we find
something that we can sell to make a bob or two we will sell it."

Sales - "the nerve centre"

THE SALES team is seen as "nerve centre and life blood of our
organisation," according to sales manager Carrie Moore.

There are at present about 140 people employed in the sales division,
made up of 14 teams each of ten people, including one team leader. The
majority are full-time employees.

Everyone works in a single large open plan office that occupies almost
an entire floor of a building located in Bromley in Kent, which is
relatively easy commuting distance from central London.

At present, there are only 13 teams operating, including two working
night shifts, as November and December are traditionally the quietest
months of the year. Busiest months are August, with new registrations
at a peak, and March, when there was the collapse of an insurance
company some years back.

Incoming calls from potential customers are automatically diverted by
the sophisticated switchboard system to the appropriate teams.

At present there are just three teams that quote only on household,
three teams which are multi-skilled (both household and motor),
including those that handle affinity group calls, and the rest only
motor.

Moore says the objective is"to have everyone trained to handle both
household and motor insurance queries by the end of March." Multi-
skilled sales persons can see on their individual telephone screens
whether the enquiry is for household or motor insurance or from an
affinity group member.

Staff are paid a fairly good basic salary on top with the possibility
of receiving commissions once certain sales ceilings are surpassed.
Thanks to their commissions, top sales people earn considerably more
than senior management.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

A PICTURE OF HEALTH

The Singapore insurance industry is booming, with insurers profits and
premium income growing impressively. The outlook for further strong
growth looks promising.  Foo Boon Ping reviews the industry and its
prospects

THE LATEST Insurance Commissioner's annual report in Singapore showed
that insurers in Singapore had a splendid year in 1994 - particularly
those operating in the general insurance sector. And all the evidence
so far suggests that 1995 will be another good year for them. (The
Commissioner's annual report is normally published some eight months
after the current year).

The Singapore insurance industry has attracted numerous foreign
insurers, with about three-quarters of all direct insurers foreign-
owned, including those that operate as branches or subsidiaries of
insurers. Firms from more than 12 countries have been attracted to this
market, and most of the professional reinsurers registered in Singapore
are also foreign-owned.

Of the 141 direct insurers, reinsurers and captive insurers operating
in Singapore, 119 are involved solely in the general insurance
business. Another 12 operate as composite insurers.

Insurance representative offices in Singapore may not become involved
in the business of insurance. The main activities conducted by the
representative offices are servicing of existing clients,
communications and liaison work on behalf of their head offices, and
market research. There are currently 16 insurers with representative
offices in Singapore.

During the year, in line with efforts to develop Singapore as a premier
regional reinsurance centre, the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS)
rationalised its policy on the establishment of representative offices
by overseas insurance and reinsurance companies.

In particular, the MAS believes that reinsurance representative offices
would be able to play a more significant role in the development of
offshore reinsurance business in Singapore if they upgrade their
operations to a branch or subsidiary level.

Hence, the five insurance and reinsurance representative offices in
Singapore were encouraged to upgrade their operations. These companies,
if they wish to continue their presence in Singapore, are required to
upgrade by January 1 1997, by submitting a formal application to the
authority for approval.

The MAS has also required that in future all general direct insurers
and reinsurers submit an annual statement attesting to the adequacy of
loss reserves.

In filing the statement, the principal officer is required to examine
all aspects of the company's or branch's loss reserving systems and to
satisfy himself that, to the best of his knowledge and belief, the loss
reserves are adequate.

Since 1990, the General Insurance Association of Singapore (GIA) has
implemented a scheme requiring all agents contracted by its members to
be registered with the Agents' Registration Board of the Association.
By January 1995, there were 890 corporate agencies and 5,263 individual
agents registered with the GIA.

The total number of persons involved in general insurance selling was
estimated at 7,100. However, only 12 percent were considered full-time
general insurance agents. Most of the individual agents registered with
the GIA are also life insurance agents.

A primary objective of the GIA's registration scheme for agents is to
ensure that those engaged in selling general insurance have insurance
qualification and competence. All prospective agents must therefore
attain the Certificate in General Insurance (CGI) or equivalent
qualifications before they can be appointed by general insurers.

By January 1995, about 60 percent of general insurance agents had
attained minimum insurance qualifications, up from 55 percent on the
previous year. The others were deemed to be qualified because of their
experience.

The Singapore Insurance Brokers' Association (SIBA), working with the
GIA to upgrade professionalism in the general insurance industry,
requires its members to meet certain minimum standards on insurance
qualification.

By January 1 1995, there were 66 general insurance brokers employing
484 broking staff. Of this number, about 92 percent had insurance
qualifications equivalent to or higher than the CGI.

In addition, general insurance brokers must comply with certain minimum
financial and solvency standards stipulated by the SIBA. On July 1
1994, all insurance broking companies were required to have a minimum
paid-up capital of $200,000.

The minimum paid up capital will be increased progressively over the
next two years to $300,000. All insurance companies must also maintain
a minimum surplus of assets over liabilities equal to 50 percent of the
stipulated minimum paid-up capital.

The Singapore general insurance business sector has continued to
perform well as it continues to ride on the back of the fast- expanding
Singapore economy, and 1994 was a good year. Overall turnover of the
industry measured in terms of gross premiums of domestic and offshore
general business topped S$2.6 billion ($1.8 billion), representing an
increase of 10.1 percent over 1993.

This was largely due to the good performance of the domestic sector, as
opposed to the offshore sector where plenty of business is conducted in
other countries in the region. As a result, the share of domestic
general business to total general business had increased to 53.5
percent.

In line with the robust performance of the Singapore economy, domestic
business expanded strongly by 13.6 percent in 1994. Consequently,
general insurance expenditure per capita rose by a healthy 11.2
percent.

Like the economy, the growth of the domestic insurance business sector
was broad-based. All classes of business recorded premium increases,
ranging from 6.5 percent to 20.6 percent. Motor and miscellaneous
accident business, which together accounted for 62 percent of total
domestic insurance business, were the main engines driving growth.

Motor business, the largest class written by general insurers,
contributed significantly to the overall growth in domestic business.
Gross premiums grew by 15.7 percent to $482 million.

Insurers attributed the strong performance to premium rate increases
for third-party insurance and covers for certain types of vehicle as
well as a general increase in car values. But premium rates for private
motor insurance remain highly competitive.

Miscellaneous business continued to enjoy good growth in 1994. This was
largely because of the buoyant construction industry, which in turn led
to an increase in the demand for construction- related insurance. Some
insurers also reported an increase in the amount of professional
indemnity insurance they write.

A directive from the MAS to limit the amount of stand-alone accident
and health insurance policies that can be written by life insurers led
to a significant transfer of business from life insurers to general
insurers.

Composite insurers had to transfer the accident and health business
from life insurance funds to general insurance funds. The 1994
estimates revealed that about half of the working population had
insurance coverage provided by their employers, a big improvement from
less than a third in 1989.

As miscellaneous business had, over the past few years, grown faster
than the other classes, its share of total domestic gross premiums had
increased significantly to 27.5 percent in 1994. It remained the second-
largest class after motor insurance, which accounted for over one-third
of total domestic business.

On the other hand, fire business had decreased in importance, with its
share down from 16.6 percent in 1990 to 13.5 percent in 1994. For the
other classes, the shifts in their share of the total market were
insignificant.

In terms of net premiums, similar shifts in the composition of domestic
business were evident in recent years. Motor and miscellaneous business
are easily the two largest classes, together accounting for 68.1
percent of the industry's total net premiums.

In 1994 the general insurance business sector staged a dramatic
recovery. The players collectively turned in an underwriting profit of
$102 million compared with a loss of $34.2 million in 1993.

This was the first time that underwriting profits from domestic general
business had exceeded the $100 million mark. Also, professional
reinsurers writing domestic business reported an underwriting profit
after notching up losses for many years.

The impressive turnaround was largely due to the significant
improvement in overall claims experience and to a lesser extent, some
improvement in commissions and management expense ratios.

Some insurers took the view that the standardisation of the commission
rate for workmen's compensation business to 10 percent contributed to
the improvement in the overall commissions ratio to 14.3 percent. But
others said they had received higher profit commissions from their
treaty reinsurers during the year.

Apart from the significant improvement in underwriting results, net
investment income from domestic business also increased by 22.2 percent
to $93.7 million. Besides focusing on underwriting profitably, insurers
had also realised the need to maximise returns on their assets without
sacrificing prudence and safety. Consequently, the industry reported a
substantially increased operating profit of $195.7 million in 1994.

In 1994, offshore business continued to grow, with premiums up 6.4
percent. Unlike previous years, this growth was largely attributed to
the growth generated by both the direct insurers and captive insurers.
Professional reinsurers, on the other hand, registered only marginal
growth in 1994.

The double-digit growth in offshore business achieved by professional
reinsurers during the past four years, was not sustained in 1994.
Offshore business written by professional reinsurers expanded by a mere
0.4 percent in 1994.

As a group, reinsurers remained the major writers of offshore business,
accounting for $747.7 million or 61.7 percent of offshore business
written.

Growth arising from business brought in by newly-admitted reinsurers
and rate increases in certain markets was dampened by the adoption of a
more selective underwriting policy by a number of professional
reinsurers. It was also blunted by a reduction in the premiums reported
by a few reinsurers in run-off.

In contrast, offshore business written by direct insurers advanced
impressively last year by 23 percent. The buoyant economic growth
generally enjoyed by the countries in the region, and the emergence of
new markets such as China, Myanmar and Vietnam have created much
increased opportunities for direct insurers to expand their offshore
business.

Offshore business written by captive insurers grew at a faster pace of
15.4 percent in 1994. Growth was supported by the contribution from
newly-admitted captive insurers and increases in coverage and premium
rates.

According to sources at the Insurance Commissioner's Department, the
outlook for the general insurance industry for 1995 is generally good.
General insurers are optimistic that the expansion of the domestic
insurance business sector will keep pace with the expected good growth
of the economy.

Indeed, the economy grew by a surprisingly robust 9.1 percent in the
third-quarter of 1995. Competition in the market place is expected to
remain keen, but insurers caution that this might have a dampening
effect on their premium growth.

Likewise, growth prospects for offshore general business are good.
General insurers and reinsurers continue to be upbeat about their
growth prospects, especially given expectations of much stronger
economic growth from a number of countries in the region.

Top ten general insurers in Singapore in terms of profits for 1994

Direct insurers                             Operating profit
                                            (S$'000)

 1  Insurance Corporation of Singapore      18,267
 2  *Mitsui Marine & Fire                    8,689
 3  United Overseas                          8,191
 4  # NTUC Income                            8,025
 5  # *American International Assurance      7,916
 6  # Keppel Insurance                       6,808
 7  Asia Insurance Company                   6,491
 8  *Guardian Royal Exchange Assurance       6,356
 9  Taisho Marine & Fire Insurance (Asia)    6,340
10  *Sumitomo Marine & Fire                  6,311

# Composite Insurers
* Foreign Insurers

Source:  Insurance Commission

Top ten general insurers in Singapore in terms of assets at
December 1994

Direct Insurers                             Total Admitted
                                            assets/liabilities
                                            (S$'000)

 1  # NTUC Income                           208,961
 2  #Insurance Corp. of Singapore           139,350
 3  India International Insurance           115,852
 4  Asia Insurance Company                  110,838
 5  People's Insurance Company              103,715
 6  *Commercial Union Assurance              88,494
 7  Cosmic Insurance Corporation             85,580
 8  # Keppel Insurance                       74,238
 9  *Guardian Royal Ex.\Assurance            65,276
10  Axa Sime Assurance                       63,210

# Composite Insurers
* Foreign Insurers

Source:  Insurance Commission

Top ten general insurers in Singapore in terms of premiums for 1994

Direct insurers                             Gross premium less
                                            return premiums (S$'000)

 1  # NTUC Income                           137,828
 2  Insurance Corporation of Singapore      128,854
 3  Cosmic Insurance Corporation             64,673
 4  Asia Insurance Company                   64,167
 5  People's Insurance Company               59,033
 6  Taisho Marine & Fire Insurance (Asia)    55,161
 7  *American Home Insurance                 54,153
 8  *Commercial Union Insurance              49,236
 9  India International Insurance            48,663
10  # Keppel Insurance                       47,872

# Composite Insurers
* Foreign Insurers

Source:  Insurance Commission

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

DIRECT WRITERS MAKE THE RUNNING

A report on the UK insurance industry prepared by Price Waterhouse for
the Association of British Insurers assesses thoroughly the current
shape of the industry, its achievements, strengths and challenges

IN THE European Union, the UK insurance industry is the clear leader
not only taken as a whole, but also when it comes to the separate life
and general insurance market. This was the conclusion arrived at by
researchers at Bournemouth University when they recently published a
report on the international competitiveness of EU insurance industries.

The claim by the researchers accurately reflects the achievements and
strengths of the UK insurance industry, maintains the Price Waterhouse
report on the UK insurance industry commissioned by the Association of
British Insurers (ABI). The report by the management consultants looks
at the UK industry's achievements and strengths as well as identifying
the criteria for future success.

The conclusion that the university researchers drew was formed after
they judged the various EU members' respective industries using four
principal measures, namely: the absolute size of the industries as
measured by premium income; the relative size of the industries
measured by premium income relative to GDP; the adjusted overseas
business share and the perceived competitiveness ranking derived from
survey responses. Briefly, the Price Waterhouse report outlined the
industry's major achievements as: making widely available insurance
protection; providing competitively priced and attractive products;
promoting savings across a wide social spectrum; contributing to the UK
balance of payments and providing finance for industry and government.

The report described the industry's strengths as having: a long track
record of innovative product design and distribution; a strong
regulatory framework; a competitive market with low entry barriers;
technical expertise and international focus with UK insurers having the
highest overseas business share in the EU.

With regard to the UK having a highly competitive market, there have
always been low entry barriers as the existence of 821 authorised
insurance companies show (according to the DTI's 1994 report). Of these
companies, 573 are in general business only, 191 in life business only
and 57 are composites, undertaking both life and general insurance.

In total, at least, 600 are actively writing new business. The market
is highly fragmented with no dominant players. The largest has only a 7
percent share of the domestic market. There are 150 foreign-owned
insurers with close to nearly half from the EU.

The consultants note that "unlike the building society sector, there
has been only limited rationalisation in the insurance industry. The
number of authorised and active insurance companies has remained
relatively constant over the last ten years."

The consultants also make the point that dramatic growth has come
largely from banks and building societies breaking their ties with
insurance companies and setting up their own operations.

Bancassurers, on the other hand, have so far shown limited interest in
underwriting general insurance business even though they are important
distributors of these products. Importantly, "this situation is likely
to change."

Not surprisingly, the report concludes that the direct writers have
been the major new form of competition in the personal motor insurance
market over the past decade. "The direct writers have demonstrated that
they can achieve considerable competitive advantage by adopting a
completely new approach to the market."

As the accompanying graphs show the direct writers have clearly made
major inroads into the private motor insurance market. Their share by
the end of 1994 was 25 percent, more than doubling in just four years.
The evidence to date suggests that they are continuing to grow their
market share strongly.

The direct writers have only really started targeting the household
insurance market in recent years. Indeed, in 1994 they managed to more
than treble their market share, albeit from a very low base, to 7
percent from 2 percent at the beginning of that year.

The management consultants outline the reasons why the direct writers
have been successful, but do not provide any new breathtaking insights.

They point out that their success is because of their "ability to price
very competitively due to their lower cost base and provide streamlined
and customer friendly telephone based services. Direct writers have
made innovative use of technologies to create centralised and efficient
administration centres, avoiding the need for costly branch networks."

They add that the majority of established and traditional insurers have
now set up direct operations to complement their sales through brokers
and have also centralised functions such as claims handling.

What is rather interesting is that they note that after success of
direct writing in the personal lines general insurance market many
direct writers are already turning to commercial lines general
insurance products. The direct writers are also turning to less complex
life assurance and other savings.

With regard to the overall criteria for future success of the UK
industry, the report identifies these as: improving public confidence;
increasing customer orientation; working with government and
regulators; harnessing new information technology developments; cutting
costs and seizing opportunities to expand into foreign markets, notably
those in the developing economies of Asia, Eastern Europe and South
America.

The consultants do venture to take a bold peek into what the future of
the industry might look like. They think that a rationalisation of the
UK market is inevitable, especially with more than 800 insurance
already licensed and new competitors still entering the market.

Among the more interesting predictions is that a new breed of financial
"Supermarkets" will emerge where customers will be able to get all
their insurance needs. But they do expect, however, "that most
customers will prefer to shop around and the industry will be dominated
by large specialist providers, who sell more selectively to carefully
defined customer groups."

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-40</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B044-49</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/in08.html 205.156.212.5 19970122021030 text/html 66410
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:08:29 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:32 GMT
Content-length: 66223
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/in08.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet <BR>
January 11, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>IL APP. CT. AFFIRMS&nbsp;CARRIER WIN ON LATE&nbsp;NOTICE GROUNDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(347 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>SD NY DENIES CARRIERS&nbsp;JUDGMENT ON TRIGGER OF&nbsp;COVERAGE, LOST POLICY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(957 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>NJ APP. CT.: CLEANUP&nbsp;COVERAGE CASE TO PROCEED&nbsp;IN BOTH NJ AND NY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1000 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>SECOND CIRCUIT RULES IN&nbsp;DISPUTE OVER NATIONAL&nbsp;GYPSUM COVERAGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(909 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>CA HIGH CT. RULES&nbsp;SURETIES NOT EXEMPT&nbsp;FROM PROP. 103</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(756 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>CA CT. APP.: LENDER&nbsp;MUST BEAR LOSS FROM&nbsp;PHONY PREMIUM FINANCING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(588 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>D AK: INSURER CANNOT&nbsp;RESCIND POLICY BASED&nbsp;ON BOUNCED CHECK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(479 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>DE SUPER. CT.: NONPARTY&nbsp;INSURER OBLIGATED FOR&nbsp;UNDERINSURED COVERAGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(617 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>MI CT. APP. ALLOWS&nbsp;DEPOSITION OF LEGISLATIVE&nbsp;AIDE IN INSURANCE CASE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(371 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>INSURER NOT LIABLE&nbsp;FOR FAILURE TO SETTLE&nbsp;MALPRACTICE SUIT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(485 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>CA SUP CT.: INSURERS&nbsp;REQUIRED TO NOTIFY&nbsp;PUC OF POLICY EXPIRATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(853 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>ATTORNEY NOT ENTITLED&nbsp;TO LOSS OF INCOME FROM&nbsp;THEFT OF EVIDENCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(592 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>MI APP. CT. UPHOLDS&nbsp;$374,319 AWARD TO BUSINESS&nbsp;FOR BREACH OF CONTRACT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(341 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>VA HIGH CT.: SEPARATE&nbsp;POLICY LIMIT APPLIES TO&nbsp;EACH MOLESTATION VICTIM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(284 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><LI>MO APP. CT. FINDS&nbsp;INSURER NOT LIABLE&nbsp;FOR MOLESTATION JUDGMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(307 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>MO CT. APP.: RES JUDICATA&nbsp;BARS EX-DIRECTORS'&nbsp;SUIT AGAINST INSURER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(424 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

IL APP. CT. AFFIRMS
CARRIER WIN ON LATE
NOTICE GROUNDS

     A company that waited 14 months to notify its insurers that
it might be partly liable for cleaning a hazardous waste site
cannot claim insurance coverage, the Illinois Appellate Court,
First District stated in an opinion published Dec. 14.
Industrial Coatings Group Inc. v. American Motorists Insurance
Co. et al., No. 1-94-1491 (IL App. Ct., 1st Dist.).

     Industrial Coatings Group Inc. learned in February 1986 that
it faced potential liability for hazardous waste contamination at
a site in Griffith, IN, where Industrial's predecessor had sent
used machinery solvent for processing and return.  The appellate
panel wrote that the policyholder should have notified its
carriers at that time.

     The predecessor Joanna Western Mills Co. sent dirty solvent
to the American Chemical Services site from 1959 to 1985.  In
operating the site for more than 25 years, American Chemical
buried more than 20,000 drums containing hazardous materials at
the site.  Many of the drums leaked or were punctured while other
hazardous materials were pumped into retention ponds on the site.

     After testing by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
the American Chemical site was designated as a Superfund site.
Industrial Coatings' insurance policies provided that in the
event of an occurrence, written notice to the insurers giving the
particulars was required "as soon as practicable."  The insured,
however, did not give written notice to the insurers until more
than 14 months after it had received the EPA's letter requesting
voluntary participation in the site cleanup.

     The Cook County Circuit Court found that Industrial Coatings
gave its insurance companies late notice, that it thereby
breached a condition precedent to coverage under its insurance
policies and that the company therefore had no right to obtain
coverage for the pollution claim which had been asserted against
it.

     The state appellate panel affirmed, finding that the delay
in notice precluded coverage.  "Under Illinois law, a delay of
even a few months in giving notice breaches the policy as a
matter of law, defeats coverage and justifies the entry of
summary judgment for the insurance company," the court said.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

SD NY DENIES CARRIERS
JUDGMENT ON TRIGGER OF
COVERAGE, LOST POLICY

     U.S. District Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy of the Southern
District of New York on Nov. 22 denied summary judgment to
Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Co. and Liberty Mutual Insurance Co.
on a policyholder's coverage demands stemming from environmental
liabilities at a North Carolina site.  Unimax Corp. et al. v.
Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Co. et al., No. 92 Civ. 6115 (KTD)
(SD NY).

     The judge rejected the carriers' contention that North
Carolina law should be construed so as to find that no
occurrences triggering coverage happened during their policy
periods.

     In 1968, the insured Unimax Corp. purchased for its
subsidiary JFD Electronics Corp. a television antenna production
facility sited in Oxford, NC.  JFD leased the site and operated
the facility over the ensuing 11 years.  In 1979, JFD sublet the
site to an affiliate of Ventura Electronics Corp., which also
assumed the facility's operations.  The following year, JFD
purchased the remainder interest from Unimax and conveyed the
site to Ventura.

     In 1986, volatile organic compounds were discovered in the
site's groundwater; the state and the EPA commenced a cleanup the
following year.  In 1988, Ventura's successor brought a
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act cost recovery action against Unimax and JFD.  The
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) notified the insureds that
they were regarded as potentially responsible parties with
respect to the site in the fall of 1989; the policyholders
asserted they first learned of the contamination in August 1988.

     That same month, the insureds tendered notice to both
Lumbermens and Liberty Mutual; both carriers refused coverage.
Lumbermens had written Unimax and JFD umbrella comprehensive
catastrophe liability coverage over 1969-1971; the insureds
asserted that Lumbermens had also issued them primary policies
covering 1968-1972.  Liberty Mutual issued the policyholders
primary comprehensive general liability (CGL) coverage over 1975-
1979.

     Judge Duffy first considered the insurers' bid for summary
judgment on the ground that under North Carolina law, an
occurrence does not take place until discovery of contamination,
and that such discovery did not occur within the policy period.
The insureds rejoined that New York law should be applied, and
that an injury-in-fact trigger should be recognized.

     The court preliminarily concluded that no conflict existed
between the laws of the interested states.  "This case," wrote
the judge, "is centered on insurance policies -- i.e. contracts -
- and the appropriate conflicts analysis begins with each State's
contract laws.  New York and North Carolina apply the same rules
for contract interpretation."

     In looking to the policy language, the court found that it
"clearly states that an occurrence takes place if physical injury
results during the policy period."  The judge further noted that
under either state's precedents, "contamination is deemed to be
physical injury."  The court further rejected Liberty Mutual's
contention that the insureds never responded to its summary
judgment with evidence demonstrating that contamination occurred
within the policy period.  "The focus of Liberty Mutual's motion
was that contamination was not considered under the law to be
property damage until the discovery of the damage," Judge Duffy
stated.

     The court then considered the policyholder's cross-motion
for summary judgment on the issue of the carriers' duty to
defend.  The judge granted the motion as to Lumbermens, finding
the insurer to have made no argument beyond the trigger issue.
Liberty Mutual's policy contained a pollution exclusion clause,
which the insurer argued would void coverage if New York law were
applicable to the dispute.

     On the present facts, however, the court noted that "an
endorsement to the contract specifically deleted the pollution
exclusion clause with regards to operations in North Carolina.
If New York law governs these policies, that endorsement was
misleading and created, at least, an ambiguity [that] must be
construed in favor of the insured."

     The court ultimately refused the insureds judgment against
Liberty Mutual, finding the insurer had raised a genuine of
material fact as to the plaintiffs' knowledge of their claims.
JFD had knowledge of its potential liabilities as early as 1972,
Liberty Mutual had argued, and therefore its notice was untimely.

     The policyholders claimed that Liberty Mutual waived its
late notice defense by not raising the defense in its 1990
disclaimer of coverage; the carrier responded that it had
insufficient knowledge of the underlying facts until discovery
had commenced.  Judge Duffy denied the insureds summary judgment
on the waiver issue.

     The court lastly denied Lumbermens summary judgment with
respect to the two CGL policies it asserted were lost.  With
respect to the 1968-1971 policy (1ZL policy), the court noted
that the insureds proffered some 100 pages bearing the 1ZL number
that were turned over by Lumbermens during discovery.  "The only
pages known to be missing are two endorsements and the policy
jacket," wrote the court.  "I find it incredible that Lumbermens
would retain this file, which imposes liability, but lose the
documents that may have relieved Lumbermens of liability."  Judge
Duffy stated that liability would be measured according to the
terms of the policy as discovered in the insurer's files.

     As to the 1971-1972 policy (8ZL policy), the judge found
that the plaintiffs had demonstrated its existence, due to a
reference to it in Lumbermens' umbrella policy.  The court denied
the insureds summary judgment, however, finding that material
issues of fact remained concerning the 8ZL policy's content.

     Bruce Bienboim and Aidan Synnott of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind,
Wharton & Garrison, New York, represent the insureds.

     Frank Torres of Evans, Orr, Pacelli, Norton & Laffan, P.C.,
New York; and Judith Fournie Helms, Catherine M. Connelly-Warren
and Katherine E. Tammaro of Tressler, Soderstrom, Maloney &
Preiss, Chicago, represent Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Co.  Robert
L. Joyce of Wilson, Elser, Moskowitz, Edelman & Dicker, New York,
represents Liberty Mutual Insurance Co.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

NJ APP. CT.: CLEANUP
COVERAGE CASE TO PROCEED
IN BOTH NJ AND NY

     After granting leave to appeal to 76 insurers who challenged
the New Jersey Superior Court's refusal to stay or dismiss an
environmental cleanup coverage dispute, the New Jersey Superior
Court Appellate Division found that the trial court properly
refused to stay or dismiss the case even though an identical case
involving the same parties is pending in New York state court.
American Home Products et al. v. Adriatic Insurance Co. et al.,
No. A-5209-94T2 (NJ Super. Ct., App. Div.).

     In rejecting the insurers' argument that the trial court
erred in applying a forum non conveniens analysis in its decision
to allow the case to proceed, the appellate panel held that New
Jersey's interests in this case constituted sufficient special
equities to justify denying the comity-stay application.

     American Home Products (AHP), a Delaware corporation, is a
manufacturer and distributor of agricultural, food and healthcare
products.  In April 1991, AHP and its subsidiaries filed actions
in Delaware state court, seeking coverage for various government
and private actions stemming from contamination at 32 sites in 11
states.  One of these sites is located in New York; there are no
sites in Delaware.

     The New York action was filed on June 27, 1991, by Employers
Insurance of Wausau, which sought a declaration that it is not
obligated to provide coverage for contamination under its eight
excess policies.  Wausau named AHP and the remaining 76 insurers
as defendants.  AHP moved for dismissal of the New York action,
and 14 of the insurers moved for dismissal of the Delaware
action. The New York Supreme Court stayed AHP's motion pending
the outcome of the dismissal motion in the Delaware court.

     The Delaware court dismissed the action on forum non
conveniens grounds in November 1991.  Upon termination of the
case, the New York trial court dismissed as moot AHP's motion to
dismiss the New York action.

     On June 1, 1992, AHP filed an action in the Superior Court
of New Jersey, seeking declaratory relief against 80 insurance
companies.  Forty-three insurance companies are the appellants in
this appeal, which involves the same issues and the same parties
as the case pending in New York.  One month after this action was
filed, AHP moved to dismiss the New York action on forum non
conveniens grounds.  Wausau and other insurance companies opposed
AHP's motion and cross-moved, seeking an order enjoining AHP from
filing an action in any other district but New York.

     In December 1992, the New York Supreme Court dismissed the
action except as to a single New York site.  Several insurance
companies appealed, and in December 1994, the New York Supreme
Court Appellate Division reversed the dismissal, reinstating the
New York action in its entirety.  The appellate court did not
enjoin AHP from proceeding in New Jersey.

     Meanwhile, AHP moved its corporate headquarters from New
York to Madison, NJ.  Several of the insurers moved to dismiss or
stay the New Jersey action on the basis of comity and the entire-
controversy doctrine.  The New Jersey Superior court, however,
permitted the action to proceed, finding there were "special
equities" involved.  The court then granted the insurers' motion
for leave to appeal in June 1995.

     In refusing to stay or dismiss the action, the New Jersey
Superior Court noted that although an action involving the same
parties and similar issues is pending in New York, this does not
bar the New Jersey court's jurisdiction; however, the New Jersey
action can be stayed until the New York action is adjudicated.

     The trial court referred to the New Jersey Supreme Court's
decision in Yancoskie v. Delaware River Port Auth., 78 N.J. 321
(1978), which held that when an identical action is pending in
another state, the court "which first acquires jurisdiction has
precedence in the absence of special equities."

     In the appeal, the insurers contended that the court "made a
clear error of law" when it did not stay the case pending the New
York action.  They further maintained that the court erred in
applying a forum non conveniens analysis, which relieved AHP of
its burden to prove special equities to avoid a stay based on
comity.  Under a forum non conveniens application, the defendant
must prove that serious inconvenience would occur if the case is
tried in the plaintiff's chosen forum.  Under this application,
it is also required of the defendant to prove that the plaintiff
will not suffer hardship if the case is transferred.

     The insurers sought to have the case dismissed on comity
grounds, and that AHP needs to prove the existence of "special
equities."  However, the appellate panel noted that the forum non
conveniens factors such as convenience, fairness and connections
with the respective forums can be examined in a comity analysis
to determine whether making a stay in New Jersey would be unjust
or unfair to the interests of the parties.

     In affirming the trial court's holding, the panel noted that
1) AHP was formerly headquartered in New Jersey, 2) 10 of the
sites allegedly covered by the policies are located in New
Jersey, 3) six of the defendant insurers are headquartered in New
Jersey, 4) one-third of the estimated $89 million in cleanup
damages may be attributable to New Jersey sites, 5) New Jersey
law will probably be applied to the coverage issues regarding the
New Jersey sites, and 6) the New Jersey case was "well along" and
discovery has been proceeding for the past two years.  The panel
also found that AHP has a "legitimate presence" in New Jersey.

     "We think the judge fairly and within his sound discretion
concluded that New Jersey's interests in this case constituted
sufficient special equities to justify denying the comity-stay
application," held the panel.  "These factors would be relevant
to a forum non analysis and would have justified a denial of a
motion to dismiss...," the panel continued. "However, we find no
abuse of discretion in also considering these factors as "special
equities" for comity-stay purposes."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

SECOND CIRCUIT RULES IN
DISPUTE OVER NATIONAL
GYPSUM COVERAGE

     In a lengthy opinion issued Dec. 13, a panel of the Second
Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals ruled on numerous issues affecting
the scope of insurance coverage available to Asbestos Claims
Management Corp. (ACMC), formerly known as National Gypsum Co.,
for asbestos-related personal injury and property damage claims.
Stonewall Insurance Co. v. Asbestos Claims Management Corp. et
al., Nos. 93-7314(L) et al. (2nd Cir.);  see Insurance Industry
LR, July 23, 1992.

     Some of the rulings -- those concerning trigger of coverage,
the expected or intended exclusions, and coverage for settlements
paid by National Gypsum through the Center for Claims Resolution
-- appear to favor ACMC.  Other rulings -- those concerning the
allocation of liability for periods during which National Gypsum
was uninsured and the calculation of deductibles for property
damage claims -- appear to favor the insurers.

     Some of the panel's rulings apply only to coverage for
asbestos personal injury claims.  In particular, the panel:

--      ruled that the district court correctly determined that
under applicable New York and Texas law, the occurrence-based
policies sold to National Gypsum could be triggered throughout a
gradual disease process where injury can be shown by a
preponderance of the evidence to be occurring at each point in
that process;

--      affirmed a jury finding against Commercial Union
Insurance Co. that injury occurred continuously from first
exposure through claim or death for all asbestos diseases;

--      upheld a trial court finding applicable to other insurers
that injury occurred continuously from exposure through
manifestation for non-cancer cases but not for cancer cases, and
remanded for further consideration of the court's finding with
regard to cancer claims "in view of the ambiguity in the District
Court's application of the injury-in-fact approach to cancer
claims";

--      upheld the district court's allocation to National Gypsum
of the pro rata share of liability attributable to those periods
during which National Gypsum was uninsured;

--      affirmed a district court ruling that National Gypsum did
not expect or intend bodily injuries from its products; and

--      upheld district court rulings that payments made by
National Gypsum through the Asbestos Claims Facility and the
Center for Claims Resolution in settlement of asbestos claims
were reasonable and are covered by the policies sold to National
Gypsum.

     Some of the court's rulings apply only to coverage for
asbestos property damage claims.  Specifically, the panel ruled
that:

--      the costs of removing and replacing asbestos products
from buildings are properly considered "property damage" as the
term is used in the policies;

--      the district court properly determined that National
Gypsum could not establish by a preponderance of the evidence
that property damage was occurring continuously or at any given
point following installation of National Gypsum's building
materials; and

--      the district court erred in holding that, for purposes of
"per occurrence" deductible provisions in the policies, all the
asbestos property damage claims arose out of a single occurrence
-- National Gypsum's decision to manufacture and sell asbestos-
containing building materials.  Instead, each installation of
National Gypsum's products was a separate occurrence, requiring
the application of another deductible, the panel said.

     The Insurance Environmental Litigation Association (IELA), a
trade association of 20 major insurers, applauded the rulings
requiring National Gypsum to assume a share of liability for
periods during which it was uninsured and requiring application
of another deductible for each installation of National Gypsum
asbestos building products.

     The Second Circuit's decision "properly limits insurers'
liability to the their fair share of the risk," said Thomas W.
Brunner, counsel to IELA and a partner at Wiley, Rein & Fielding
in Washington, DC, in a prepared statement.

     "The Court's formula enforces a policyholder's conscious
business decision to forgo insurance and rejects the
policyholder's attempt to obtain a windfall of coverage for its
uninsured periods," he added.

     The court ruled in an action brought by Stonewall Insurance
Co. for a declaratory judgment that it has no duty to indemnify
National Gypsum for property damage claims arising from asbestos
products made by the company between 1931 and 1981.  The action
also named other National Gypsum insurers.  National Gypsum later
counterclaimed for coverage of asbestos personal injury claims
against it.  All of the policies at issue in the action are
occurrence-based, that is, they are triggered by personal injury
or property damage which occurs during a policy period.

     Commercial Union opted for a jury trial to resolve its
coverage dispute with National Gypsum.  All of the other insurers
opted for a bench trial.  After the two trials, the district
court entered a series of partial declaratory judgments which
determined coverage for asbestos personal injury claims under
Commercial Union policies involved in the jury trial, determined
coverage for asbestos bodily injury claims under insurance
policies involved in the bench trial, and determined coverage for
asbestos property damage claims.  The district court also
certified its rulings for interlocutory appeal under 28 U.S.C.
Section 1292(b).

     Asbestos Claims Management Corp. assumed liability for
National Gypsum's asbestos liabilities in the company's Chapter
11 bankruptcy proceedings.  It is represented in the action by
Thomas M. Reiter, Donald E. Seymour and Gail Kamnitz with
Kirkpatrick & Lockhart of Pittsburgh.

     Twelve different insurance companies participated in the
proceedings in the Second Circuit.  Amicus briefs were filed by
Mid-American Legal Foundation, Insurance Environmental Litigation
Association, Armstrong World Industries, Inc., The Flintkote Co.,
Western MacArthur Co. and Owens-Illinois, Inc.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

CA HIGH CT. RULES
SURETIES NOT EXEMPT
FROM PROP. 103

     The California high court ruled Dec. 14 that the surety
industry is not exempt from Proposition 103, a 1990 act imposing
a 20 % rate rollback on premiums, because the exemption did not
further the purpose of the initiative.  Amwest Surety Insurance
Co. v. Wilson et al., No. SO37405 (CA Sup. Ct.).

     "It is true that excluding some forms of insurance would
allow the commissioner to focus greater resources upon the
remaining forms of insurance...but this premise cannot further
the purposes of Proposition 103 because voters did not limit its
provisions to a few forms of insurance of greatest concern to the
public...," the panel held, affirming a state appeals court
decision.

     In 1988, California passed Proposition 103, or the Insurance
Rate Reduction and Reform Act, which imposed a rate rollback, and
required any subsequent rate increase be approved by the state
insurance commissioner.  The proposition states that it may not
be amended by the state legislature "except to further its
purposes."

     Two years later, the California legislature enacted Section
1861.135 of the state insurance code, thereby exempting surety
insurance from Proposition 103.

     On Nov. 9, 1988 -- one week after Proposition 103 was
enacted -- Amwest Surety Insurance Co. filed a suit against
Governor Pete Wilson and Insurance Commissioner Chuck Quackenbush
in Los Angeles Superior Court, challenging the validity of
Proposition 103 as applied to surety insurance.  In 1990, Voter
Revolt, the organization that drafted Proposition 103, intervened
in the suit to challenge the validity of Section 1861.135,
asserting that it did not further the purposes of
Proposition 103.  The superior court disagreed, finding the
section valid.  Voters Revolt and the insurance commissioner
appealed.

     A divided California Court of Appeal panel reversed the
trial court's opinion, holding that Section 1861.135 was, in
fact, invalid.  The panel noted that under the state
constitution, the legislature cannot amend an initiative statute
without voter approval unless the statute specifies otherwise.
The panel found Proposition 103 permits legislative amendments
that further the purposes of the initiative, but that Section
1861.135 did not serve such purposes.  Amwest appealed to the
state Supreme Court.

               The high court agreed with the appeals panel, holding that
"exempting surety insurance from the rate rollback provision of
Proposition 103 [did not] further the purposes of the initiative
for the reason that a rate reduction was unnecessary in the case
of surety insurance."

     Amwest and its amicus curiae, Surety Company of the Pacific,
argued that the high court is limited to Proposition 103's
express statement of purpose, which is to protect customers,
encourage competition, and ensure that rates are fair and
affordable.  The panel disagreed, referring to California Housing
Finance Agency v. Patitucci, 22 Cal.3d 171, 177, which held that
"when a constitutional amendment is subject to varying
interpretations, evidence of its purpose may be drawn from many
sources."

     Amwest further contended that clarification of Proposition
103 is needed, because the materials about the proposition which
was distributed to the voters did not mention surety insurance
and did not include a summary of Section 1851.  Thus, Amwest
argued, the voters probably did not understand that the
proposition applied to surety insurance, and that "it would
further the purposes of the proposition to make it say what the
voters thought it meant."

     The panel struck down the surety's argument, holding that it
is "merely a collateral attack upon [the proposition] which has
been adopted by a majority vote of the people who must be assumed
to have voted intelligently...."  The panel further noted that
the insurance regulations set forth prior to the passage of the
proposition applied to surety insurance, and that the initiative
"altered the substance of those regulations, but did not purport
to alter the scope."  Thus, the panel concluded, Proposition 103
applied to surety insurance.

     Amwest then maintained that exempting surety insurance
furthers the purposes of the proposition because the rates for
surety insurance "have long been stable and reasonable" and it
was thus unnecessary to apply the provisions to surety insurance.
Once again, the panel disagreed.

     "If the rates for surety insurance already were fair and
reasonable, the rate rollback might, in large part, be avoided,"
held the panel.  "Exempting surety insurance from this provision
does not further [the proposition's] purpose."

     The panel added that exempting surety insurance from the
requirement that the commissioner approve any rate change prior
to its use likewise fails to further the provision's purpose,
because the requirement is to prevent future abuses in setting
rates.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

CA CT. APP.: LENDER
MUST BEAR LOSS FROM
PHONY PREMIUM FINANCING

     Losses stemming from a fraudulent insurance premium
financing transaction arranged by an agent which is not
authorized by the insured must be borne by the lender, not the
insurer, the California Court of Appeal, First District, ruled
Dec. 13, upholding a state Superior Court decision.  California
Indemnity Insurance Premium Finance Co. v. Fireman's Fund
Insurance Co., No. A068421 (CA Ct. App.).

     The panel found that because the transaction was not
authorized by the insured, the lender must bear the loss under
the California Insurance Code.

     In 1992, an insurance agent used unauthorized premium
financing transactions in an attempt to convert funds to his
personal use.  The agent signed the premium financing documents
"on behalf" of the insureds without obtaining their
authorization, then kept the cash proceeds of the unearned
premium without paying the required monthly payments to the
lender, California Indemnity Insurance Premium Finance Co. (CII).

     When CII tried to cancel the insured's policies, issued by
Fireman's Fund Insurance Co., it discovered that the insureds did
not seek premium financing, and that the policies were already
paid in full by the insureds.  Thus, Fireman's Fund refused to
cancel the policies.  Meanwhile, the agent filed a bankruptcy
petition, leaving a $36,000 loss to be absorbed by either CII or
Fireman's Fund.

     The matter was tried in Marin County, CA, Superior Court,
which held that CII must bear the loss.  CII appealed.

     The California Court of Appeal upheld the judgment of the
trial court, referring to Pacific Auto Insurance Co. v. Wolff,
which noted that Section 2309 of the California Civil Code, which
was amended in 1973, provides that "an insured could not escape
from a premium financing agreement, which the insurance agent had
been orally authorized to sign, merely because the insured did
not give that agent written authorization to cancel the policy
thus financed."  (Pacific Auto Insurance Co. v. Wolff, [1977] 72
Cal.App.3d 537, 541.)

     However, the appellate panel noted that Section 2309 does
not allow insurance agents to make legally binding premium
financing arrangements which were not authorized by the insured;
rather, it allows the insured to authorize another party to
execute the right to cancel.  "In light of [this], we are not
impressed by CII's argument that the implicit intention of the
1973 amendment was that authorization by the insured was no
longer necessary," held the panel.

     CII maintained, however, that the Doctrine of Latent
Equities provides that "where an assignee purchases an assignment
for value in good faith...the assignee takes the claim free from
equities of all others except the original obligor."

     The panel refused to apply the doctrine to this case, noting
there was no valid assignment of rights to CII; thus, there is no
question of latent equities following a valid assignment.

     CII also argued that the trial court erred in its decision
because the agent received the funds "in a fiduciary capacity"
under Section 1733 and was guilty of theft.  While the panel
agreed with this conclusion, it dismissed CII's argument, holding
that the agent received the funds from CII as proceeds from a
fraudulent financing arrangement, not from the insureds as
premium payments.

     The panel also found CII's additional arguments to be
without merit.

     Arguing for CII were Todd F. Haines and Joshua N. Willis of
the Law Offices of Raymond A. Greenberg, Calabasas, CA.  Arguing
for Fireman's Fund was Arthur D. Levy of Ewell & Levy, San
Francisco, CA; and Douglas Cole Grijalva of Fireman's Fund,
Novato, CA.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

D AK: INSURER CANNOT
RESCIND POLICY BASED
ON BOUNCED CHECK

     The Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals ruled Dec. 22 that
an insurer is obligated to pay an uninsured motorist claim even
though the policyholder's premium payment check was not honored
by her bank, because the policy did not expressly provide that
coverage would be resinded in such a situation. Davis v.
Criterion Casualty Co., No. 94-36141 (9th Cir.).

     Plaintiff Mary Davis' car insurance policy with Criterion
Casualty Co. was canceled in Dec. 1992, when Davis failed to make
a premium payment.  After purchasing a new car, Davis went to
Criterion to reinstate her policy.  She paid the premium by check
on January 13, 1993, which was deposited by the insurer.

     On January 28, Davis was hit by an uninsured driver.
Unfortunately, on the same day of the accident, Davis' check
bounced.   Criterion mailed Davis a notice of cancellation and
refused to pay her claim.  Davis filed suit against the insurer
in Alaska state court, seeking uninsured motorist coverage.
Criterion removed the case to U.S. District Court for the
District of Alaska based on diversity of citizenship.  Both
parties moved for summary judgement.

     Criterion maintained that because Davis' initial policy was
not immediately reinstated, the second policy was not a "renewal"
of the first policy, but rather a new policy.  Thus, the insurer
argued that it had the right to rescind the new policy because
Davis' check did not clear.

     The district court granted Criterion summary judgment,
finding no Alaska statute precluded the insurer's "common law
right of rescission," and that the Alaska Supreme Court would
find that the policy in this case was properly rescinded.  Davis
appealed.

     The Ninth Circuit panel reversed the lower court's grant of
summary judgment.

     First, the panel found that the second, disputed policy
explicitly provided that a service fee of $10 would be added to
the insured's account if her check were not honored by her bank.
"This language clearly signals that the penalty incurred for
bouncing a check is a $10 fee, not the absence of coverage," the
panel noted.

     The panel concluded that the facts of this case favor Davis
more strongly than the "intermediate doctrine" outlined by John
A. Appleman's Insurance Law and Practice, which states that if an
insurer accepts a check as payment of a premium and issues a
receipt, it waives its right to rescind the policy even if the
check is dishonored.

     "Under these circumstances," the panel held, "the honoring
of Davis' check was not a condition precedent to Criterion's
provision of insurance.  Accordingly...there was coverage until
cancellation."

     The panel noted that Criterion could have protected itself
by simply providing in the policy that no coverage would exist if
the insured's check is not honored.

     The panel also found that Criterion did not meet Alaska's
20-day notice requirement for cancellation when it rescinded
Davis' policy.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

DE SUPER. CT.: NONPARTY
INSURER OBLIGATED FOR
UNDERINSURED COVERAGE

     An insurer is obligated to make underinsurance coverage
payments to a policyholder after a state Superior Court
arbitrator determined that her injuries were caused by a third
party, even though the insurer was not a party to the
arbitration, ruled the Delaware Supreme Court, thereby reversing
an opinion by the state Superior Court.  Sutch v. State Farm
Mutual Automobile Insurance Co., No. 183 (DE Super. Ct.).

     In its Dec. 28 opinion, the court found that the insurer had
ample notification of the policyholder's suit against the third
party and thus would have been able to defend its interests.

     Deborah Sutch was injured in a three-car accident on Dec. 5,
1991.  Sutch filed a negligence suit in Delaware Superior Court
against a third-party tortfeasor.  After arbitration, the trial
court found in favor of Sutch for $100,000.  Sutch's carrier paid
half of the award, which was the limit of the third-party's
liability coverage.

     Sutch demanded the remaining $50,000 from her underinsured
motorist insurer, State Farm Mutual Insurance Co.  When State
Farm refused, Sutch filed suit against the insurer in Delaware
Superior Court, contending that she was entitled to the sum under
Delaware insurance law, and that the collateral estoppel bar in
Delaware Superior Court Civil Rule 16.1(j) "does not entitle
State Farm to relitigate the issues of liability and damages."

     Sutch and State Farm then filed cross-motions for summary
judgment.

     After an arbitration hearing, the trial court granted
summary judgment to State Farm, holding that the judgment entered
against Dale was not binding because State Farm was not a party
to the underlying suit.  Sutch appealed to the Delaware Supreme
Court, contending that the superior court erred in holding that
State Farm had shown prejudice resulting from Sutch's failure to
comply with the notice provisions of her policy.

     The court reversed the decision of the trial court, holding
that Rule 16.1(j) is not applicable to this case because the
parties did not request a trial de novo after the arbitration
decision became final.

     The court noted that Rule 16.1(j) expressly provides that
when an arbitrator's award is entered as a judgment, "after the
time for requesting a trial de novo has expired, the judgment
shall have the same force and effect as a judgment of the
superior court in a civil action except it shall not be subject
to appeal."

     Regarding the issue of collateral estoppel, the court held
that although State Farm was not a party to the arbitration, it
was notified of the decision a month before the entry of judgment
in the superior court.  "Thus, State Farm had the opportunity to
intervene in the proceedings between Dale and Sutch to protect
its interests, once it was notified of the demand for payment of
underinsurance benefits," noted the court, holding that the
arbitration decision was binding upon the insurer.

     In addition, the court disagreed with State Farm's
alternative argument that Sutch did not notify State Farm of her
suit against the third party until the arbitrator's decision was
rendered, as required by her policy.
               "This court has held that the lack of notification to a
carrier does not necessarily relieve the carrier of making
payments pursuant to the policy," noted the court.  "When the
insured fails to comply with a notification provision, the
carrier has the burden of showing it was thereby prejudiced."

     The court found that because State Farm had notice of the
suit, it did not show such prejudice.

     Arguing for Sutch was David H. Erisman of Erisman & Curtin,
Wilmington, DE.  Arguing for State Farm was Francis J. Jones Jr.
and Eileen K. Anderson of Morris, James, Hitchens & Williams,
Wilmington, DE.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

MI CT. APP. ALLOWS
DEPOSITION OF LEGISLATIVE
AIDE IN INSURANCE CASE

     A state Senate aide must give deposition testimony
concerning disclosure of confidential information about an
investigation by the state Insurance Bureau, a Michigan Court of
Appeals panel ruled Nov. 14, holding that the aide is not
shielded by the Speech and Debate provision of the state
Constitution because the questions do not concern matters within
the legislative sphere.  Michigan Education Special Services
Association v. Insurance Commissioner et al., No. 171303 (MI
Ct. App.).

     The nonprofit Michigan Education Special Services
Association is a third-party administrator for a teachers union's
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health plan; the union is politically
active, primarily on behalf of Democrats.  The association sued
the state insurance commissioner in Ingham County, MI Circuit
Court, alleging that an Insurance Bureau investigation was
politically motivated.

     Judge James R. Giddings issued a temporary restraining order
prohibiting the bureau from releasing any information about the
investigation.  However, a Republican state senator learned of
the investigation and issued a press release announcing that the
bureau would soon investigate the association.

     Senate aide John Prange was deposed but refused to disclose
how the senator's office learned of the investigation.  Prange
contended he cannot be constitutionally compelled to answer
questions regarding the content of statements the senator made to
him because they were made in the confines of the senator's
office and not disclosed to the public. Judge Giddings disagreed
with Prange and granted the association's motion to compel
discovery.

     In an opinion by Judge Kathleen Jansen, the Michigan Court
of Appeals panel rejected Prange's argument that the information
sought is privileged under the Speech or Debate Clause of the
Michigan Constitution.  The communication between Prange and the
senator in the senator's office was not within the sphere of
legitimate legislative activity because it related to an
administrative agency's actions, the panel held.

     Even if the senator had been involved in introducing
legislation concerning health care coverage for teachers, the
questions asked of Prange were not an integral part of
legislative deliberations, noted the panel.

     On the insurance commissioner's cross-appeal, the panel
declined to overturn the temporary restraining order against
releasing information about the investigation to the public.
However, it found the commissioner may raise the issue on remand.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

INSURER NOT LIABLE
FOR FAILURE TO SETTLE
MALPRACTICE SUIT

     An HMO's malpractice insurer is not liable for more than its
$2 million policy limits although it refused to settle for that
limit until jury deliberations began, a federal judge in Missouri
ruled Nov. 3, holding that the insurer's obligation to tender the
policy limits at the time of negotiation was not certain enough
to make its insistence on a release from the HMO wrongful.
Humana Kansas City Inc. v. Continental Casualty Company,
No. 93-1248-CV-W-6 (WD MO).

     In 1989, Humana Kansas City was sued in Jackson County, MO,
Circuit Court for obstetrical malpractice.  It sought defense and
indemnification under its $2 million professional liability
policy from Continental Casualty.  Humana initially assessed the
settlement value of the case at $100,000, but the patient
demanded a settlement for the policy limits.

     As the malpractice trial opened and started to go poorly for
the HMO, Humana demanded Continental tender its policy limits;
later in the trial, a lawyer predicted a verdict of about
$2 million and a $1.5 million settlement value.  The patient then
offered to accept $3.25 million by a specified deadline or
$4 million after the close of evidence.  Continental refused to
tender its policy limits unless Humana waived indemnification for
any amount above $2 million; Humana agreed, allegedly only if the
case were settled, not if it went to verdict.

     Before the jury returned its $13 million verdict, the
parties settled for $5 million.  Humana then filed a
diversity-based complaint in U.S. District Court for the Western
District of Missouri alleging bad-faith refusal to settle.

     Senior Judge Howard F. Sachs granted summary judgment in
favor of Continental.  First, he found sufficient evidence that
the parties had mutually agreed that Continental would tender the
policy limits in exchange for Humana's release of any
indemnification claim, even if Humana had no other choice under
the circumstances.

     Furthermore, the judge found the insurer's obligation to
tender the policy limits had not been established at the time of
the negotiations because there had not yet been a verdict of at
least $2 million.  As a result, the insurer's agreement to do so
furnished adequate consideration to support Humana's release, he
said.

     Next, the judge rejected Humana's argument that a release
from liability for a bad-faith claim is not a proper subject for
contract and violates public policy.

     Although the estimated settlement value of the case began to
rise from less than $2 million once the trial began,
Continental's obligation to tender $2 million was not so certain
that its demand for a release was wrongful, Judge Sachs held.  He
also rejected Humana's duress claim, saying any economic exigency
that existed cannot be attributed to a wrongful act by the
insurer.

     John E. Turner of Kansas City, MO, and Donald W. Vasos of
Kansas City, KS, represented Humana.  James D. Griffin and
M. Courtney Koger of Overland Park, KS, represented Continental.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

CA SUP CT.: INSURERS
REQUIRED TO NOTIFY
PUC OF POLICY EXPIRATION

     A divided California Supreme Court panel ruled Dec. 29 that
a highway carrier insurer is liable for an accident that occurred
nine years after the policy expired, because the insurer failed
to provide the state public utilities commission with the
required 30 day cancellation notice after the policy's
expiration.

     The panel found, however, that an insurer is entitled to
seek reimbursement from the carrier under the public utilities
commission's regulatory scheme.

     In 1989, an Amtrak train and a truck owned by Tab
Transportation, Inc. caused three deaths and several injuries,
resulting in $6 million in legal claims against Tab for wrongful
death, personal injury, and property damage against Tab.  Tab
sought recovery under three insurance policies.  Two of the three
insurers contributed a total of $1.6 million to a global
settlement.  Transamerica Insurance Co., however, did not
participate in the settlement.

     Transamerica filed an action in May 1992 for declaratory
judgment in the San Francisco County Superior Court, asserting
that it was not liable for damages under the $500,000 one-year
liability policy it issued to Tab for the period between February
1, 1980, and February 1, 1981.

     The Public Utilities Commission (PUC) of California requires
that liability policies issued to highway carriers may only be
canceled after 30 days' written notice is submitted to the PUC.
Transamerica did not give the PUC the required notice of
cancellation when Tab failed to renew the policy. Although Tab
replaced the Transamerica policy with a new policy issued by
another insurer, neither party notified the PUC of the
cancellation of the Transamerica policy.

     Transamerica asserted that if it were liable for damages, it
was entitled under PUC regulations to be reimbursed by Tab for
any payments made under the policy.  Tab filed a cross-complaint
contending that it was entitled to coverage under the policy
because Transamerica had filed with the PUC expressly stating
that its policy was effective in 1980 until canceled.  The trial
court granted Tab's motion for summary adjudication on this
basis.

     The case was tried on the remaining issue of whether
Transamerica was entitled to reimbursement by Tab.  The trial
court ruled in favor of the insurer, referring to a PUC
endorsement attached to the Transamerica policy providing for Tab
to reimburse Transamerica "for any payment made as the result of
obligations arising under the endorsement."

     Both parties appealed.  Transamerica challenged the trial
court's summary adjudication in favor of Tab on the coverage
issue, and Tab cross-appealed on the issue of Transamerica's
right to reimbursement.  The California Court of Appeals reversed
on the coverage issue, concluding that the Transamerica policy
had, in fact, expired on Feb. 1, 1981 and that Transamerica had
no obligation to give written notice of cancellation to the PUC.
Tab filed a petition for review in the California Supreme Court,
which was granted.

     The high court panel reversed the appeals court's
determination, referring to Fireman's Fund Ins. Co. v. Allstate
Ins. Co., supra, 234 Cal.App.3d, which held that a 30 day notice
of cancellation submitted to the PUC is required before a policy
covering a highway carrier is terminated.

     "In addition to providing an efficient means for the PUC to
administer the financial responsibility requirements imposed on
highway carriers, the policy on file with the PUC serves as
assurance that the public is protected...," noted the panel.
"These important considerations far outweigh the slight burden
imposed by the statute on an insurer of providing the PUC with 30
days' written notice of cancellation."

               On the issue of whether Transamerica is entitled to
reimbursement by Tab for payment of damages resulting from the
accident, the panel found that the regulatory scheme of the PUC
allows highway carriers to pay damages to the public, but
prevents the carriers from "reaping an undeserved windfall" by
allowing the insurer to seek reimbursement from the carrier.

     However, the panel noted that if the carrier is insolvent
and cannot reimburse the insurer, the risk of loss falls on the
insurer.

The Dissenting Opinions
     Judge Armand Arabian and Judge Marvin Baxter dissented with
the majority.  "I agree with the holding of the Court of Appeal
on the coverage issue," Judge Baxter wrote, "and would affirm the
judgment of that court.  Since the Court of Appeal determined the
issue of coverage in favor of Transamerica, it did not reach or
address the further issue of Transamerica's right to
reimbursement under the terms of the standard form endorsement.
I would likewise refrain."

     Judge Baxter noted in a similar case that the Ninth Circuit
U.S. Court of Appeals found a distinction between "non-renewal"
and "expiration" of a policy, and held that notice is only
required in the event of cancellation, not expiration.

     Judge Arabian agreed with Judge Baxter on the issue of
reimbursement, but added that although Transamerica

     "The reimbursement 'consolation' plainly and unjustly
ignores the reality that resort to expired insurance coverage
will only be necessary if the insured...is insolvent.  If for
this reason an injured claimant cannot recover full damages, an
indemnitee insurer obviously will fare no better," Judge Arabian
contended.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

ATTORNEY NOT ENTITLED
TO LOSS OF INCOME FROM
THEFT OF EVIDENCE

     A personal injury attorney is not entitled to recover
damages resulting from loss of income after $433 worth of
evidence he was planning to use in court was stolen from his
office, because he could not show his practice was suspended or
harmed by the theft, the Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals
ruled Dec. 29, upholding a California federal court decision.
Winters v. State Farm Fire and Casualty Co. et al., No. 93-56412
(9th Cir.).

     Jack Winters was representing a man who was injured while
using an electric-powered handsaw purchased from J.C. Penney,
Inc.  Winters purchased five handsaws to aid in arguing his case,
and kept them in his office.  Unfortunately, they were stolen
from the office and never recovered.  The court ruled in favor of
J.C. Penney.

     Winters submitted claims for theft of the saws and lost
income to his business insurer, State Farm Fire and Casualty Co.
The insurer paid Winters $433, the cash value of the saws, but
denied his loss of income claim.

     Winters filed a claim in the San Diego County Superior Court
against State Farm, alleging breach of contract.  State Farm
removed the action to U.S. District Court for the Southern
District of California and moved for partial summary judgment.

     The district court granted summary judgment to the insurer,
holding that the business personal property loss provision of
Winters' policy "covers only the value of the property involved,
and does not cover the insured's potential legal liability to
third parties in contract or in tort."  The court concluded that
Winters' recovery was limited to the cash value of the saws.

     The lower court further determined that Winters failed to
demonstrate that the theft of the saws prevented him from
continuing to practice law, and that Winters' claim did not
constitute recoverable "extra expenses" because the losses were
not sustained during a "period of restoration," as required by
the policy.

     Winters appealed, contending that the court erred in
awarding summary judgment because the value of the saws is a
disputed issue of material fact.  Moreover, he argued that the
term "legally liable" is ambiguous.

     The Ninth Circuit panel affirmed the district court's
decision, finding that courts interpreting policy language nearly
identical to the State Farm policy held that coverage is only
provided for the cash value of the property -- not for liability
to third parties.

     In addition, the panel found that the personal property
coverage section of the policy requires property loss to be
adjusted on the basis of actual cash value.  Furthermore, if
"legally liable" were interpreted as Winters urged, the personal
property section "would be redundant of the business liability
portion of the policy," held the panel.

     The panel also determined that under the "limit of
liability" provision, Winters is only entitled to actual cash
value where he did not inform State Farm he had replaced the saws
within one year of the loss.

     Finally, the panel upheld the district court's holding that
any loss stemming from the theft is "speculative" because he
could not prove that he would have won the case if the saws had
not been stolen.  Furthermore, because Winters' practice was not
suspended, he is not entitled to losses under the policy, the
panel found.

     Arguing for Winters was Robert E. Adams of Winters &
Associates, San Diego, CA.  Arguing for State Farm was Stephen E.
Smith of Ramsay, Johnson & Klunder, Irvine, CA; and Peter
Abrahams and Holly R. Paul of Horvitz & Levy, Encino, CA.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

MI APP. CT. UPHOLDS
$374,319 AWARD TO BUSINESS
FOR BREACH OF CONTRACT

     The Michigan Court of Appeals Dec. 1 affirmed a $374,319
award against an insurer that failed to honor a policyholder's
business interruption claim, holding that the policyholder
presented sufficient evidence that its business losses were
caused by physical damage to its insured computer system.
Synchronized Design & Development Company Inc. v. Chubb Group of
Insurance Companies, No. 164340 (MI Ct. App.).

     Synchronized Design & Development Co. obtained a broad
insurance policy from Chubb Group.  The policy covered business
interruptions caused by damage to a covered risk.  After
lightning storms caused power surges and outages that damaged
Synchronized's computer equipment, the company filed a claim for
damage to the equipment and for several thousand dollars in
business interruption losses.

     A dispute arose over the amount of loss, and Chubb
eventually rejected the proof of loss after paying out $114,294.
A breach-of-contract complaint was filed in Macomb County, MI,
Circuit Court. Chubb counterclaimed to void the policy on the
basis of an allegedly falsified and inflated damage claim and to
recoup its $114,294.

     At trial before Judge Deborah A. Servitto, the jury awarded
Synchronized $291,777 and rejected Chubb's counterclaim for fraud
and false swearing.  Judge Servitto denied Synchronized's motion
for sanctions.  Judgment was entered for $374,319 plus costs and
post-judgment interest.

     The Michigan Court of Appeals panel affirmed in a per curiam
opinion, finding that Chubb was not entitled to a directed
verdict because the jury could reasonably conclude that the
physical damage to the computers caused the claimed business
loss.  Nor was there an abuse of discretion in the trial judge's
denial of post-trial defense motions on the fraud counterclaim,
the panel held.

     On procedural issues, the panel rejected defense challenges
to the admission of evidence from Synchronized's experts, to the
jury instructions on Chubb's counterclaim and to exclusion of
evidence about the tax fraud conviction of Synchronized's
majority shareholder.

     On cross-appeal, the panel upheld the denial of sanctions,
holding that Judge Servitto had not clearly erred in ruling that
the counterclaim was not frivolous.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

VA HIGH CT.: SEPARATE
POLICY LIMIT APPLIES TO
EACH MOLESTATION VICTIM

     A per-occurrence policy limit applies to each victim
molested by the same assailant even if the attacks were part of a
pattern of criminal conduct, the Virginia Supreme Court ruled
Dec. 13, setting the maximum exposure of an insurer at
$7 million, or $1 million per purported victim, rather than at
the $1 million policy limit collectively for all the victims.
S. F. (Doe) et al. v. West American Insurance Company, No. 950120
(VA Sup. Ct.).

     West American issued a business liability policy to the
owners of Harbor View Apartments, whose resident manager
allegedly molested seven children on multiple occasions.  The
policy provided up to $1 million coverage per occurrence.

     The victims sued the Harbor View owners on a theory of
negligent hiring, selection, retention and supervision of the
resident manager, who was previously convicted of child
molestation and was on parole when hired.

     West American filed a declaratory judgment complaint in City
of Norfolk Circuit Court.  Judge John E. Clarkson ruled the
insurer is at risk for only the $1 million policy limit because
the allegedly negligent hiring constituted only a single
occurrence.

     The state high court reversed in an opinion by Justice Leroy
R. Hassell Sr.

     The policy's definition of occurrence was ambiguous and thus
must be construed against West American and interpreted in a way
that grants rather than withholds coverage, the court held.  For
example, as written, an occurrence could be deemed as the
insureds' negligent hiring, or their negligent supervision or
their negligent retention of the resident manager, noted the
court.

     Moreover, the court held that although each victim was
molested more than once, those attacks constituted only one
occurrence per victim.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

MO APP. CT. FINDS
INSURER NOT LIABLE
FOR MOLESTATION JUDGMENT

     A homeowners' insurer is not liable for a molestation-
related judgment because child sexual abuse is inherently
intentional misconduct, the Missouri Court of Appeals ruled
Dec. 5, rejecting a victim's attempt to garnish his assailant's
insurer.  M.A.B. et al. v. Nicely et al., Nos. WD 50462 &
WD 50528 (MO Ct. App.).

     The panel also ordered the victim to pay the insurer's
attorneys' fees and costs in the garnishment action and appeal.

     M.A.B. claimed he was sexually abused by Kenneth Nicely
while Nicely's homeowners' policy from Union Mutual Insurance Co.
was in effect.  The policy included bodily injury coverage but
excluded damage "which is expected or intended by the insured."

     M.A.B. won a $100,000 personal injury judgment against
Nicely, then brought a garnishment action against Union Mutual in
Jackson County, MO, Circuit Court to collect.  Judge Jon R. Gray
rejected Nicely's denial of the assaults but quashed M.A.B's writ
of garnishment.  He also denied Union Mutual's motion for
indemnification of attorneys' fees and costs.

     The Missouri Court of Appeals, Western District, modified
the lower court's ruling in an opinion by Chief Judge Gary A.
Fenner.

     The panel agreed with Judge Gray that Union Mutual is not
liable for the underlying judgment because of the exclusionary
language in the policy.  In the context of child sexual abuse, an
inferred-intent standard applies, the court held, so the
molestation of M.A.B. is deemed by law to have been intentional
on Nicely's part, noted the panel.  Intent to molest is the same
thing as the intent to harm, the panel noted.

     On the insurer's cross-appeal, the panel said M.A.B. is
required to pay Union Mutual's fees and costs for defense of the
garnishment action.  In an unsuccessful garnishment action or
appeal, court rules require taxing the garnishor for the
garnishee's expenses, said the panel.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 11, 1996

MO CT. APP.: RES JUDICATA
BARS EX-DIRECTORS'
SUIT AGAINST INSURER

     Res judicata bars former officers and directors of a
corporation from suing the company's insurance broker for failing
to obtain adequate coverage for securities fraud claims, the
Missouri Court of Appeals ruled Nov. 28, finding a prior Kansas
decision blocking the ex-directors' suit on statute of
limitations precludes relitigation in Missouri.  Bendis et al. v.
Alexander and Alexander Inc., No. WD 50698 (MO Ct. App.).
               The four plaintiffs were officers and directors of
Comprehensive Health Care Systems Inc., a Kansas corporation.
Alexander and Alexander, a Maryland corporation authorized to do
business in Kansas and Missouri, procured insurance for
Comprehensive, including an officers and directors policy.
Coverage was obtained from Federal Insurance Co. and Hartford
Accident & Indemnity Co.

     In 1986, Comprehensive merged with TBG Inc.  TBG later filed
a federal court complaint accusing the ex-directors of
misrepresenting Comprehensive's financial status and violating
securities laws.  When Federal and Hartford refused to defend or
indemnify, the ex-directors sued them in the District of Kansas;
the insurers won on summary judgment.

     The ex-directors sued Alexander and Alexander in the
District of Kansas for failure to perform a risk evaluation for
Comprehensive and for failure to obtain insurance to defend and
indemnify them against the underlying securities and common law
claims in the TBG case.  Alexander and Alexander won summary
judgment based on the Kansas statute of limitations.

     The ex-directors then filed a petition against the broker in
Jackson County, MO, Circuit Court, with the same allegations as
their unsuccessful Kansas federal complaint.  Judge Jon R. Gray
granted summary judgment in favor of Alexander and Alexander.

     The Missouri Court of Appeals, Western District, affirmed in
an opinion by Judge Laura Denvir Stith, finding the suit barred
by res judicata.  There was an identity of parties, underlying
facts, causes of action and issues in the Kansas federal and
Missouri state litigation, held the panel.

     A potential difference over whether the Kansas or Missouri
limitations period applies does not preclude res judicata, found
the panel, because the statute of limitations is an affirmative
defense and has no effect on subject matter jurisdiction.  In
addition, adopting the ex-directors' position would allow
plaintiffs to forum-shop for a state with a longer limitations
period, defeating the purpose of the res judicata doctrine.

     The court denied the broker's request for damages for a
frivolous appeal.

     David W. White, Alan V. Johnson and William F. Logan of
Overland Park, KS, represented the ex-directors.  Eric T. Swanson
and Theresa Shean Hall of Kansas City appeared for the insurance
broker.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-41</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B044-75</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/in03.html 205.156.212.5 19970122021116 text/html 32693
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:08:52 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:33 GMT
Content-length: 32506
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/in03.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
THE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNet <BR>
January 15, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>NAIC: 'RE-ENGINEERING' NEW BUZZWORD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(618 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>FLA. BILL TO EXPAND POLLUTION LIABILITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(633 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>MISSOURI LOSES GRIP ON STOP-LOSS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(469 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>DEFINITION OF TERMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(236 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>CONN. AGENTS PUSH LANGUAGE COVERING BANKS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(479 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>NEW YORK SNAGS TWO AUTO INSURERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(267 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>STATE SURVEY</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>NORTHEAST ZONE: MAJOR REFORM SLATED FOR N.Y. WORKERS COMP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(268 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>MIDWEST ZONE: KANSAS HMO BILL HEADED TO LEGISLATURE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(331 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>WEST ZONE: TEXAS BRINGS VIATICALS TO REGULATORY TABLE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(292 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>TAX REFORM</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>TAX SIMPLIFICATION COULD BLAST BALANCE SHEETS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(814 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

NAIC: 'RE-ENGINEERING' NEW BUZZWORD

The NAIC era of heavy growth and large regulatory nets is over,
marked by the resignation of David Simmons, the NAIC executive vice
president, and the embracing of "regulatory re-engineering," as the
association's new strategy.
        The upcoming annual commissioners retreat beginning Jan.19 will
carry regulatory efficiency forward under the guidance  of Brian Atchinson,
the NAIC's new president, Kansas Commissioner Kathleen Sebelius and Iowa
Commissioner Terri Vaughan, according to Atchinson.
        Happy to leave regulation to the regulators, Simmons is working on
arranging to take a position as a lawyer in private practice.
        Simmons remarked that during his tenure, the NAIC experienced a lot
of growth while improving the quality of service to its membership.
        The rate of growth will now abate considerably, he said, which it
perhaps should. "I think its time to slow the rate of growth," he said.
        Whether or not that is adopted as an official strategy, those who
are championing regulatory re-engineering appear determined to prune
excessive regulations.
        The project picks up where last year's regulatory efficiency effort
left off, according to the regulators involved.
        Atchinson pointed to the comments and suggestions made by the
industry on how to improve and streamline insurance supervision during the
December meeting of the Regulatory Efficiency Special Committee as a
guideline in configuring the re-engineering effort.
        Sebelius serves as chair of the newly-formed Regulatory Re-
engineering Special Committee, Vaughan as vice-chair. They were appointed
by the officers in December.
        "We're going to put our energy into that," Atchinson said. He said
insurance deregulation, the focus of a recent New York study, is but one
issue involved.
        Others issues to be considered or resolved by the NAIC according to
the minutes from the Regulatory Efficiency meeting in San Antonio include
the coordinated market conduct examinations due to the expense of market
conduct examinations and their redundancy, simplification of agent
licensing standardization requirements for admission and licensing.
        "Re-engineering needs to be done because we have limited resources
but global market. The demand of a global marketplace truly presents
challenges," he said.
        It will be done "in a manner that doesn't compromise consumers," he
added.
        While noting the new direction of the NAIC, Simmons' denied his
decision to leave was in any way related to the new leadership  and
budgetary priorities that could leave favored activities such as the
producer database and system for electronic rate and form filing (SERFF)
out on a limb. Instead, he just became fatigued with NAIC work, he said.
         In fact,he said he told Utah Commissioner Robert Wilcox that even
if Wilcox was elected NAIC president, he would leave. Wilcox later withdrew
his challenge of Atchinson for the chief regulatory position (See IR Nov. 6
);.
        Simmons gave notice fellow regulators about a week ago that he will
leave the association March 15. He first vocalized his intentions to the
membership during the NAIC Winter meeting in early December during a closed
meeting of the Executive Committee.
        "I don't consider myself a regulator," Simmons told IR. "I'm
basically a lawyer." Simmons had been general counsel for the NAIC in
Kansas City before rising to the executive position four years ago.
        "The position wears you out," Simmons said, noting that he was
thinking of leaving last year but decided to stayed on a while longer
because he could serve as an "institutional memory" for many of the new
regulators.
        "Now they are seasoned and I feel freer to leave," he said.
        Meanwhile, the NAIC's general counsel in Washington, Kevin T.
Cronin, will assume the position of acting executive vice president while
the NAIC conducts a national search for someone to replace Simmons. Cronin
has already become the point-man on several issues that require information
sensitive to the NAIC.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

FLA. BILL TO EXPAND POLLUTION LIABILITY

The Florida House of Represent-atives is preparing a draft for a
pollution liability bill that would force insurers to rewrite policy
language  to expand their exposure and possibly reduce premiums.
        The bill targets insurance industry language describing liability
parameters for pollution claims and is being drafted by the House Insurance
Committee under the watch of its chairman, Rep. John F. Cosgrove, D-Miami.
It is intended to  bind insurers to statements made to regulators in 1970.
        Proponents of the bill at the Tallahassee law firm of Greenberg,
Traurig, Hoffman, Lipoff Rosen & Quentel submitted a white paper to the
House through their involvement in the Coalition to Preserve Environmental
Insurance Coverage that details a proposed amendment enforceable through
the state insurance department.
        The paper argues that the 1993 state Supreme Court case, Dimmitt
Chevrolet v. Southeastern Fidelity Insurance Corp., 17 Fla. Law W. S 579,
on rehearing, undermined the state's pollution abatement efforts and
shouldn't be allowed to influence the outcome of litigation over an
insurance claim.
        The final Dimmitt decision upheld insurers' denial of gradual
pollution claims and ruled that the language of the pollution exclusion was
unambiguous and didn't cover events that were "unexpected and unintended,"
only those that were "abrupt or instantaneous."
         The problem is that insurers had vouched to regulators that they
would still cover events that were unexpected and unintended, i.e., gradual
unintentional pollution, in seeking to exclude intentional pollution acts
in 1970, according to arguments and amicus briefs cited in the white paper.
        In 1970, the insurance industry had made representations to the
insurance department that although liability would exclude intentional acts
of pollution, it would still cover events that were "unexpected and
unintended," according to a Dimmitt amicus brief filed by the attorney
general's office.
        The phrase was supposedly a clarification of "an abrupt and
instantaneous event," which is a covered claim.
         However, the court ruled that statements made to state regulators
by insurers couldn't be considered by the state courts because the language
of the exclusion itself was unambiguous.
        Therefore, Fred Baggett, a partner at Greenberg, Traurig is urging
Cosgrove's office to include in its bill:
         That liability insurers, upon receipt of a claim for coverage for
environmental damages, construe the policies under which the claim was
brought in accordance with the statements they have made to state
regulators in 1970 regarding the language of those policies.
         A right of action in the event an insured is damaged by its
insurer's failure to comply with this requirement.
         Make violations of this requirement an act that may be prosecuted
by the insurance commissioner.
         The rules would not apply retroactively to closed claims and
wouldn't require an insurer to take into account oral statements made
outside the regulatory record; only written statements on the record would
serve as the basis for coverage.
        "If Dimmitt is allowed to stand, it will mean that there was a
massive reduction in coverage provided to insurers in 1970 with no
reduction in premiums for over two decades, the white paper asserts.
        Furthermore, the author suggests that Hurricane Andrew's aftermath
drew sympathy from the courts towards the policies of insurance companies.
        The possibility "that such considerations did have an influence
requires increased scrutiny and immediate action by the legislature," the
white paper.

        While the draft of the bill by Cosgrove and the insurance committee
is underway, it probably won't be ready for a few weeks. The Florida
legislature's session begins in early March.
        The proposed amendment to 18 Fla. Law W. S 400  shouldn't cause any
financial burden on insurers in Florida, Baggett argues in his paper.
        Since insurers haven't "been issuing policies with the 'sudden and
accidental' exclusion since the mid-1980s, the amendment directly addresses
largely historical policies, not current policies, and will have no effect
on current underwriting," it concludes.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

MISSOURI LOSES GRIP ON STOP-LOSS

Missouri became the first state to lose its stop-loss jurisdiction
altogether after a recent court decision, potentially setting a damaging
precedent to other states seeking to amend their stop-loss statutes to
approach the NAIC model act.
        In a decision that marked a victory for employers and some insurers
to keep the NAIC out of the self-funded health care market, a Cole County
circuit court judge ruled that the Missouri insurance department has no
statutory authority to regulate stop-loss coverage issued to employers on
behalf of self-funded, noninsurer health plans.
        The department was seeking to implement terms of the model law on
stop-loss adopted by the NAIC in September when it was sued by a life
insurance company and three state business associations in November.
        In Associated Industries of Missouri, The Missouri Chamber of
Commerce, General American Life Insurance Co. and St. Louis Area Business
Health Coalition v. the Missouri Department of Insurance and Jay Angoff,
Director, No. CV195-1326CC, the court said the proposed regulation is
directly pre-empted by Erisa.
        The plaintiffs had only sought to enjoin the amendments to the
rule, not the rule itself, and the department has been talking with them
since the decision to clarify that point as a basis for future legal
action, according to a department spokesperson.
        Other departments such as Maryland's have sought to adjust their
stop-loss provisions and are responding to lawsuits over their
implementation of the NAIC model act,and if not, according to the position
of the Self-Insurance Institute of America, soon will. (See IR, Nov. 20).
        The Missouri rule, set to take effect on the first of the year,
would have established when stop-loss coverage would be deemed a medical
expense, established that the purpose of stop-loss coverage is to cover
catastrophic losses and specified which insurance laws are applicable to
stop-loss coverage.
        The NAIC set a $20,000 attachment point for employee group health
claims, under which they are considered health insurance. But stop loss
coverage is issued to an employer or self-funded health plan to pay for
catastrophic losses over and above the expected claims for the plan, so is
not under the rubric of employee-benefiting group health insurance,
according to the judicial opinion.
        Missouri's rule would have raised the attachment point to $10,000
from $7,500 as a compromise. Now, no attachment point exists, meaning group
health insurance plans could have a lower limit as low as $1 theoretically,
according to a department spokesperson.
        But adding stop-loss group health insurance to the definition of
group health insurance, Angoff is "illegally usurping authority over stop-
loss coverages under the guise of regulating group health insurance,"
according to the opinion.
        The department will appeal, saying the decision due to go into
effect Jan. 27, will affect hundreds and hundreds of thousands of people
and threaten the viability of group health market.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

DEFINITION OF TERMS

NAIC President Brian Atchinson came up with the loaded buzzword
"regulatory re-engineering," but now it will be up to the other NAIC
members to define it  and put it into effect.
        In business, re-engineering typically has referred to redesigning a
company's working structure from the ground up, rather than an effort to
peel costs and staff off the core, although a reduction in costs is often
the result. However, the "increasingly limited resources" of the NAIC, as
one regulator put it, will probably result in some old-fashioned down-
sizing. According to Terri Vaughan, vice chair of the regulatory
reengineering committee. Atchinson and Kathleen Sebelius, the committee's
chair, re-engineering includes:
         Streamlining and consistency: Consistency in reporting forms is
one element of re-engineering. Variations in forms such as annual statement
and continuing education forms will be examined for creating more
consistency among them.
        However, total uniformity is not the goal, just eliminating those
areas that are a result of failure to better coordinate.
         Deregulation: There is a proposed charge to look at the
feasibility of deregulating some commercial lines of insurance.
"Deregulation is perhaps an exercise that each of the states will evaluae
depending upon where they are," Sebelius noted.
         Reassigning limited resources: There will be a push to focus on
the big picture and draw back from nit-picky activities, Sebelius
suggested.
        For example, pulling employees away from rote file approvals and
refocusing them on market conduct records.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

CONN. AGENTS PUSH LANGUAGE COVERING BANKS

Insurance agents in Connecticut are proposing regulatory language
addressing bank sale of annuities in a 15-16 page working draft soon to be
circulating among state insurance and banking department officials.
        "The goal is not to inhibit the banks but instead have them realize
their unique position among financial institutions," according to an
industry representative working on a draft for the department.
        Meanwhile, the banks are waiting and remain in the dark about
developments in the working draft, according to a banking lawyer, who has
not yet seen an internal insurance department working draft, whose next
stop is said to be the state banking department.
        "There is no draft," an insurance department spokesperson said.
        New regulatory language is necessary to guide the way for national
banks in Connecticut to sell annuities. Banks have been able to apply for
licenses since a partial settlement was reached with Shawmut National Bank
last fall, but no bank has yet applied because institutions are waiting to
see the regulatory language, the department's director of licensing has
said before.
        That's not entirely true, suggested Rob Taylor of the Hartford law
firm Day, Berry & Howard.
        Some banks are delaying as they await the outcome of the Shawmut
and Barnett Bank decisions as well as the completion of the Shawmut/Fleet
National Bank merger, he said. But if banks would apply, perhaps the
department would feel pressured to promulgate the regulatory language soon.
The department has said that it would deliver a decision on a bank's
license within two to three weeks of receiving an application.
        Taylor helped represent Shawmut when the insurance department sued
it for attempting to sell insurance from one of its local branches.
        "Our position is to make sure that the bank people are properly
trained," said Warren C. Ruppar, the executive vice president of the
Independent Insurance Agents of Connecticut.
        Other provisions the agents have been trying to work into the draft
include consumer protection language that would prevent banks from
accessing a bank customer's personal financial records and minimizing the
potential for coercion. "For instance, if you are applying for a loan, the
issue of separation is very, very important," he said.
         The access to personal financial records worries the industry
because it is worried about a level playing field, Ruppar noted. For
instance, if you are applying for a loan, the issue of separation is very,
very important.
        He isn't sure which of the various suggestions to level that field,
which include exclusion of records or equal access to them, will make it
into the final regulatory language.
        "We're in the midst of a regulatory discussion on whether it should
be a straight and full prohibition of access or various other ways," he
said.
        Also, the assurance that there is full disclosure and a signed
customer acknowledgement that the insurance products aren't FDIC-insured
should be necessary, according to the agents.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

NEW YORK SNAGS TWO AUTO INSURERS

A Pennsylvania insurer got slapped with $142,590 fine from the New
York Insurance Department for myriad claims violations in connection with
its automobile insurance policies, while a New York company received a
$105,520 fine for similar violations.
        Worldwide Underwriters Insurance Co. of Frazier violated the law
when it failed to send to insureds initial and follow-up no-fault
applications and verification forms in a timely manner, the department
charged.
        The department's charges are based on a market conduct
investigation of Worldwide that revealed that violations occurred between
May 1991 and April 1992.
        Country-Wide Insurance Co.'s slighter smaller fine reflects a
slighter smaller list of offenses uncovered in a market conduct exam
conducted between June 1993 and May 1994. Country-Wide, of New York City,
for example, didn't get cited for failing to report losses to the National
Insurance Crime Bureau within specified time limits, as was Worldwide.
        Among the other charges included in the stipulation signed by
Worldwide include failure to resolve claims within specified time frames
and provide insureds with notices explaining delays in claims.
        The company also failed to follow guidelines for the inspection and
documentation of damaged vehicles and failed to make timely good faith
offers to policyholders.
        The company also committed calculation errors. It failed to
appropriately calculate overdue no-fault benefits and reimburse claimants
for lost wages up to their policy limits. It also failed to use the correct
figures in calculating the value of lost or stolen vehicles.
        Worldwide must review all no-fault and total loss payments made
between July 1994, and December 1995. Country-Wide must conduct similar
reviews and also perform quarterly self-audits.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

NORTHEAST ZONE: MAJOR REFORM SLATED FOR N.Y. WORKERS COMP

The governor of New York has announced he is directing state
regulators to introduce a sweeping reform plan for workers compensation
during the 1996 legislative session.
        In his state-of-the state address Jan. 3, Gov. George E. Pataki
challenged the existing workers comp laws by stating that "they do not
fairly serve either workers or employers."
        "In recent years, costs skyrocketed, and the injured worker
received no better service or medical care," Pataki stated.
        Pataki was riding the theme of creating more jobs and greater
opportunity and diminishing "pointless" regulation in his speech, a
continuing theme for his administration whose early momentum brought about
a recently concluded plan for regulatory reform in the state insurance
department.
        There appears to be a lot of force behind the push to reform in New
York.
        The industry has been working closely with the business community
to make sure that workers comp reform and other problems that plague.the
industry are dealt with, said a representative for the American Insurance
Association's Northeast region. "Other attempts at change were Band-Aids;
more serious surgery is required," she said.
        Pataki has charged Labor Commissioner John Sweeney and Workers
Compensation Board Chairman Robert Snashall as well as his director of
regulatory reform, Bob King, with submitting a reform plan to him within 90
days. The governor will be proposing a bill to both the state Assembly and
Senate.
        The New York Workers Comp Action Network of Syracuse, which
organized two years ago to produce reform, will also be introducing a bill.
        Last year, managed care was introduced into workers comp and rates
decreased by 5%, according to Pataki.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

MIDWEST ZONE: KANSAS HMO BILL HEADED TO LEGISLATURE

Kathleen Sebelius, the Kansas insurance commissioner, is calling
for a major update of the consumer protection elements of the state's
managed care market months after she defined insurance to create more
clarity in the marketplace.
        And she's looking to her neighbor in Missouri HMO law for help.
        The state legislature opened its chambers for the 1996 season last
week and Sebelius was there with her legislative agenda, which includes
notice of a bill draft on the Kansas HMO act.
        The act has not been significantly amended since it was first
approved by the legislature in 1974, Sebelius has pointed out. Sebelius
issued a bulletin in late November outlining the parameters of "insurance"
for managed care regulatory purposes, a step both Ohio and Florida have
also undertaken. (See IR, Dec. 11).
        The draft bill will include provisions found in the current NAIC
model act, except in the areas of solvency and deposit requirements and
grievance procedures, where the bill will follow the provisions in the
Missouri HMO law.
        Additional disclosure requirements of the financial agreements
between providers and managed care organizations are also on the agenda.
        The solvency standards in Missouri are done on a sliding scale
based on revenues detailed in the company's marketing plan and has run over
$1 million in capital, according to a spokesperson for the Missouri
department. To enter the state, a group health plan's capital threshold
must be $150,000.
        HMOs in Missouri must have an internal grievance procedure for the
first wave of complaints, the spokesperson noted, referencing the 1983
state law and its further provisions.
        Sebelius also hopes to follow the route Missouri took for enrollee
participation in the business operations of the HMO and for payment for
emergency room care.
        Enrollees in Missouri receive the annual statement of their HMO's
financial condition, full descriptions of organizational changes, where and
how to obtain services and a detailed description of the complaint process.
All these requirements are fleshed out through market conduct procedures,
the spokesperson said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

WEST ZONE: TEXAS BRINGS VIATICALS TO REGULATORY TABLE

The Texas Department of Insurance is closer to joining almost a
dozen other states that have implemented viatical settlement protection
rules with a hearing Commissioner Elton Bomer held Jan. 9.
        The proposed rules to protect terminally ill Texans who sell their
life insurance policies for immediate cash were described as "bare bones"
reporting standards by a department spokesperson.
        The reporting would have the viatical company reveal such
information as the location, size and key employees of a viatical company.
The department would also seek enough information to ascertain whether
customers were being treated fairly, according to the spokesperson.
        Misleading advertisements and marketing schemes would be ruled as a
violation of departmental regulations, as would dishonoring the privacy of
the applicants. All advertising material, forms and marketing plans must be
approved by the department, under the proposed rules.
        Insurance companies no longer could hold the policy for longer than
they should when they find out it is to be used for a viatical settlement,
as some have, the spokesperson said.
        The viatical policies must also reveal the tax consequences of
settling to the applicant, as well as other consequences,such as loss of
welfare or Medicare benefits. The company must also notify applicants of a
15-day right of rescission in their decision to sell their policies under
the proposed rules.
        However, no capital requirements of viaticals will be necessary in
Texas.
        Companies will need a certificate of registration to do business
without which they will be in violation of regulations and be subject to
revocation of their certificate. The department may deny certificate of
registration.
        Bomer is reviewing the testimony of the 16 parties who testified at
the hearing will make a decision on the final rules in the near future, the
spokesperson said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
THE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

TAX SIMPLIFICATION COULD BLAST BALANCE SHEETS

Tax simplification could have a drastic effect on corporate balance
sheets, wiping out as much as $3 trillion in equity, according to tax
experts at the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants who have
just completed a major study of alternatives to the current system.
        Many observers in Washington and on Wall Street believe that
Congress will undertake a major overhaul of the tax system by the turn of
the century. But the new AICPA study indicates that the "unintended
consequences" of some of the tax reform plans that have been put forth are
so great that the proposals will collapse of their own weight.
        "The level of discussion in the last two or three years (about tax
reform) has gotten to be significant, but once you look at some of this
information you become less certain that people will want to jump into
that," said Deborah Walker, a KPMG Peat Marwick partner and chair of the
AICPA's Tax Executive Committee.
        "The AICPA has long been an advocate of tax simplification, but
there are many, many unanswered questions," said Barry C. Melancon, AICPA
president.
        Various proposals have been made in Washington, and they differ in
many significant ways. But in general they would do away with the current
income-based system of taxation and replace it with one based on
consumption.
        Byrle M. Abbin, a retired partner and now a consultant at Arthur
Andersen, warned of "dire" effects on financial statements from tax
simplification.
        First, there would be some gains from the elimination of the
corporate income tax. He noted that $600 billion in deferred tax
liabilities would no longer be owed while just $100 billion in deferred tax
assets would be wiped out by a flat tax.
        But the big crunch would become with the imposition of a
consumption tax.
        "Without transition relief, deductions for depreciation of existing
assets would not be allowed under the new tax, and the entire proceeds from
a theoretical sale of assets at the end of the reporting year for the
initial application of the new tax law would be included in the tax base,"
the AICPA said in its new study, "Flat Taxes and Consumption Taxes: A Guide
to the Debate."
        Assuming a 10% tax rate and given that corporations have $20
trillion in tax basis, "it is possible that $2 trillion of deferred tax
liabilities would be created upon the enactment of this new tax," the AICPA
said.
        Under FAS 109, this entire amount, which could be higher with a
higher tax rate, would have to be booked in the year of tax change.
        "This would more than wipe out total corporate profits in any one
year and severely reduce the amount of shareholders' equity," the AICPA
warned. "Thus financial statements would have to reflect the enormous
increase in future taxes that results from lost depreciation deductions or
taxable gain on sales due to the elimination of tax basis."
        "The desire for efficiency and simplification has to be balanced
with problems of fairness," Abbin said. He acknowledged that some of these
problems could be reduced or resolved with appropriate transition rules.
But he predicted a battle royal over those rules.
        "Even if you do have transition rules, first you are going to have
strong discussions involving FASB, the SEC, the accounting profession and
Congress," he said. "It would be a tough, tough confrontation."
        Tax simplification could present additional problems for insurers.
Not the least of these would be the loss of tax advantaged status for many
life products and for policy payouts. In addition, however, insurance
companies and other financial service providers may find themselves subject
to a special tax regime.
        "Because it is difficult to identify and value services provided by
financial institutions, no country with a consumption tax has been able to
tax financial services in a manner consistent with consumption tax
principles," the AICPA said. "Exemption of financial institutions from
consumption tax generally results in overtaxation of financial services
provided to businesses and undertaxation of services provided to
consumers."
        In general the tax burden would increase for labor-intensive
businesses, such as insurers, and decrease for capital-intensive ones, the
AICPA said. While tax rates may be cut dramatically, tax outlays could
actually increase.
        "Even though the (proposed) rates sound low, you have to remember
that people don't pay rates, they pay taxes," Abbin said. "There'll be a
whole host of companies with lower rates that will have higher taxes to pay
because major components of their business cannot be deducted."
        Another area where there could be surprising consequences to tax
reform is in international operations. "The exclusion of exports from gross
receipts provides large tax benefits to those firms that export," the AICPA
said.
        In addition, Abbin said that the "U.S. could become a tax haven"
under some of the reform proposals. "This could bring retaliation from
foreign countries where we have operations." --Miles Maguire



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B02-42</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B044-116</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/in19.html 205.156.212.5 19970122021156 text/html 97124
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:09:52 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:29 GMT
Content-length: 96937
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/in19.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1995<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>EUROPE'S PENSIONS TIME BOMB IS STILL TICKING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(467 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FEATURE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>THE EMPEROR'S NEW CLOTHES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2077 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>PRUDENTIAL MOVES INTO THAILAND</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(404 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>POLAND:  TAX ON COMMISSION STARTS ROW</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(149 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>CU GETS PAKISTAN PERMIT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(221 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>AIG WINS RUSSIAN LICENCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(159 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>VIRGIN CHALLENGES `NEANDERTHAL' INSURERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(439 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>LIFE COMPANIES EXPLOIT DIRECT LEADS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(213 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>HALIFAX SETS DIRECT TARGET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(194 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>ZURICH SCORES ALLFINANZ COUP IN ITALIAN MARKET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(214 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>SWEDEN:  TRYGG-HANSA PLANS BANK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(121 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>AUSTRIA:  DIE ERSTE LAUNCHES FUND-LINKED PRODUCT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(141 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>UNITED KINGDOM:  MIDLAND REVAMPS SALESFORCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(159 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>POLAND:  WARTA AND PKO LINK UP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(194 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>AIG LINKS WITH ITALIAN UNION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(254 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>BERLUSCONI GROUP SEEKS BANKING STATUS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(281 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>BELGIAN POST OFFICE SEEKS PARTNER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(214 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>AMB AND AGF PULL CLOSER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(203 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>ALLIANZ, BERNER TO CO-OPERATE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(233 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>NEW YORK AND ST. JAMES CAPITAL LINK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(237 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>BRADESCO MOVES INTO ARGENTINA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(221 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>CZECHS SLATE NEW PENSION PROPOSALS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(481 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>BRITISH GOVERNMENT MAKES FRESH PENSIONS MOVE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(240 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>UNION TO SUE OVER UK PENSIONS SCANDAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(233 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS BRIEF</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>VITAL REQUESTS SHARE SUSPENSION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(200 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>PRUDENTIAL MAKES FRAUD PROVISION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(150 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>IRISH LIFE FINED BY LAUTRO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(145 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>CORPORACION MAPFRE FORECASTING RISE IN PROFITS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(106 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>TRAVELERS GROUP SPREADING ITS NET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(293 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>IMPERIO ALLIES WITH BCP TO BID FOR BPA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(172 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FEATURE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>INSURERS SANGUINE ON EU</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1261 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>GATEWAY TO ASIA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2016 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>FRENCH BANKS TURN TRADITIONAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1786 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

EUROPE'S PENSIONS TIME BOMB IS STILL TICKING

RANIERO VANNI, Commissioner for Financial Services, has made good his
threat to withdraw the draft Pension Directive. Vanni had warned last
year that this might be necessary, after the June 1994 Internal Market
Council failed to make any progress towards adoption of the Directive
on Freedom of Management and Investment of Funds held by Institutions
for Retirement Provision.

Instead, the European Commission has issued a Communication on Freedom
of Management and Investment, stressing the "urgent need" to clarify
its intentions in the pensions field.

The Commission will ensure, it said, that any restrictions that apply
in particular Member States will be "fully justified on the prudential
and other grounds upon which such restricutions have been applied and
they are proportional to their objectives".

The Communication said that the Commission had to withdraw the proposal
because it"refused to make the text acceptable to a majority of member
states by inserting certain amendments which risk to completely change
the sense of the Directive".

The draft directive was dogged by conflict on the issues of scope,
localisation of assets and currency matching. The currency matching
provision - requiring that a minimum proportion of funds should be
invested in the currency in which pensions would be paid - was most
troublesome and was the main contributor to the downfall of the draft.

Most member states wanted to keep the power to require 80 percent
currency matching, ensuring consistency with the insurance Directives.
The Commission, backed by the UK, Ireland and the Netherlands, was
determined to give pension funds the ability to invest freely in
whatever markets they wanted - subject to prudent limits. Sixty
percent, the commission felt, was a reasonable limit - given that those
with complete freedom to invest rarely exceed 40 percent.

The Commission's move comes as European think tank, Federal Trust,
released a report The Pension Time Bomb in Europe, which predicts that,
without radical changes, maintaining level of benefits provided by Pay-
As-You-Go schemes in line with present expectations will impose an
unacceptable burden on future generations of taxpayers, will worsen the
competitiveness of industry and will harm the prospects for employment
and the economy.

The three original aims of the draft Pension Fund Directive - freedom
of cross-border membership, freedom to provide the service of managing
pension funds and freedom of cross-border investment of fund assets -
should not be abandoned, the report argues, but should be pursued by
other means.

Drastic cuts in benefits or rises in contribution, it maintains, can be
avoided by establishing a partnership between Pay-As-You- Go and
privately-funded pension schemes. Maximisation of benefits and the
minimisation of costs under private schemes requires that fund managers
have the maximum freedom to invest, subject to prudential safeguards.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

THE EMPEROR'S NEW CLOTHES

The New Year may herald a new era in the UK life insurance business,
with onerous new disclosure requirements. Alison Jarman reports

AFTER A year which saw the UK life industry's reputation shredded by
the scandal of mis-sold pensions, 1995 is widely expected to bring big
changes as insurers begin providing full details of fees and charges
and the effect these have on the return to investors.

Prompted by consumer complaints that front-end loading of fees resulted
in minimal surrender values - almost non-existent generally during the
first five years of a 25 year policy - the Securities and Investments
Board (SIB) has finally put in place a disclosure regime which gives
the customer a clear idea of the return of a policy and the factors
affecting it.

January 1 saw the introduction of the long-awaited commission
disclosure rules, but while pundits have welcomed the greater
transparency, insurers are now waiting to see how the public reacts to
the latest rattling of skeletons from their closets. Aware that
brazenly admitting that in the case of many policies, the first two
years of premium is eaten up in commission and other charges would not
be wise, companies have been working hard to create a structure which
will make the new regime workable and limit the damage as far as
possible.

Under new SIB rules, before customers buy a life or pension product,
they must be presented with paperwork outlining the type of product,
its workings and, where appropriate, surrender values. A key feature of
this is to illustrate how commission charges and other fees affect the
policy, how much of the premium goes to the salesperson and return for
early surrender at certain dates. After July the information will have
to be even more specific, relating directly to the customers own
financial circumstances and lifestyle, rather than the insurers'
generic models.

Although easily explained, the process of introducing these features
has been taxing the industry throughout 1994, and has resulted in
revamping of products and restructuring of salesforces and the way
these and independent financial advisers are paid. With comparative
tables likely to become widely available, enabling customers to shop
around for competitive products, companies have been forced to address
not only the question of front-end loading but the nature of commission
payments themselves.

They have also been forced to take a hard look at the types of products
on offer. During the final months of 1994, Allied Dunbar, the
Prudential and Clerical Medical all launched flexible life and savings
schemes. Allied Dunbar, one of the country's leading pensions
suppliers, went so far as to withdraw its product range and replace it
with a smaller selection of new products. Other insurers are expected
to follow this shake-up as they struggle to cope with changing customer
needs.

New style policies reflect the changing labour market which
increasingly relies on short-term contracts. The concept of a job for
life is becoming rarer. Essentially the change means that, for the
industry, the standard sale now longer exists.

Potentially the greatest threat stemming from disclosure is that public
reaction to the charges will result in a switch entirely away from life
and pensions products. Research conducted by consultants National
Economic Research Associates (NERA) forecasts that sales will drop by
10 percent following the introduction of disclosure.

Last year's public reaction to concern over mis-selling was to stop
buying, a public vote of no confidence which hit profits and share
values. There is little to suggest that providing more information will
prevent the same thing happening again.

Within a smaller market, public awareness of costs will force companies
to cut costs further, with a resulting squeeze on profitability. But
these cuts are likely to be achieved through greater use of technology,
particularly EDI systems, and a squeezing out of less competitive
players on both sides of the selling line. Behind the factfinds and
reams of new customer- friendly information is the knowledge that
commission levels remain largely unchanged - only the way they are paid
has been altered.

Commissions paid during 1992 are estimated at #2.5 billion ($3.96
billion or half the total cost of winning new business in that year.
According to NERA, the disclosure shake-up will cut industry costs by
#800 million. Part of the commission bill will be cut by smaller
salesforces, but commission levels are not falling.

How commission is taken has become as flexible as the new-style
policies. How much a product will cost in future and how much it will
generate for company and salesperson will depend on the agreement
between the company and the seller. It will reflect the complexity of
the product and a willingness to buy add-ons.

At Standard Life, commission levels to Independent Financial Advisers
(IFAs) are being maintained, although surrender values are also being
increased. In this case, the company is financing the initial costs
itself, deducting them over the life of the entire policy. IFAs are
being allowed to pick and choose between level commission, indemnity
commission or any combination of the two. If they decide to rebate
commission this will not cause problems.

Clerical Medical, which distributes its products through IFAs, is
committed to protecting its salesforce, and has introduced a complete
range of flexible products and commission structures. "We believe that
our commission flexibility options meet the majority of IFA's
requirements," says Mike Elcock, Clerical Medical's disclosure product
manager.

"Once the new regime is in place and IFAs can measure the impact of
these changes on their business, we will need to review our initial
arrangements to ensure that IFAs get the help and service they need to
operate efficiently and effectively."

While the possible initial reaction may be to drive some customers away
from the market, the impact on the shape of that market in the long-
term is not limited to 10 percent of business. Bacon & Woodrow
forecasts that the number of companies operating in the market will
drop by 40 percent by the end of the decade, as price competition
forces them out. Changes in the IFA market are expected to arrive far
more quickly, as many move to become member of larger networks.

"We're likely to see growth in networks, with perhaps fewer, bigger
networks," predicts Geoff Show, life and pensions financial controller
at Norwich Union, which draws heavily on the IFA sector for its sales.
The advantage to the customer of larger networks will be that greater
size and income means that "they will be able to offer more talent,
research and skills", providing a competitive edge to smaller firms.
"IFAs will be able to decide how best to present commission charges,"
according to scales of commission previously registered with Norwich
Union, and ask for a quotation as they feel appropriate.

The IFA's key sales point - the independence to choose products from
across the entire market - should also provide them with an advantage,
providing the service matches the cost.

Switching to operating on a fee-only basis appears a strong
possibility, although customers are being warned that depending on the
complexity of the work accumulated hourly fees could outweigh
commission charges unless a substantial portfolio is involved. Tony
Shepherd, chairman of the Institute of Financial Planning (IFP),
comments: "Typically, most members of the IFP register charge between
#75 and #125. If any adviser is charging more than #150 per hour, there
needs to be a good reason for it."

The dilemma facing many IFAs as well as members of direct salesforces
therefore is not whether commissions will drop, because sufficient
structures have been put in place to protect this, but whether they
will see commissions at all. Pressure will fall this year on the IFA
sector where competition on pricing will force many into networks or
out of business altogether. Direct salesforces felt the first pain of
disclosure last year.

Banks, building societies and insurers forced to withdraw salesforces
for retraining took the opportunity to reduce them in size at the same
time and switch them from commission-only to salaried status.

In its annual survey of industry employment, the Life Insurance
Marketing and Research Association (LIMRA) reported that the industry
salesforce declined by one-sixth in the first nine months of 1994. For
every six salespeople at the beginning of the year, there were five by
October. Its findings suggest that the trend will continue downwards.

Leavers are not being replaced on a one-for-one basis and recruitment
is far more stringent. "What we are seeing is a steady upgrading of the
quality of the salesforce," comments Frank Fletcher, LIMRA Europe's
research director. "Companies are being increasingly selective in the
people they retain and even more selective in the quality of people
they take on."

Although it doesn't anticipate heavy job cuts, Midland Bank has taken
the decision to integrate its 850-strong life and pensions salesforce
into its branch network (see page 6), which will bring about economies
of scale.

It is impossible to judge how the public will react to the increased
amount of information which the industry has so assiduously provided,
but undoubtedly perceived value for money will be an important sales
factor.

Research undertaken for consulting group Merchants indicates that
consumers are increasingly proactive when it comes to purchasing
products, indicating that the industry adage that products are "sold
rather than bought" is a false one.

Up to two-thirds of customers approach companies to make a purchase, a
factor which demolishes many arguments that an established sales
relationship will generate more business. The highly stable market of
recent years has meant that "the nuances and foibles of consumers have
often been shielded from the life assurance companies by intermediary
salesforces", Merchants concludes.

In the survey, only 22 percent said that commission levels are a "very
important" factor when choosing a product, although overall value for
money is an important factor. As a result, consumers may use the new
disclosure information to take a longer-term view of their investment
choice, rather than leaping at the lowest commission figure. "The
companies which are most likely to suffer a consumer reaction . . . are
those with uncompetitive charges or return on investment record - not
those companies which operate high commission channels," says
Merchants. Soft factors, such as speed and accuracy of response, and a
complete answer to queries, also rate highly, indicating that attention
to pricing and good service will help companies build their competitive
advantage.

For the increasing numbers of customers familiar with purchasing
financial services over the telephone, direct sales of life and
pensions products will offer an attractive low-cost high-service
package. In addition to established direct writers such as Direct Line,
1995 has seen the news that entrepreneur Richard Branson's Virgin Group
will be launching a direct life and pensions company, Virgin Direct
(see page 5). A spokesman for Virgin said that the new company will
beat all traditional suppliers of pensions and life cover on price and
costs.

Norwich Union, which is joint, equal partner in the operation,
providing third-party administration and fund management expertise,
will in return benefit from connections with an organisation built on
strong service-led principles and affordable products. It should also
be borne in mind that Branson has assiduously avoided getting involved
in any business which would damage the Virgin brand, indicating that he
will avoid the structures which have hampered and harmed the rest of
the life industry.

Virgin's low-cost approach will be followed by that of another trusted
UK brand, Marks & Spencer. Its concept of reliable quality at slightly
above average pricing is likely to prove a success in this sector as it
has in others. It has an extensive network of shops in the UK, which is
also growing worldwide. Like Virgin, and perhaps unlike the industry,
it too is strong on brand protection.

Disclosure represents a major step change which will alter the face of
the industry. Its supposed new transparency which will be of such
benefit to the consumer is largely cosmetic compared with the knock-on
effect for the industry itself. For well-known new entrants, like Marks
& Spencer, disclosure offers an opportunity and a shock as it enters
the only industry which legally has to admit by how much a product is
marked-up between wholesale and retail price.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

PRUDENTIAL MOVES INTO THAILAND

PRUDENTIAL CORPORATION of the UK has broken into Thailand, buying a
24.99 percent stake in a small local insurance company, Thai Sethakit
Life Assurance PLC (TS Life), at a cost of some #13 million ($20.2
million). Prudential is acting through a joint- venture company Staple,
set up with local businessman, Roan Asvinvichit and other affiliates.
It plans to bid for the remaining shares of TS Life in a tender offer
through Staple. Thai insurance law prohibits foreign entities from
owning more than 25 percent of a Thai insurance company.

Eventually, Asvinvichit will acquire between 15 percent and 20 percent
of TS Life, while the rest will go to minority shareholders, predicted
sources at advisers Peregrine and Morgan Grenfell. The tender offer,
priced at Baht 65 ($2.59) per share, will be made in February.

Prudential may give a new lease of life to languishing TS Life. It may
also provide competition for American International Assurance (AIA),
the only wholly-owned foreign entity of the 12 life companies operating
in the country.

Thailand has some 6 million life insurance policyholders, with total
premium for 1994 forecast to reach Baht 37 billion. Thai insurers have
teamed up to combat the threat posed by AIA, which has carved out a
market share estimated at 58 percent of the total life premiums and 20
percent of policyholders. Last year, AIA quit the Thai Life Assurance
Association, citing irreconcilable differences with the members.

Most recently, Thai insurers have charged that AIA infringed Thai
insurance law by opening offices outside Bangkok, the capital. Overseas
insurance companies are restricted from conducting their insurance
business outside the capital city, but AIA contends that the offices
have no relation to its insurance operations, are not connected to the
activities of the Bangkok head office and do not contribute financially
to it.

AIA has established a superior branding image, backed up by a more
efficient organisation and an aggressive salesforce.

To boost efficiency, domestic companies have agreed not to poach sales
staff from each other. The association is committed to spending up to
Baht 1 million in training and has roped in US- based Life Insurance
Management and Research Association (LIMRA) to assist.

Soontorn Boonsai, president of the association and Ayudhya Life
Assurance plc, said that all these measures cannot ensure that local
companies will be able to compete effectively with AIA.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

POLAND:  TAX ON COMMISSION STARTS ROW

THE JANUARY 16 introduction of 22 percent VAT (value added tax) on
commissions of Polish insurance brokers and agents has stirred the
Association of Insurance Brokers to write a letter of protest to the
Ministry of Finance.

Chairman Leon Kozicki, objects to the tax largely because insurance
companies are exempt. It is too early for such a tax as brokers have
not yet reached full profitability," he said. Brokers have been
operating in Poland for two to three years. "This is a three-pronged
problem," argued Grace Zrodlowski-Kabat, managing director of Sedgwick
Poland."A new developing industry is being curbed; the move is
inconsistent with EC law on VAT registration; and it will stifle the
entire insurance market."

Polish insurance premiums are not subject to VAT, and the question
arises now as to whether they will have to go up to compensate.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

CU GETS PAKISTAN PERMIT

COMMERCIAL UNION (CU), the UK's largest composite insurer, has been
granted permission to write life business in the newly- opened Pakistan
market.

CU is the largest non-life foreign insurer in Pakistan and has been
keen to get a life licence since the market, nationalised in 1972, was
opened up to local life insurers in 1991, Steve Corfield, life
development manager in CU's overseas division, told LII.

It is the second foreign life insurer to win entry - in May last year,
American International Group, the largest international US insurer, was
granted initial permission to set up a life company.

"We still have plenty of work to do as the penetration of life
insurance is very low," Corfield said. Only 2 million people, out of a
population of 120 million, have life insurance cover."We will now go
into a stage of developing our infrastructure for a life operation,
working on product development, systems and so on," he said.

Corfield said CU expects to build its own distribution network as the
state company has a substantial tied agency force .

The company also hopes to build on its non-life contacts - it has a 5
percent market share, with approximate net written premiums of 160
million rupees ($5.2 million) last year.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

AIG WINS RUSSIAN LICENCE

AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL Group (AIG), the US's leading international
insurer, has become the first American insurer to receive a licence to
operate a sizeable partnership business in Russia.

AIG's Russian partners are Moscow-based Stolichny Bank of Savings and
the recently-formed, joint-stock company Garant- Invest.

The new company, RUS AIG, will be managed by AIG, which capitalised the
$3 million venture. AIG's central European senior executive Bengt
Westergren, will chair the board. Russian insurance expert, Andrei
Saznov, will act as general manager in Moscow.

RUS AIG, which will open in St Petersburg later this year, will offer
individual health, travel and motor insurance, as well as commercial
insurance.

Russian partner, Garant-Invest, was formed in September 1992 to provide
financial and investment services. Stolichny Bank of Savings is one of
Russia's largest retail and commercial banks, with 30 branches - it
also has the Federation's largest network of automated cash dispensers.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

VIRGIN CHALLENGES `NEANDERTHAL' INSURERS

AFTER REVOLUTIONISING the airline industry and taking Coca-Cola head-
on, entrepreneur Richard Branson is to tackle the UK's "Neanderthal"
financial services industry.

Virgin Direct, a joint venture between Virgin Group and Norwich Union,
will begin selling its first product, a no-fee Personal Equity Plan
(PEP), at the end of February.

Virgin aims to be a niche player in the life and pensions market, with
no intention of becoming "a mainstream direct banker", according to
spokesman Will Whitehorn. He stressed that the company would "like to
be a major player in a non- essential market".

Virgin targets niche markets for non-essential products, placing its
emphasis on bettering rival services at a lower price. Operating a
direct telesales service is an astute move on cost grounds and this,
combined with Virgin's service reputation and strong brand, will
attract custom - as will Richard Branson's image for challenging the
status quo. The group claims that there are 18 million Britons working
without pensions provisions.

Norwich Union is providing fund management and third-party
administration for the 50:50 joint venture, with the Virgin fund being
managed exclusive of Norwich Union business.

Speculation has surrounded Norwich Union's recent research into the
direct market - despite its widely stated commitment to the broker and
Independent Financial Adviser (IFA) market.

Before Christmas, the insurer said it was keeping up to date on
developments in the direct market. Once news of the Virgin joint
venture broke on January 1, a Norwich Union spokesman said that the
launch does not rule out further direct ventures, but at the same time
said the company remains "committed to the intermediary market".

Initially, telesales staff will operate from Norwich. The product
range, designed to Virgin's specifications, will roll out over the next
year to provide four or five cost-effective products, including a
single premium life and pensions product and a unit trust.

The inclusion of a flexible life and pension policy suggests that
Virgin has spotted this niche quicker than established insurers who are
only just beginning to design products which reflect today's flexible
employment market.

Virgin earlier rebuffed several approaches to bring its high- service,
low-cost approach to the financial services market, but a combination
of 1994's pensions scandal and the disclosure regime had suggested an
opening in the market for Virgin, Whitehorn said.

"This highlighted the expensive, Neanderthal selling structure of the
industry, while disclosure represents a major regulatory change which
breaks down barriers to entry. There was obviously an opportunity for a
`green field' operation to dramatically reduce costs across the
market."

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

LIFE COMPANIES EXPLOIT DIRECT LEADS

UK LIFE companies are using rival direct insurers to drum up sales
leads. Standard Life, which generates most of its life and pensions
business through independent financial advisers, has confirmed its
links with direct writer, Churchill Insurance.

Churchill, with 600,000 policyholders the UK's second-largest house and
motor direct writer after Direct Line, is acting as an introducer for
Standard Life. The direct insurer follows up sales leads from customers
who have requested further financial services information on publicity
and proposal forms. Telesales staff explain different products and
arrange an appointment with a Standard Life salesperson - although in
some cases they complete sales of products such as term assurance.

In addition to contributing towards the training of Churchill telesales
staff, Standard Life pays Churchill commission on sales generated.

The arrangement is not the only one of its kind. Sun Life uses
Prospero, the direct arm of Provincial insurance, to generate leads,
while Admiral, the Lloyd's of London direct insurer, was an appointed
representative of Scottish Amicable until the middle of 1994.

A spokesman for the Scottish Life house said that Admiral had
investigated whether it was possible to"cold-sell term assurance
products". Admiral is now pressing ahead with its own direct life
insurer.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

HALIFAX SETS DIRECT TARGET

HALIFAX BUILDING Society plans to move into direct life and general
insurance sales if a proposed direct personal banking service takes
off, according to general manager David Gilchrist. Both developments
partly depend on whether the planned merger between the UK's biggest
building society and Leeds Permanent goes ahead.

Gilchrist said that both societies are interested in telephone banking,
and providing this service as a merged operation would reduce the
expense. Developing this to offer classes of insurance is also a
possibility, he said.

The two societies announced merger plans in November 1994. Should they
gain the support of members, they would then convert to a PLC (public
limited company) to become the country's third- largest bank.

Failure would not preclude developing the service: both societies have
fledgling life insurance arms (Halifax launched its company on January
9), and, following changes to the Building Societies Act, are able to
write housing-related general business.

Bradford & Bingley has announced plans to launch a telephone mortgage
service in spring. It will target borrowers with substantial equity
with an exclusive discounted mortgage, unavailable through its branch
network.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

ZURICH SCORES ALLFINANZ COUP IN ITALIAN MARKET

ZURICH INSURANCE'S Italian branch office is to establish a life company
in conjunction with Banco di Napoli, Italy's sixth- largest bank.

The new company will sell its products at over 800 Banco di Napoli
branches. It has yet to get a licence, but should be operational by
autumn, according to Peter Schenker, Zurich senior vice-president for
Southern Europe.

Zurich will sell simple life products through the bank branches, he
said."As there is still a legal barrier in Italy, preventing banks from
selling products for which advice is necessary, it is only possible to
sell standard products."

The insurer already had some local co-operation agreements in Italy but
was keen to develop a countrywide distribution network - Banco di
Napoli was the last of the top eight Italian banks without an allfinanz
link.

Zurich, with a network of about 600 agents, is a small player on the
Italian life market - last year's estimated premiums written of L260
billion ($159.6 million) represents a market share of about 1.5 percent
- and Schenker said the company hopes the new agreement will help it to
break into the top ten life insurers. The market leaders, Generali, RAS
and INA, have market shares of 10 percent-15 percent.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

SWEDEN:  TRYGG-HANSA PLANS BANK

TRYGG-HANSA, the leading Swedish life insurer, has received a banking
licence and is to open a niche bank focusing on deposits and individual
pension-savings products. Trygg-Banken, which will open in the second
quarter of 1995, will target Trygg-Hansa's 1.7 million policyholders.

Lars Thunell, chief executive of Trygg-Hansa, noted that the move will
allow the company to operate on the same terms as other Swedish
insurers. Rival insurer Skandia, with 1.5 million policyholders,
launched SkandiaBanken on October 3 1994 (see LII 64).

Skandia created the bank both to expand its product range to include
deposit accounts and other standardised banking products and to allow
it to offer higher rates to its pensions customers.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

AUSTRIA:  DIE ERSTE LAUNCHES FUND-LINKED PRODUCT

DIE ERSTE Osterreichische Sparkasse, the fourth-largest Austrian bank,
has become the first bank to introduce a fund-linked insurance product
on to the market. The launch in December, was in conjunction with
German insurer Nurnberger Lebensversicherung.

The bank's insurance subsidiary, Versicherungs Makler Gesellschaft,
will manage the product - the insurer already offers traditional life
insurance and some general insurance products and 99 percent of its
business is with individuals.

Die Erste's 240 outlets will be used as the distribution channel,
according to Anton Freitag, Die Erste's head of market segmentation.
The development of fund-linked insurance products in Austria will, he
predicts, be similar to that in Germany. Freitag envisages that it will
be a niche product.

Nurnberger Lebensversicherung AG is the biggest provider of fund-
linked insurance products on the German market.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

UNITED KINGDOM:  MIDLAND REVAMPS SALESFORCE

MIDLAND BANK, the UK's third-largest, is integrating its 850- strong
life insurance and pensions salesforce into its network of 1,740 bank
branches.

Midland is retraining staff to meet the new rules on product and
commission disclosure which came into effect on January 1 (see pages 10-
11).

The bank recently revamped life, pension and investment business and
claims that it is going beyond the regulations by including commission
disclosure on life and non-life regulated products and client-specific
illustrations. Midland investors will be informed about surrender and
maturity values and the effect of charges.

Midland has also made unit trusts and PEPs more competitive, reducing
the initial charge from 6 percent to 4 percent, and halving the minimum
regular savings contribution from #100 to #150 ($155.35-$233).

At the same time, Midland has introduced a new payment structure for
its salesforce, based on a considerably higher salary compared with
commission.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

POLAND:  WARTA AND PKO LINK UP

WARTA, POLAND'S second-largest insurer, is to create a life insurance
company with the state-owned bank PKO BP. Both will hold a 40 percent
stake in the new company, Warta-Vita.

Warta-Vita intends to compete with Panstowy Zaklad Ubezpiecen (PZU),
which controls 95 per cent of the market and concentrates on group
insurance.

Warta-Vita will emphasise"western-type" individual products, said
Warta's Olga Doan, who has been involved in planning the venture for
three years and will be on the board of directors of Warta- Vita. It
will also introduce one new group product.

Fund-linked insurance products are a definite consideration for the
future - Thomas Klaricki, director of banking investment at PKO BPK,
noted that the bank should have important input in fund management.

Klaricki believes the venture will influence product design to suit
customer needs. Allfinanz is not a new notion for PKO BP, which before
the war offered life insurance products to its customers.

Products will be distributed through Warta insurance agents and the 800
branch network of PKO BP. Warta-Vita has applied for its licence and
expects to start operating in April.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

AIG LINKS WITH ITALIAN UNION

AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL Group (AIG) has teamed up with an Italian trade
union, Cisi, to access the growing demand for private pensions and
insurance cover in the market. Unionvita, owned 51 percent by the trade
union and 49 percent by Alico, AIG's Italian life subsidiary, was
authorised at end-December - its management will come from the American
insurer.

Guido Laudini, Unionvita managing director, said the joint venture
should be highly beneficial to both parties. "Alico does not have a
sales network or any existing agreements so we were keen to fill the
gap," he said.

"In many ways the venture will be similar to a bancassurance link, with
upfront costs reduced to the minimum and a large captive market to
which the requisite products can be offered."

Cisi was keen to find an international partner, Laudini said. "They
preferred a foreign company because a similar link-up with an Italian
operator would find itself competing with the partners existing sales
network."

The union has 4 million members and already operates a consultancy
service for pensions, insurance and fiscal matters -
 also available to non-union members.

"Italy is significantly underinsured as a country," Laudini noted."In
1992, only 0.8 per cent of Italian GDP went on life insurance premiums
so the prospects for growth are very good. In addition, the range of
products is likely to expand because most life insurance is still used
as a saving instrument rather than as cover against a person's death."

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

BERLUSCONI GROUP SEEKS BANKING STATUS

PROGRAMME ITALIA, the Italian financial services group which owns one
of Italy's leading life operators, Mediolanum Vita, has decided to
restructure and seek banking status. The ownership of the group is also
under discussion.

Managing director, Ennio Doris, has expressed a desire to acquire a
majority stake from Fininvest and the outgoing Italian prime minister,
Silvio Berlusconi, with whom he started the company in 1982.

The decision to convert to a bank, according to Doris, is "a natural
evolutionary step to exploit the company's expertise in various sectors
of the Italian financial services market". As a bank, he pointed out,
Programme Italia will be in a better position to focus on core
businesses and to widen the range of products and services.

Programme Italia will not open banking branches for its clientele,
preferring to operate almost exclusively through its extensive sales
network - the current 2,000 consultants will be increased to 3,000 by
the time the bank is launched in 1996.

Mediolanum Vita, Italy's sixth-largest life company, saw its premium
income rise by more than 30 percent to L552 billion ($338.8 million) in
the first ten months of 1994. Sales of Programme Italia's 15 mutual
funds increased by more than 40 percent over the same period and the
group's total turnover grew by 27 percent to l,909 billion.

Doris said it is likely that there will be a reorganisation of the
group and this will affect the shareholding structure. "I am ready to
take the leading role in the company if that is the result," he
said."If necessary, I will look for partners to help finance an
eventual acquisition."

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

BELGIAN POST OFFICE SEEKS PARTNER

THE BELGIAN post office, De Postcheque, is planning to distribute
products such as insurance, mortgages and loans through its post office
network and has narrowed the choice of candidates down to the last few.

In late 1994, De Postcheque invited 260 financial companies in Belgium
to tender. Among the final contenders are Belgian insurer Royale Belge
and ING, the Dutch allfinanz group, which recently decided to develop
its international allfinanz operations (see LII 64), according to
Freddie Weyers, project manager at De Postcheque.

ING Group has a 100 percent-owned subsidiary, Postbank, which sells
products through the Dutch post office and "would like to apply this
experience elsewhere", according to a company spokesman. The
conglomerate already has a life office in Belgium, La Patriotique,
offering financial services including insurance.

De Postcheque is prohibited by law from acting as a bank,"so if we want
to offer more sophisticated products to our customers, we must enter
into a partnership", said Weyers.

De Postcheque has between 1,700 and 1,800 offices throughout Belgium.
If it enters into a co-operation with a financial group, such as ING,
it is only permitted by law to have that one partner. It can, however,
have as many insurance partners as it wants.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

AMB AND AGF PULL CLOSER

AACHENER UND Munchener Beteiligungs (AMB), Germany's second largest
insurer, and Assurances Generales de France (AGF), the second-largest
composite insurer in France, are pulling closer together.

AMB, which currently holds 2.57 percent of AGF's share capital, will
increase its holding to 5 percent on or before June 30 1995. In future,
a representative from AMB will be entitled to attend meetings of AGF's
administrative council. AGF must maintain its stake in AMB at 33.55
percent until December 31 1999. In the first half of 1994 this stake
contributed Fr106 million ($19.72 million) to AGF's net earnings,
almost twice the amount recorded the previous year.

A working group of experts from both companies is being formed to
define and develop areas of co-operation. AMB is keen to look at AGF's
experience with market segmentation, while AGF is interested in AMB's
direct selling knowledge, gained through its associate direct insurer
COSMOS.

On an international level, AMB and AGF will be formulating combined
strategies, although it is not yet clear what form these strategies
will take.

AMB has set up a building society in Strasburg and this is a business
area AGF may develop in France.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

ALLIANZ, BERNER TO CO-OPERATE

ALLIANZ, EUROPE's largest insurer has sealed a co-operation agreement
with Berner Insurance of Switzerland, in which it bought a 31.5 percent
stake last year, giving it a sizeable foothold on the Swiss market.

The essence of the Berner agreement is exchange of information, Allianz
spokesman Emilio Galli-Zugaro told LII. Gerhardt Rupprecht, Allianz
board member, is in charge of know-how transfers within the group and
Berner will participate in working committees focused on the European
market.

"On the investment side, they can be part of our financial committees,
deciding where to allocate resources, investment etcetera," Galli-
Zugaro said. "International investment know-how is not as big at
Berner." Information exchange will extend across the board - in
electronic data processing, for example, the Allianz sales force in
Germany is equipped with lap- top computers and this could be a
possibility for Switzerland.

On the product side, Galli-Zugaro argued that the potential for
innovation may not be huge. Fund-linked products are already available
in Germany but are not popular, he pointed out.  "We would be ready to
launch them tomorrow - we have our own investment management, but we
don't want gimmicks." Information exchange on mortality and actuarial
tables will be important.

The companies will be looking at all processes. Berner has been
carrying out a cost-cutting programme in recent years and this will
continue.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

NEW YORK AND ST. JAMES CAPITAL LINK

NEW YORK Life Worldwide Holding, a subsidiary of New York Life
Insurance Company, has announced the formation of a new company with UK-
based, St. James Place Capital (SJPC), to pursue its UK acquisition
strategy.

The company, Life Assurance Holding Corporation (LAHC), will be
capitalised at $100 million, with New York Life Worldwide and SJPC each
contributing $31.25 million.

Capital commitments have also been made by financial institutions such
as Chase Investment Bank, PosTel, Scottish Amicable, Invesco, and John
Rothschild Assurance Holdings. "LAHC is designed to help us participate
in the consolidation which is taking place in the UK life market," said
William Mowat, executive vice president and chief financial officer of
New York Life, who compared the new company to Conseco, a leading buy-
out firm in the US.

One of the largest life insurance companies in the US, New York Life's
previous UK acquisitions include Windsor Life Assurance Company, in
1989; Gresham Life, in 1992; and US Aetna's UK life business, which it
bought in 1993.

The Windsor Life Assurance Company, sold to LAHC by New York Life (UK)
as part of the transaction, will serve as the LAHC vehicle for life
acquisitions. Windsor's chairman, John Wybrew, will act as chief
executive; SJPC chairman, Sir Mark Weinberg, was appointed chairman;
and William Yelverton, chief executive officer of New York Life
Worldwide, is vice- chairman.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

BRADESCO MOVES INTO ARGENTINA

BRAZIL'S LARGEST insurer, Bradesco, has bought a 70 percent stake in La
Rosario Companhia Argentina de Seguros, an inactive Argentinian
insurance company belonging to that country's Roberts allfinanz
conglomerate.

The move is part of a trend started by the economic integration of the
two countries into the Southern Cone Common Market (Mercosul), which
came into formal existence on January 1 and also includes Uruguay and
Paraguay.

Already, other major Brazilian players, such as Bamerindus and Sul
America, have set up operations in Buenos Aires, as have multinational
insurance groups, such as AGF and Mapfre, with their Brazilian
subsidiaries managing the operations.

Bradesco's move into Argentina is noteworthy, given the size of the
Brazilian insurer. It has a net worth of $1.5 billion, more than double
the collective net worth of all the 220 companies operating in
Argentina.

Even in Brazil, Bradesco dwarfs the competition - its annual premiums
amount to over $300 million, twice that of the number two on the
market. The Argentinian market had total premiums of about 4.5 billion
in June 1994, some 64 percent the size of the Brazilian market.

The new company will be headquartered in Buenos Aires, with the
operational side run by La Buenos Aires, the largest insurer in the
Roberts Group.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

CZECHS SLATE NEW PENSION PROPOSALS

CZECH TRADE unions staged a 15-minute national strike on December 21,
the first since the 1989 revolution, protesting against a pensions
reform bill recently submitted to Parliament.

Pension fund management has become a boom industry in the Czech
Republic, especially for banks, but it's a bone of contention for
unions and pensioners opposed to reforms which also affect the health
industry.

Unions and pensioners are concerned that the bill gives the government
powers to alter pension rates without indexation and to raise the
pensionable age for men to 65 years. Men currently retire at age 60 and
women from age 54 to 57, depending on the number of their children.

The basic pension is around half of the worker's previous salary, but
with monthly salaries averaging only CK7,000 ($200), 62 percent of all
pensioners complain they cannot cope, according to a poll by the
Chamber of Trade Unions. Of these, more than half supplement their
pensions from their savings, according to the poll.

The debate has helped boost the profile of newly-formed private
pensions and fund managers claim demand has been strong among the few
workers to be offered the schemes to date. Most schemes are run by
Czech banks and other institutions with large employee or client bases.
Since October, when private pension funds were first allowed to
operate, 21 licences have been granted and a further 23 applications
are pending.

Many leading funds are run as joint ventures, often between a bank and
one or more financial specialists such as insurance companies, although
notable stand-alone operations include those of Komercni Banka and
Winterthur Life (see LII 65).

Among the largest non-financial firms offering pensions are a group of
construction firms based in Prague (Stavebni penzijni fond) and a joint-
venture between trading companies in Northeast Moravia (Bansky a hutni
penzijni fond Trinec).

Minimum capital is CK20 million, but Penzijni fond Ceske Pojistovna,
run by the Czech Insurance Company, has the largest base capital at
CK90 million. Pension funds can offer products including standard
retirement incomes, disability and inheritable pensions and lump-sum
contributions.

Employees select their own fund and manage their own contributions.
Employers may supplement payments, but are not required to. The
government is offering supplementary payments, depending on the
employee contribution.

All pension funds must be open to all Czech citizens and are restricted
to conservative investments, including government securities, property
and blue chip shares listed on the Prague Stock Exchange. The law also
requires 85 per cent of funds to be distributed and a further 5 per
cent to be held as reserves.

Some funds are offering rates of return of up to 10 percent - recalling
the feverish competition between investment privatisation funds which
bid one another up until they were offering rates of return which
failed to materialise.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

BRITISH GOVERNMENT MAKES FRESH PENSIONS MOVE

PROMPTED BY recent high-profile cases of plundering of company pension
schemes, the UK government has placed new pensions legislation before
Parliament.

It proposes a new regulatory authority far larger than that anticipated
in an earlier White Paper. With 200 staff and a seven-member
controlling panel, the Occupational Pensions Regulatory Authority
(OPRA) will be bigger than the financial services watchdog, the
Securities and Investments Board (SIB).

The bill includes many of the findings of the Goode Committee, which
recommended widespread change to pensions legislation to prevent cases
such as that of the Maxwell Pension Fund, which was raided by chairman
Robert Maxwell prior to his death three years ago (see LII 64). It also
equalises pensions ages for men and women at 65.

Among the changes are index-linking of pensions fund benefits to the
Retail Price Index (RPI) or 5 percent a year - whichever is smaller -
and a requirement for minimum solvency standards for pension funds.

The latter has already generated debate. The bill contains no actual
figures and some MPs are concerned that some companies may keep their
funds to the bare minimum and avoid the build-up of large surpluses.

Overall, the cost to the pensions industry of index-linking benefits,
meeting solvency requirements (still to be decided), plus establishing
OPRA has been estimated at #165 million ($256.3 million) a year, plus a
#400 million one-off charge.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

UNION TO SUE OVER UK PENSIONS SCANDAL

A UNION representing members who were mis-sold pensions during the
1980s has said that it will not wait for official investigations to be
completed before taking legal action against life and pensions
companies.

Bill Day, National Pensions Officer for the GMB union, which represents
general and municipal employees including teachers and health workers,
said that the union had identified more than 100 cases where
individuals were wrongly advised to opt out of union or company schemes
into personal pensions.

Although the entire UK life and pensions industry is reviewing
potential mis-selling, following the Securities and Investments Board's
(SIB) report that more than 250,000 pensions customers were wrongly
advised, GMB has said that it will not wait until the end of the 18-
month review. "We're not happy with the level of compensation that the
SIB recommends in the review and there is no suggestion of damages,"
said Day. "We want to test it in court."

When the action reaches court, expected to be in several months time,
it will test SIB's approach to the mis-selling scandal and increase the
bad publicity surrounding the industry.

Concerns were expressed in October 1994 that SIB's schedule might
prevent some individuals from taking legal action due to the statute of
limitations. The GMB move may result from such concerns, although a
spokesman would not confirm this.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

VITAL REQUESTS SHARE SUSPENSION

VITAL, NORWAY'S second-largest insurer, saw some turbulence in early
January. On January 4, the company, which has a 20 percent market
share, asked the Oslo stock exchange to suspend trading in its shares
after the share price was hit by rumours that it was in negotiations
with international insurers.

Vital, which reported a loss of NKr97 million ($14.27 million) for the
third quarter of 1994, compared with a profit of NKr2.3 billion the
previous year, admitted that it was "considering various structural
alternatives, including international options". This is motivated, the
company said, by the internationalisation expected as a result of the
European Economic Area (EEA) and the termination of its co-operation
with Den norske Bank in October last year.

Last year's losses were largely as a result of rising interest rates,
which hit the value of Vital's bond portfolio. Premium income at the
end of the third quarter stood at NKr2.8 billion, up from NKr2.3
billion.

Trading resumed on January 11 - Vital has said that discussions are
closed for the moment and that it will initiate no new talks, although
a spokesman said it would "give all approaches consideration".

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

PRUDENTIAL MAKES FRAUD PROVISION

PRUDENTIAL INSURANCE Company, the US's biggest life insurer, is
injecting its securities division with $365 million to help buoy it
against the spiralling expense of fraud settlements.

Prudential Securities has cost its parent company $1.6 billion since
1981 through settlements with defrauded investors, many of whom bought
limited partnerships presented as being "safe" but actually high-risk.
So far, Prudential Securities has paid over $650 million to a
restitution fund established by the Justice Department and the
Securities & Exchange Commission (SEC). To date, a relatively small
percentage of 56,000 claimants have received total settlements of $397
million. However, reports from law firm Storch & Brenner indicate that
claims total about 152,000 - and growing.

The firm, selected to assist with fund administration, said claims
filed against Pru Securities doubled to almost 3,000 a week, as the
January 10 filing deadline approached.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

IRISH LIFE FINED BY LAUTRO

IRISH LIFE has been fined #300,000 by Lautro, the UK life insurance
disciplinary authority, and ordered to pay Lautro's #85,000 costs. The
fine related to charges of: failure to deal satisfactorily with
complaints; failure to adhere to Lautro recruitment requirements for
some appointed sales representatives; inadequate monitoring of company
representatives; and failure to keep proper records. Up to April 1994,
Irish Life UK had also failed to implement a satisfactory training and
competence scheme.

Lautro conceded that Irish Life, Ireland's top life insurer, remedied
these breaches quickly and fully - the life company said it was
disappointed by the reprimand, given this acknowledgement and the fact
that most of the offences were more than 12 months ago.

Of Irish Life's total premium income of more than #800 million, about
#100 million is generated in the UK.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

CORPORACION MAPFRE FORECASTING RISE IN PROFITS

CORPORACION MAPFRE, of Spain, is forecasting a rise in consolidated
profits for 1994 of more than 25 percent. The group's life subsidiary,
Mapfre Vida, was the main contributor to profit growth, contributing
about Pta6 billion ($4.48 million).

Mapfre Vida was listed on the Spanish exchange on December 23 1994,
after 1.2 million of its shares - 7.5 percent of share capital - were
placed at a price of Pta4,750 in a public offer exclusive to
shareholders of Corporacion Mapfre, Spain's leading insurer. The issue
was oversubscribed 4.8 times. The proceeds will be used to strengthen
Mapfre's international activities.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

TRAVELERS GROUP SPREADING ITS NET

TRAVELERS GROUP has been spreading its net, recruiting the head of a
failed US investment house to two senior positions. Michael Carpenter,
who resigned his chief executive post at the faltering securities firm
of Kidder, Peabody in June, has been named an executive vice president
of business development and strategic planning at Travelers Group. He
will also take responsibility for the life and annuity businesses of
Travelers Insurance.

Carpenter left Kidder, Peabody in the wake of rising interest rates
which were deflating the bond market and an inside trading scandal
which forced Kidder's parent company, General Electric (GE), to reduce
its after-tax earnings by $210 million. Kidder Peabody went on the
auction block earlier this year and will reportedly sell most of its
business to another Wall Street securities firm, PaineWebber.

Carpenter is an interesting choice for the Travelers life post. While
he has no direct experience in insurance, he managed several company
acquisitions and buy-out deals when working for Kidders' parent
company, GE. Travelers does not currently admit to acquisition plans,
but Travelers Group president James Dimon, said the company's life
business is"expected to grow" and Carpenter said he expects "new
opportunities" from industry consolidation.

In his new positions, Carpenter will report to Robert Lipp, chief
executive of the company's insurance division, and to Sanford Weill,
Travelers Group chairman.

Based in New York, Travelers Group is the parent of the Primerica
Financial Services term insurance network, and Travelers Insurance, the
company which recently made headlines when it merged its group health
care business with Metropolitan Life's, creating MetraHealth Companies,
the largest commercial managed health care network in the US, with a
customer base of about 13 million customers (see LII 61).

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

IMPERIO ALLIES WITH BCP TO BID FOR BPA

IMPERIO, PORTUGAL'S largest insurer, has allied with Banco Commercial
Portugues (BCP), in a bid for the country's second- biggest bank, Banco
Portugues do Atlantico (BPA). BCP made a failed takeover bid for a 34.5
percent stake in the bank last summer.

Imperio already owns the small Banco Mello and sells the bank's
products through its network - a spokesman said that the BPA bid could
be useful in developing the insurer's allfinanz strategy, but no
details were available.

Under the terms of the tender, approved by the Ministry of Finance on
January 12, BCP is offering Esc300 billion ($1.87 billion) for BPA, or
Esc2,730 per share, considerably lower than the Esc3,000 it offered
last year.

BCP would acquire just over 50 percent of BPA's capital and Imperio the
rest of the shares sold off.

With BPA go two smaller banks it controls - Banco Commercial de Macau
and Uniao de Bancos Portugueses - as well as BPA's life insurer, BPA
Vida.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

INSURERS SANGUINE ON EU

If Austria's EU membership as of January 1 means tougher competition
for the life insurance market, domestic companies seem unperturbed.
George Hamilton reports from Vienna

AUSTRIA HAS technically been open to outsiders for the past year, under
the European Economic Area (EEA) agreement, but no sweeping changes
have occurred. Over two years ago, Austrian life insurers showed no
anxiety over possible competition and nothing has happened to support a
reversal in their laid-back attitude.

Insurance regulations were redrawn last summer to conform to EEA/EU
practice, greatly liberalising the market. Any insurer registered in an
EEA/EU country may offer products in Austria, regardless of whether the
firm has an Austrian subsidiary.

Non-Austrian firms must be approved by the finance ministry's insurance
supervisory authorities before products may be sold. Nor may Austrian
agents legally offer products of non-approved insurers.

If an insurer is not approved, "please don't ask me what happens in the
case of a claim", says one Austrian insurance broker. The registration
is no problem to serious companies and is intended mainly to protect
policy purchasers and proscribe money laundering. About 30 companies
registered outside Austria have filed their intent to sell insurance
within the country - how many of these might offer life policies is not
clear.

While conditions indicate opportunities for companies new to the
Austrian life insurance market, other factors work towards maintaining
the status quo. The market is dominated by a handful of domestic
insurers or the long-established subsidiaries of Italian and German
concerns.

Helping to maintain the situation is a Sch40,000 ($3,600) "special
expense" personal tax deduction, available only against premiums paid
to Austrian insurers. Life policies, whether bought in Austria from a
domestic insurer or purchased outside the country, are subject to a 4
percent insurance tax.

Furthermore, policies written in currencies other than schilling or
Deutschmark carry an exchange rate risk - sterling and even the Ecu,
for example, have plunged against the schilling in recent years.

The threat of competition has resulted in gradual lowering of premiums
and greater policy flexibility on the part of domestic life insurers.
Policyholders in some cases may cancel policies or switch without
penalty between different life types.

New policyholders are able at any point to shift their life insurance
from annual premiums to a paid-up policy, subject to a limit placed on
the minimum paid-in premium under which this option is available.
Policy language has been greatly simplified and footnotes eliminated.

Rates by domestic insurers have been reduced gradually to more closely
meet those of potential competitors and to conform to updated actuarial
tables. Indeed, earlier last year, Wiener Allianz, member of the German
Allianz group, estimated that rates for life policies could drop by as
much as 20 per cent.

The single main factor which continues to reserve the market to
domestic insurers is the conservatism of the public, coupled with the
assumption that the generous government retirement pensions will
continue. The well-established vast network of company-tied local
agents is also a help. Few life insurers could afford to build up the
agent networks which the top half-dozen life insurers operate, each
with some 3,500-4,000 agent-employees.

This cost element admittedly contributes to higher premiums, but the
direct personal service is expected by the insured public. The agents'
cost can be spread over a number of products and services such as
claims adjustment, helping to justify the expense while supporting an
unusually high level of service.

"Austrians have a curious fascination with the subject of death, but
don't talk about it in a direct personal way," contends one observer
writing about the Austrian personality. The observation is verified by
experience of the life insurance industry, which finds it considerably
easier to sell annuities or single-premium term policies than pure life
policies with pay-out upon death.

This fact has led to considerable creativity on the part of insurers in
packaging the more traditional policies as investments rather than
insurance and in developing new products. Single-premium term
insurance, for example, was the industry sales hit last year.

On a direct basis, the local company agent can often sell life policies
in conjunction with other insurance coverage. A term life policy is a
relatively easy add-on for banks when providing personal or home loans -
 this accounts for the high life market share of Wustenrot building
society, for example, where insurance is a secondary but hardly
unimportant product.

Indeed, Austrian insurers are finding banks increasingly important
beyond their own sales networks in selling life policies. There is
cross-ownership between the number one life insurer Wiener Stadtische
Versicherung and the number one bank, Bank Austria.

The same is true of the number two in each category, Generali Leben and
Creditanstalt-Bankverein. The latter not only sells Erste Allgemeine-
Generali products but shares a joint company, CA- Generali, with the
insurer.

The CA tie has become so important to EA-Generali that it worries over
current moves to privatise the bank. German competitor Allianz is
amongst those considering a bid for a shareholding in CA - such a move
presumably would preclude further links between CA and Generali.
Generali has given notice that it would be prepared to increase its
stake in Creditanstalt before going to the expense of recreating the
sales capacity which the present bank connection offers.

Appearances would suggest considerable market potential for life
insurance. Each Austrian allegedly has about $73,000 in savings set
aside in investments of one form or another, generally in savings
accounts, often at minimal interest rates. By tapping some of this
potential, total life insurance written has been growing at an average
cumulative rate of 9 percent-10 percent, with premiums reaching $3.6
billion in 1993. Nonetheless, Gregor Kozak, spokesman for the insurance
industry, notes that "Austrians are not a particularly insurance-
friendly people. Internationally, Austria lies well behind."

No great invasion of new insurers is expected as a result of EEA/EU-
inspired entry liberalisation. As Dietrich Karner, general director of
EA-Generali observes:"The prominent insurance groups are long since
present in Austria and have carved out their market share".

Karner contends that Austria is oversupplied, relative to the number of
insurers already in the market, and that lower rates can be achieved
only at the expense of services which the Austrian policyholder
expects. Given these conditions, market entry is clearly no casual
affair. Even entry via direct mail- order, probably the least expensive
approach, offers limited opportunities.

Well-established leader in health and hospitalisation, Austria-
Collegialitat, tried a broad-brush mail-order sales programme for
health insurance several years ago with only modest success; even at
that, the firm had follow-up capabilities via its rank of agents.
Currently only the German mail-order house, Quelle, offers life
insurance by mail.

The relative complacency of the current group of 35 domestic and
international subsidiary firms offering life insurance in Austria may
be exaggerated - but the market has been fought over long enough and
hard enough that the existing insurers will not yield territory to
newcomers without a good fight.

Life Insurance in Force, Premiums and Claims (Sch million)

                      1990         1991         1992       1993

Total policy value    697,457      769,391      834,507    915,552
Premiums written       27,585       29,198       31,265     40,111
Claims paid            10,935       11,938       14,402     16,450

Source: Verband der Versicherungsunternehmen Osterreichs

Top Ten Life Insurers by market share

Wiener Stadtische           (Austrian)
Generali Leben              (Italy)
Bundeslander                (Austrian)
Raiffeisen                  (Austrian)
Wiener Allianz Leben        (German/Austrian)
Wustenrot                   (Austrian)
Interunfall/RAS             (German)
Austria-Collegialitat       (Austrian)
Donau                       (Austrian)

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

GATEWAY TO ASIA

Australian life insurers face new challenges of stiffening regulation
and emerging Asian markets. Tess Critzer reports on the issues
preoccupying the industry

THE AUSTRALIAN life insurance market enjoys the singular distinction of
being the only European model market in its region. Ranked eleventh in
the world, it is the third-largest market in the Asia Pacific region,
surpassed in size only by Japan and South Korea.

Companies entering the Australian market, or any of the emerging Asian
markets, must be prepared to look deep and make market and cultural
allowances, argues James Cochrane, managing director of Oceanic
Holdings.

"The British designed the Australian market, and have grown with it,
and Europeans in general are used to adapting to different markets.
American companies, however, have not fared as well here. I think the
reason is that while Australia appears to be very similar to the US,
there are actually important subtle differences, and we have very
entrenched notions of how we go about doing business."

Cochrane points out that the Australian life industry is dominated by
Europeans. "It is a western economy with a consumption per capita
almost identical to the US and it has 17 million consumers. Any
overseas companies moving into the market must first recognise what
those consumers want."

Unlike in the US, both the life and non-life industries are regulated
federally. Currently, there are 41 direct insurers, employing 20,000
people, and five reinsurers, according to the Life Insurance Federation
of Australia (LIFA). About 80 percent of the life business is currently
written by ten of those 41 insurers, 22 of which are Australian-owned.

The three largest direct insurers are mutuals - Australian Mutual
Provident (AMP), the leading company, National Mutual and Colonial
Mutual. Seven of the 41 insurers are bank-owned, and three are
government-owned. Of the foreign insurers, eight are from the US and
six are of UK origin. There is one company each from the Netherlands,
Switzerland and New Zealand, as well as one Belgo-Dutch company and one
UK/Dutch venture.

As of September 1993, Australian life offices held $96 billion in
assets, up 11 percent on the previous year, more than half of which are
controlled by the three large mutuals. Indeed, the ten biggest
companies control more than 80 percent of overall assets. Overseas,
Australian life offices, located primarily in Asia and Europe, hold
assets of about $16 billion.

Career agents have traditionally been used for the distribution of
personal lines, with the industry employing an estimated 8,000 agents.
Many direct insurers, particularly the three market leaders, employ
independent or multi-agents, who sell the products of more than one
company, resulting in a strong, independent market of self-employed
agents.

The industry is facing new regulatory and operating hurdles, Cochrane
points out:

Allfinanz:"In general now in the Australian market, banks are the
winners, particularly since distribution has developed in investment
markets. The largest of these, Bankers Trust, sells investment products
and annuities, and it has the greatest share of retail funds management
in the country.

"Four years ago the three big mutual companies had about 70 percent of
premium income. That's changed now. They still have a good share of the
risk business, but bank-owned companies have undercut them on other
products.

"Banks came into their own in the Australian industry in the late
1970s, then they got into the pension fund market in the 1980s. The
banks did not replicate traditional insurance companies. Rather, they
sought to deliver life products at lower costs, and they found they
could sell insurance investment products, which enjoy preferential tax
treatment.

"Banks have the advantage of generating business through their branch
networks, and they also have access to a great deal of customer
information, so that when a customer walks into a bank and deposits a
cheque, the bank representative can cross- sell that individual,
convincing them to invest their savings in annuities or insurance
bonds.

"Australian banks have very high security, with almost no failures
whatsoever in the country's banking history. However, banks do not
guarantee their insurance products, and customers can lose a percentage
of their money without realising it. I also believe that banks should
issue disclosures of how they're managing their administrative costs.

"We've also seen the emergence of a broker market. Until recently, life
brokers were non-existent in Australia, but certain regulatory changes
have made brokerage attractive. The brokers control the group life
market in our industry, but I don't believe that commercial-strength
groups like brokers will branch out into individual products."

Regulatory Change: "The genesis of Australia's latest round of
regulations stems from the inability of the current regulations to
accommodate the needs of the country's current life products, because
in fact, 60 percent of these products did not exist when the old
regulations were written. For example, the old laws didn't even require
profit/loss statements.

"Within the next two months, a whole new raft of regulations will be
enacted in Australia, affecting company conduct as well as agent and
consumer issues. The regulations for company conduct will be fairly
standard, allowing for the establishment of an actuarial standards
board to oversee corporate control. The big difference is that
directors of life companies will owe primary allegiance to
policyholders, rather than shareholders.

"The regulations relating to agents and consumer issues are more
dynamic. The new rules will revolve around `Needs Analysis', very
similar to the British system. In other words, an insurer will not be
able to sell a policy without a complete analysis of the customer's
needs (unless a customer refuses to give out the information and
thereby signs a release).

"There will of course be a raft of regulation in regard to controlling
sales methodology. Many regulations have been introduced over the past
year and we have rules that prescribe complete illustration of fees,
charges and earnings (the regulator prescribes rates for earnings and
inflation purposes).

"Agent commissions have also been cut back significantly in recent
years, and the general requirement is to move to a flatter commission
scale and thereby lower the front-end load, although no one has yet
devised a method for making up the inevitable income loss.

"New laws will help consumers know what they're buying. For example,
the disclosure laws will help consumers recognise levels of agent bias.
Agent bias usually takes the form of commission, or other methods of
payments and benefits, and this naturally renders the agent biased in
favour of certain products. Now, agents must show their commission
bias, and the company also issues a report in conjunction with policy
issuance, informing the customer how much commission or what benefits
that agent got for selling him the product.

"Another aspect of the new regulatory proposals concerns agent quality.
At the moment, there are no qualifications other than industry
experience. However, some of the current proposals relate to agent
licensing, and movement toward greater education and improved
competency through training. In fact, steps are being taken to
establish a nationwide standard, enforced by training centres, at an
estimated cost of about A$300 (US$229.88 million) per agent.

"A much feared aspect of the new regulations relates to joint and
several liability, designed to make companies responsible for an
agent's underwriting actions. This provision would relate most
specifically to multi-agents - those who represent several companies.
It would require such agents to notify all their employer companies
when applying for a new agency, or when one of their agencies are
cancelled. This law is designed to better protect consumers from
unsuccessful or unscrupulous agents."

Costs and Profitability: "The costs of regulation are variable,
stemming from the nature of the regulation. However, it is often
difficult to balance off consumer interests against production costs.

"For example, the law now prescribes that an insurer's board of
directors must set up a compliance committee comprised of a majority of
outside, non-aligned directors who will certify that the company's
approved materials for market release comply with regulations.
Legislation prescribes that consumers can directly sue the members of
the compliance committee, so those external directors will seek to
protect themselves during their preparation and review of documents.
The result is that everything done today must be checked by a team of
lawyers. So, we turned things like advertising and promotion into
activities which need to be checked by lawyers.

"Likewise, new requirements for customer brochures have made it
virtually impossible to print out total disclosure and illustration
tables on less than 30 pages, which is driving up the costs of
advertising.

"Reduced agent commissions and other agent-related provisions have
resulted in a nearly double-digit reduction of agent numbers, industry-
wide. Many agents saw the market contracting and they got out. The more
experienced agents found renewed enthusiasm for selling risk products,
because there is no commission disclosure on a risk product unless it
has an investment element."

New Markets: Cochrane, like many other Australian life insurers, is
hopeful that Australia may become a regional centre for the
Asia/Pacific countries, along with Singapore and Hong Kong. Australia
offers a viable alternative to Asian bases because it is politically
non-aligned, he argues.

Australia has more than a century-old history of doing business in Asia
- one hundred years ago, four Asian insurers were also operating in
Australia: North China Insurance Company, Shanghai; China Traders
Insurance Company and the Canton Insurance Office, Hong Kong; and The
Straits Insurance Company, Singapore.

Today, only eight non-life Japanese companies represent Asia in
Australia. The tide is flowing the other way, with Asia the chosen area
of expansion for today's Australian insurers, according to Michael
Wansley, chairman of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu's National Insurance
Industry Group.

"Every year sees Australian insurers opening more offices in Asian
countries," says Wansley. The big three mutuals already have
capabilities in countries like Indonesia, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Japan and
the Philippines, he points out. Already 17 direct insurers based in
Australia have offices in the Asian/Pacific countries: two are in
China; eight in Hong Kong; three in Indonesia; six in Japan; two in
Malaysia; twelve in New Zealand; one in Pakistan; four in the
Philippines; eight in Singapore; two in South Korea; and three in
Taiwan.

The increasingly profitable Asian markets have"scarcely been tapped",
argues a report by LIFA, compiled by specialist writer, Florence Chong.
Australian life insurers have just begun establishing long-term,
mutually profitable relationships throughout the region.

Virtually all the Asian markets are experiencing double-digit growth
and Chong predicts that Asia will become a significant contributor to
Australia's total life revenue by the year 2000.

AMP offers a good illustration of the trend. Although it was the last
Australian company to venture into Asia, AMP estimates that about 80
percent of its income will originate in offshore European and Asian
markets by the end of the decade, as opposed to the current proportion
of 55 percent.

The strongest future growth in Asia will stem from Australia's life
sector, rather than non-life insurance, Chong forecasts. In 1992, for
example, total life insurance premiums (US$283.7 billion) were more
than double those of non-life premiums (US$110.4 billion).

Most Australian insurers in Asia seek long-term ventures with local
partners - a recent example was the agreement between Australia's MLC
Group and PT Asuransi Jiwa Simas Life, a subsidiary of the Indonesian
mega-conglomerate, Sinar Mas.

Asian companies are seeking out foreign partners in order to protect
their market share against other joint venture companies, Chong notes,
arguing that long-term thinking and market adaptation are the key
requirements for achieving success in the region.

The greatest growth potential lies in the Thai, Indonesian and Indian
markets, according to LIFA research. A ten-year growth period for Hong
Kong is predicted, and an ever-increasing demand for investment
products is forecast in Singapore. LIFA warns, however, that the China
market will not be ready for foreign entry for three years, because of
the inadequate legal framework, currently under revision by a drafting
committee.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

FRENCH BANKS TURN TRADITIONAL

Allfinanz has transformed the French life market. Jean-Pierre Daniel
international development manager of French research body CREP (Centre
de Recherche sur l'Epargne et le Patrimoine) traces the stages of
development

TWENTY YEARS ago, France was from the insurance point of view a very
"continental" country - very traditional, with few innovations in
products, a widespread front-end commission system and under the firm
control of the state. Most of this has changed in the last few years
and the growing role played by banks in distribution of insurance
personal lines explains many of the changes.

We had an old tradition of bancassurance with the Assurances du Credit
Mutuel (ACM), a subsidiary of the powerful co- operative bank, which
started in 1971 to sell general insurance products through the bank
branches. It started in the Eastern part of France, close to the German
border and gradually extended its network.

Today, ACM is very strong in Alsace and present in most of the
provinces. But strangely, probably because in the first years they
limited their influence to some regions, the Credit Mutuel has not been
considered as a danger - or an example - by the other actors in the
French market.

The origin: Apart from the ACM, bancassurance started in France in the
1960s when banks decided to sell insurance products as add-ons to
banking services. They had three objectives: to improve their relations
with their customers; to protect themselves, for instance in the case
of the borrower's death; and, of course, to earn extra commission.

The most typical product of this period is a death insurance guarantee
which covers a possible deficit on the bank account and is paid to the
surviving spouse if the account is in credit. The premiums are very
small, directly debited from the bank account each month, and the
results are excellent for the bank.

The tax factor: A second phase started in the 1970s when banks decided
to sell financial products under the insurance tax system. The typical
product is a deferred-capital contract, with a duration calculated to
optimise the tax treatment. Today, this is eight years.

Often, the product is a single premium or a scheme where the customer
is totally free to pay additional premiums when he wants to. Of course,
if it's a regular premium contract, premiums are debited monthly from
the bank account.

The offer is based only on: profitability, or rate of interest paid on
the invested capital; flexibility, or freedom to pay additional
premiums or to make withdrawals; and tax advantages under French law.
Nowhere does advertising refer to classical insurance objectives, to
the protection of the family or to pension plans.

These products still exist and, indeed, represent the huge majority of
contracts at present sold by banks - the turnover of French
bancassurers is made up 90 percent of products of this generation.

From a marketing point of view, these products can be classified
according to their target market. For lower-income customers, banks
sell very simple monthly premium contracts, emphasising tax relief and
a guaranteed rate of interest. For medium-range customers, they offer
single premiums or non- compulsory premiums. And, for top-level
customers, they offer very sophisticated financial products, with an
interest rate linked to a stock exchange index, or multi-fund contracts
or contracts with guaranteed results which are very high in comparison
to what the market offers.

Changing traditions: The third stage of bancassurance started in the
1990s. It is not a substitution of one stage by another one - it's an
addition. Banks are still widely distributing deferred- capital
policies but are also selling other products.

On the life side, some subsidiaries of banks have started to sell death
insurance. Individual term insurance is under-developed in France,
mainly because the French over-estimate the protection provided by
Social Security and by the group contracts which result from collective
agreements between workers' unions and employers.

Entering this market, banks have what I would call an accounting
approach. While traditional insurers explained that a good husband and
father had to provide security for his widow and orphans, banks analyse
for the customer the financial consequences of death, aim to minimise
the effects - and remain on the financial field where they have their
legitimacy.

At the same time, banks have reduced medical requirements as much as
possible, trying to avoid delay between the time when the customer
agrees the contract and the point when the medical and administrative
department of the company officially accepts the risk. Often the sums
insured are relatively small and the acceptance of risk is made at a
very low level in the hierarchy of the bank.

The rewards: For the French banks, bancassurance is a very successful
diversification. They are selling new products and they have learned a
new business. They have earned more commission and strengthened their
relations with their customers. They have kept most of their staff -
otherwise technological evolution would have forced them to reduce the
number of employees. Indeed, the French banking industry was foreseen
as "the steel industry of tomorrow".

In France, there has been a serious debate on the profitability of
bancassurance, centring on "cannibalisation". As most of the money
invested by customers in life products was previously held in a bank
account in the same bank, the argument is that bancassurance is non-
productive for the bank.

It's a very interesting theory but it doesn't have any practical
meaning. In truth, a bank had no choice. Because of the mobility of
customers, if a bank had not adopted a bancassurance policy, its
customers would have moved to a competitor.

The market impact: Traditional insurers have not really lost anything
with the emergence of bancassurance. The products banks have sold were
not sold - at least to any great degree - by agents, brokers and direct
salesforces.

And since many customers have not realised that in purchasing one of
the investments offered by banks they have bought an insurance product,
traditional insurers still have an opportunity in the field of pension
plans, for example, where people look more to insurers.

The impact of bancassurance on products has been very important.
Changes in product design largely explain the success of this new form
of distribution: banks were forced to sell very simple contracts
because they had to convince and train their commercial networks before
convincing their customers. Where insurers were at that time selling
endowment policies, mixing savings and family protection, banks have
sold deferred capital and adopted a definitely savings-oriented
attitude.

Even today, although they sell term insurance, they separate protection
and savings. As a consequence of the banks' attitude, endowment
policies have almost disappeared from the French market.

Another effect of bancassurance on new products is that they are now
much cheaper for the buyer. As newcomers to a market, banks had to be
in some way "better" than traditional insurers. At that time the
consumer press, which is very powerful in France, carried a lot of
criticism of the front-end commission system.

The banks, to be different and because it was more suited to their
culture, offered contracts with a low cost for the customer - for
instance a 5 percent charge on each premium, with almost no additional
charges. They have also improved the transparency of the contracts. The
client can very easily see how much of the premium is really invested
in his or her name and how much is eaten up by the company in costs.

A third impact on the product results from banks' use of more financial
technology in insurance products. They have reached a very high level
of sophistication and now the French market offers all the products a
consumer might dream of.

The sale of financial products by banks under the life insurance tax
system has been very successful. Life insurance is now the most popular
investment in France - more than 50 percent of French households'
savings are invested in life products.

An interesting point may be underlined here. The surveys we carry out
at CREP show that the number of French consumers who declare that they
have bought a life insurance policy is relatively flat, at around 34
percent of households. In spite of the tremendous growth of life
insurance turnover - Fr378 billion ($70.3 billion) in 1993, up from
Fr59 billion in 1983 - this figure increases very slowly. Many of the
consumers who buy a life insurance contract in a bank are convinced
that they have made "an investment with tax advantages", but not they
have purchased a life policy.

The reason consumers are so fond of life insurance is that products are
much better and much cheaper than they were 20 years ago. There are
still"bad contracts" on the French market but as a whole quality has
improved.

In 1980, commissions and administrative costs represented 30 percent of
life insurance premiums; in 1993, they represented no more than 11
percent. This reduction is attributable to the entry of banks on to the
market. The banks' costs were lower but, most importantly, traditional
insurers have had to follow the move started by the banks, which acted
then as challengers.

The future: I would suggest two issues which French banks and their
life insurance subsidiaries are facing or may face in the near future.

In an environment of decreasing interest rates, newcomers which have a
more recent portfolio of stocks and shares, are disadvantaged. This is
the position of life insurance subsidiaries compared with traditional
insurers, which have very old and diversified portfolios of financial
assets. This will impact on the profitability of life policies. One may
ask whether the consumer will still prefer the convenience of the bank
network to a better return on investment offered by a traditional
company?

The other question arises from the fact that many consumers have
realised only that they have bought a tax-relief financial product, not
that they have agreed a life insurance policy. What will happen if the
tax system changes? The billions which have so easily switched from a
bank account to a life contract could very easily swing the other way,
switching to another product offered by the bank and leaving the life
insurance subsidiary a skeleton.

This danger explains to a certain extent the desire of some life
subsidiaries to sell products such as term insurance or general
insurance. It is the one way that these subsidiaries can have their
identity recognised by their clients - and by their shareholders.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
