<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-1</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B046-297</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/la19.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033158 text/html 46146
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:30:02 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:58 GMT
Content-length: 45959
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/la19.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
January 26, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>End Of An Era&nbsp;SOFTWARE WARS ARE OVER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(711 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Change In Plans&nbsp;COMPUSERVE TO OFFER PARENTAL/USER CONTROL&nbsp;IN LIEU OF GERMAN BLOCK OUT OF NEWSGROUPS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(359 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>Don't Post That Crypto&nbsp;THE ZIMMERMANN IRONY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(842 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>Lemon Into Lemonade&nbsp;PHONE HOME, PROCD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(970 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>Photo Wars&nbsp;COPYRIGHT REGS ON PHOTO REGISTRATION&nbsp;HAS PHOTOGRAPHERS, FINISHERS AT ODDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(590 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>Learning To Live Together&nbsp;PRETTY GOOD GUIDELINES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1494 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>No Secrets&nbsp;UNDAUNTED BY CRYPTO LITIGATION, CYLINK PLANS IPO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(249 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>NO COMMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(266 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>Inquiring Minds Want To Know:&nbsp;THE 200 NEWS GROUPS YOU CAN'T READ ON COMPUSERVE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(250 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>ONE YEAR AGO IN INFORMATION LAW ALERT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(190 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet
January 26, 1996

End Of An Era
SOFTWARE WARS ARE OVER

Supreme Court's tie vote in Borland
moves debate over software to other arenas

The Supreme Court brought to a close, earlier this month, a
decade-long search in court for the proper and best way to
protect software.  The 4-4 tie in the Lotus v.  Borland case
will likely encourage parties to look to other forums,
particularly legislative bodies, for guidance and relief.

Most lawyers interviewed for this story say that there aren't
many cases percolating down below that are likely bait for
Supreme Court justices to nibble on.  "The age of the big cases
is over," said Jonathan Band, a partner in Morrison & Foerster's
D.C. office and coauthor of Interfaces on Trial, a book that
relives the great court fights involving software in the 1980s
and 1990s, Computer Associates v.  Altai, Apple v.  Microsoft,
Sega v.  Accolade, among many others.  "I don't see a case that
will capture the imagination of the Supreme Court and the
industry."

The Supreme Court's tie vote affirmed the First Circuit's
decision that Borland's copying the menu tree from Lotus's 1-2-3
spreadsheet program was not a copyright violation.  But the
unwritten decision has no precedential value and will give scant
guidance on what aspects of software are copyrightable
expression and what are uncopyrightable methods of operation.

                          HOPES DASHED

Most observers were surprised the court took the case in the
first place.  Once it did, there was widespread hope that the
justices would finally clear the air between the protectionists,
represented by Lotus and its new parent, IBM, and the
interoperable folks who brought the world Borland's Quattro Pro
and other products that have had depended upon their ability to
work with their competitors' products.

With the court so divided, it may be a long time before the
justices step into software waters anytime soon.  Justice John
Paul Stevens did not participate.

Even before the Supreme Court's ruling, there was already plenty
of action out of court to take care of what that might otherwise
take place inside the courtroom.

There is a multiyear effort, for example, to revise the Uniform
Commercial Code in an effort to give more muscle to shrink-wrap
licenses.  Companies have had limited success in court enforcing
software licenses because the buyer is unable to bargain over
terms and because some courts have found that the contracts are
an impermissible endrun of the copyright act (See related story
in this issue.)

Many companies are putting greater emphasis on protecting their
products through patents rather than or as a complement to
copyright.  This shift recognizes that courts have been
loosening restrictions over patents, while tightening the
requirements for copyright, and that patents have a greater
certainty than copyright.  (It's generally easier to interpret a
patent claim than to agree on copyright's coverage in software.)

Finally, Congress may be getting into the act.  There's nothing
like lawmakers on the loose today to divert attention from court
decisions tomorrow.  The Administration has proposed a series of
copyright changes in response to the threat and opportunity
presented by digital technology.

While parts of the legislative package are benign, it contains
proposals that have already divided the computer and software
industry.  In some respects, the Administration attempts to
accomplish in Congress what the software industry's
protectionist forces failed to do in court in issues involving
interoperability, reverse engineering, and fair use.

Over the next year, the time, energy, and money spent on
lobbying Congress on these issues will likely dwarf whatever is
devoted to similar court fights.

                             STASIS

Perhaps there isn't a blockbuster software case around the
corner because of a general comfort with the state of flux in
the law.  The sky has not fallen on the ultraprotectionists,
despite rulings such as the 9th Circuit's Sega v.  Accolade
decision that allows reverse engineering under limited
circumstances.  And neither has software become a giant visible
grab bag, into which competitors can dip and choose the best and
brightest features of their competitors' products.  The 2nd
Circuit's Computer Associates v.  Altai case lays out a broad
methodology other circuits are adopting to discover what is and
is not protected.  It's a confusing murkiness that the industry
seems to be learning to live with.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet
January 26, 1996

Change In Plans
COMPUSERVE TO OFFER PARENTAL/USER CONTROL
IN LIEU OF GERMAN BLOCK OUT OF NEWSGROUPS

Online provider does not want to face country-by-country
censorship decisions

CompuServe is close to lifting its global ban on about 200
Usenet groups that a German prosecutor said may violate
antipornography laws and will put in place controls that will
allow all its users--not just those in Germany--to block access
to
objectionable material.

CompuServe originally planned to block access to those groups to
only German subscribers but has backed away from that approach
in favor of so-called parental controls.

"We're really hesitant to become the Baskin & Robins of online
service providers, providing a different flavor [of content] in
different countries and cities," said Kent Stuckey, CompuServe's
business development manager and former general counsel.

At the end of 1995, CompuServe blocked all its customers from
accessing the newsgroups, many dealing with sexually explicit
topics and containing digital images of nasty stuff.  The
company said that it faced potential prosecution in Munich for
carrying the newsgroup.  Because CompuServe could not
technically block access to those groups to German customers at
that time, it put a global ban in place.

Earlier this month, CompuServe announced that it was developing
the technical ability to institute a ban limited only to
Germany.  But Stuckey says that, upon reflection, that approach
won't work either technically or administratively.

German users, for example, could access the system from a node
outside of Germany.  Moreover, it could force CompuServe to
configure the content that flows through its system to the
national, regional, and local standards wherever it does
business.

Stuckey says it makes more sense to put controls in the hands of
the end-user.  The controls will allow users to block material
that comes from within the CompuServe system and also from
outside the service, such as the Internet's multimedia
component, the World Wide Web, and the Usenet discussion group
network.  The blocking feature will be the digital equivalent of
brown paper wrappers that cover the "adult" magazines at
newsstands.

Stuckey says "we have reason to believe" that the controls will
satisfy the Munich prosecutor who was investigating the online
pornography.  CompuServe has about 250,000 customers in Germany.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet
January 26, 1996

Don't Post That Crypto
THE ZIMMERMANN IRONY

Gov't may be more likely to prosecute future cases
in wake of its decision to leave PGP author alone

Nearly five years after his popular encryption program Pretty
Good Privacy was posted on the Internet, Phil Zimmermann has
discovered he won't be prosecuted for conspiring to export a
munition.

Ironically, the three-year investigation into Zimmermann may
actually increase the odds of a prosecution if strong
cryptography is posted to an Internet site.  The international
publicity that has attended the Zimmermann investigation would
make it far harder for someone else to claim he or she was
unfamiliar with the government's concerns about the export of
cryptography.  "I think it would be easier to bring a case" if
the posting occurred in 1996, said Ken Bass, a partner in the
D.C. office of Venable, Baetjer.

Moreover, in 1991, when PGP was posted to computer sites, there
was not nearly the awareness of the global reach of the
Internet.

Today, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology distributes a
noncommercial version of PGP under a screening system that
limits access to U.S. citizens.

On January 11, William Keane, the federal prosecutor overseeing
the investigation, told Zimmermann's lead lawyer, Phil Dubois,
that his client would not be prosecuted.

Many individuals and computer companies believed the export
laws under which Zimmermann might have been prosecuted should be
relaxed to permit the free flow of strong cryptography.  They
believe cryptography enables free speech and that the
restrictions hurt the U.S. software companies that must dumb
down their products for export.

Like Bass, Dubois cautions that the decision not to prosecute
Zimmermann, a folk here for many in the online and computer
fields, should not be interpreted as a license to upload
tamper-proof crypto.

"Every year that goes by it strangely becomes more likely that
there could be a prosecution" because of the growing awareness
of the issues of cryptography, national security, and export, he
said.

If the government prosecuted Zimmermann, it would have been
forced to argue that the mere posting of PGP on a domestic
computer site qualifies as an export because it was
available--and found its way--overseas.  Prosecutors would also
have to show that Zimmermann, a security consultant who lives in
Boulder, Colorado, was acting in concert with the person who
posted the program.  Zimmermann himself says he did not post the
software.

                         UNKNOWN CLIENT

A California resident has taken credit for posting
the software in 1991 as a way to thwart legislation in Congress
that could have limited the availability of strong cryptography.
In various postings and articles, Jim Warren, a California
computer activist, journalist, and entrepreneur, has described
this person's activities in uploading the software.

Upon hearing that he would not be prosecuted, Zimmermann posted
a note to an Internet mailing list for cryptographers.  He
thanked his legal team and also "Joe Burton, counsel for the
codefendant."

Burton presumably represented this person during the
investigation, a
presumption Burton and Zimmermann's lawyers won't confirm.

In a later message, Dubois also cited the help Burton, who is
based in San Francisco, provided.  "He represented another
person who was under investigation.  To have made this other
person publicly known would have been an invasion of his
privacy, so we didn't.  We still won't, but we can finally
acknowledge Mr. Burton's enormous contribution.  .  .  .  Mr.
Burton labored quietly on behalf of his client.  He took the
case pro bono and did an extraordinary job."

                              NEXT

The government isn't commenting on why it declined to prosecute
Zimmermann.  One theory is that the government did not want a
trial to serve as a springboard for a public debate on export
controls and cryptography.  Another is that officials did not
want to put the export control regime at risk in litigation.
Zimmermann's lawyers would have argued that the law
unconstitutionally restricts speech.

These issues are not going away.  Bass, one of Zimmermann's
lawyers, is also representing Phil Karn, a engineer from
Southern California, who has waged a challenge to export
controls on free-speech grounds.  The case involves Karn's
desire to export a diskette that contains cryptographic source
code.  Although the government has permitted the export of a
book containing the same code, it won't permit the disk to leave
these shores.  Judge Charles Richey of D.C. Circuit Court is
likely to issue a ruling on the government's motion to dismiss
the case or for summary judgment in the next few months.

Separately, the Electronic Frontier Foundation is financing a
challenge of the export control laws on behalf of a University
of Chicago mathematics professor.  The suit challenges a section
of the Arms Export Control Act and its implementing regulation.
Daniel Bernstein filed suit after the State Department
determined that he would have to register as an arms dealer and
obtain a license in order to publish a scientific paper about
and the source code for a cryptographic program, which is
considered a munition.  The parties are awaiting the judge's
ruling on dismissal.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet
January 26, 1996

Lemon Into Lemonade
PHONE HOME, PROCD

Wisconsin judge rules that university student did not violate
shrinkwrap license by placing phone directory on the Internet

There's already a front runner for the 1996 award for, depending
upon your mood, either turning lemons into lemonade or uncanny
timing.

ProCD of Danvers, Massachusetts, is almost a lock to win the
award for either its quick response to a court loss or its
prescient timing.

The company last week announced that it would place 95 million
phone listings, which it sells as a CD-ROM product, on America
OnLine for customers to access.  "The main motivation for going
online is to expose the product to more people," a ProCD
spokesman.  "It's a brand-building project for us."

What ProCD neglected to mention was that two weeks earlier
federal judge Barbara Crabb of Madison, Wisconsin, had ruled
that the company could not stop a university student from
placing those listings on the Internet.  ProCD had sued Matthew
Zeidenberg, a University of Wisconsin computer science Ph.D.
candidate, who had placed listings from ProCD's SelectPhone
CD-ROM program on his Internet site.

The company sued Zeidenberg for copyright infringement.  In the
complaint, ProCD briefly claimed that he had violated ProCD's
copyright in the listings themselves (a claim clearly at odds
with the Supreme Court's 1991 Feist decision), but devoted most
of its effort trying to show infringement of the software
allowing users to access the listings.

ProCD also claimed Zeidenberg violated the terms of the
shrinkwrap license.

Despite having issued a preliminary injunction against
Zeidenberg late last year, judge Crabb concluded that copyright
law actually protected Zeidenberg's actions.

ProCD will appeal the ruling and has asked that the dissolution
of the injunction be stayed.  Zeidenberg, meanwhile, is
preparing to resume his online phone directory.  His site was
getting 20,000 "hits" a day before the court-ordered shutdown.

Coming so closely on the heels of the court decision, ProCD's
alignment with America OnLine looks like a way to manage the
adverse decision.

Not so, says Rob Levinson, the ProCD spokesman.  He says that
the America OnLine deal was in the works long before the court
ruling and that the two events are wholly unrelated.  Indeed,
many companies have found that the Internet and online services
provide an opportunity for potential users to sample
slimmed-down versions of their product for free.

                           SLAM DUNK

For example, America OnLine users can search the ProCD database
only by name, while licensed holders of the software can conduct
much more robust, granular searches.

Users can identify, for example, neighbors of a particular
person, or search the entire database by street name, a useful
feature if a voice-mail message is garbled.

Nonetheless, Crabb's ruling is hardly welcome, if unsurprising,
news for ProCD, for it permits licensed users of ProCD's product
to extract all the names and addresses in the database, despite
the shrinkwrap license, which forbids such a practice.

On each key point, she ruled in favor of Zeidenberg.

She dispensed with ProCD's copyright claim in the underlying
data in short order by citing the Feist decision, a case
informed by "a nearly identical context."

Nonetheless, Crabb displayed some ambivalence about this
outcome.  She said there was "substantial equitable appeal" to
ProCD's argument that "it is unfair and commercially destructive
to allow defendants to take the information plaintiff had
assembled with a significant investment of time, effort and
money."

ProCD argued that Zeidenberg should not have copied the software
onto his hard drive since that was not an "essential" step.  The
judge disagreed:  "This conclusion conflicts with both basic
patterns of computer use in the 1990s" and copyright law, which
allows copies if they are an "essential step" in the use of the
program.

ProCD also argued that Zeidenberg should be bound by the
shrinkwrap license, which says "you will not make the Software
or the Listings in whole or in part available to any other user
in any networked or time-shared environment, or transfer the
Listings in whole or in part to any computer other than the
computer used to access the Listings."

Crabb rejected that argument because Zeidenberg "did not receive
the opportunity to inspect or consider those terms" at the time
of the sale.  It didn't matter, the judge ruled, that Zeidenberg
eventually bought a second and third copy of the program since
"software companies are free to change the terms of their
shrinkwrap licenses between initial and later versions of their
products."

Even if Zeidenberg had assented to the contract, it is preempted
by copyright law, Crabb ruled.

The contract's "prohibition on the distribution of public
information cannot be squared with the purposes of copyright law
or with plaintiff's own compilation of data," she wrote, making
a special point of saying that ProCD is trying to close off
opportunities to others that it once took advantage of.

                             IRONY

"Had each of the compilers of the 3,000 directories that
plaintiff used to put together its database attached a set of
terms prohibiting further distribution of the information
included in its directories, plaintiff would not have been able
to create SelectPhone without negotiating with and compensating
each compiler for use of its data.  The Supreme Court's decision
in Feist allowed plaintiff to avoid these problems and create
its database without any fear of copyright infringement.  It is
ironic that after plaintiff has attained the benefits of
copyright law, it wants to prevent others from receiving that
same protection."

Coda:  The case was a maiden court voyage for David Austin,
Zeidenberg's lawyer.  He had been admitted to the bar the day to
original complaint was filed.

For the appeal, Zeidenberg will be relying on Austin and
another lawyer, Keith Napolitano, who is now in business school.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet
January 26, 1996

Photo Wars
COPYRIGHT REGS ON PHOTO REGISTRATION
HAS PHOTOGRAPHERS, FINISHERS AT ODDS

Deposit-less registration proposal is running into opposition

A proposed Copyright Office regulation allowing photographers
to register photographs depositing copies of them.  The proposal
is intended to encourage the registration of photographs but is
causing anxiety among photofinishers, who fear that they will
suddenly be liable for statutory damages and attorney's fees if
they reproduce a registered photo.

"I believe in the principle of copyright law.  No one should
take the work of an artist, in this case, a photographic artist,
an make an income from it without compensating the maker.  But,
if grandma wants to have a copy made of a photograph she has of
her grandchild for her own personal use, should this be a
prosecutable offense?  I don't think so," wrote Henry Oles,
president of EPS Photographic of San Marcos, Texas, in comments
to the office.

Representatives of the photo industry say that photofinishers
are blowing the proposal out of proportion.  They say the
proposed regulations, which they urged upon the office, are a
realistic way to give photographers the advantages of
registration without undue burden.  Few photographs are
currently registered, often because the photographer does not
know which of thousands of images may eventually be published.
It would also be expensive to register the photos individually.

Even though the proposed regulations would make it easier for
photographers to win statutory damages and attorneys' fees,
those awards are unlikely except in case of misconduct, argues
Charles Ossola of Lowe Price LeBlanc & Becker, counsel for the
American Society of Media Photographers.  "There is no basis for
anyone who acts in good faith to worry about statutory damages,"
Ossola said.

Ossola notes that the photo industry had strongly supported
efforts in the last Congress to relax registration requirements.

Under the proposal, a photographer can register a group of
photos taken within a year under a single title, provided he or
she provides basic identifying information about the photos.
The Library of Congress may request to view 50 to 100 of the
registered photos and select five to ten images from each group
registration.  The photos comprising the group don't necessarily
have to be of the same subject material.

Photofinishers feel they have been double-crossed.  This summer,
the industry published voluntary guidelines on copyright
protection that were meant to discourage litigation and protect
innocent infringers from damages.  The proposed regs, they say,
undercuts the guidelines.  "Many in the industry felt this was a
landmark agreement we could work with.  Now before this
agreement has been tried, the Copyright Office is proposing to
give photographers new incentives to sue," wrote John Heafield,
president of Photofast One Hour Photo in Birmingham, Michigan.

Comments on the proposal are due at the Copyright Office
February 9.  The deadline was pushed back twice.  At press time,
most of the nearly two dozen comments received opposed the
change, but Ossola's group and the other trade associations
representing photographers had yet to weigh in.

Ossola played down the possibility that photographers would try
to abuse the relaxed registration requirements.  "If you go to
court and commit perjury, you get in trouble," he said.

In the Federal Register, the Copyright Office said photographers
"need relief now."  An official at the Copyright Office declined
to speculate on when a decision on whether to issue the
regulation may be made.  The proposed regs originally were
supposed to be issued as "interim" regs, meaning they would take
effect immediately, but photofinishers were able to change that
at the last minute.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet
January 26, 1996

Learning To Live Together
PRETTY GOOD GUIDELINES

The photo industry's copyright guidelines provide useful
insights for online community

Editor's note:  Over the summer, after protracted negotiation,
the photo industry released voluntary guidelines on the
protection of copyright.  They set out responsibilities that
photographers and photo finishers agreed to assume in order to
protect the livelihood of photographers and minimize the risk of
litigation for photo finishers.

The guidelines are remarkably adaptable to the online industry,
which is struggling with similar issues.  The roles of online
service providers and photo finishers, for example, are closely
joined.  Thousands of copyrighted works pass through the portals
of providers and finishers each day.  There often is little or
no opportunity to check that the customers are the rightful
owners of the works.

A useful exercise is to replace the phrase "photo finisher" and
"photo processor" with "online service provider" and
"photograph" with the more general "content" in the guidelines,
reprinted below.

The Board of Directors of the American Society of Media
Photographers, the Professional Photographers of America, Photo
Marketing Association International, the Association of
Professional Color Laboratories, the Professional School
Photographers Association International, and the Coalition for
Consumers' Picture Rights, adopt the following guidelines
concerning copyright practice for members of the photo industry.

All members of the Photo Industry should:

1.  Recognize the photographer or studio as the owner of
copyright in his or her photographs in most circumstances,
particularly in the case of professional portraits.

2.  Encourage greater enjoyment of photography through the use
of photographs, made in compliance with applicable laws.

3.  Encourage all members of the photo industry to educate and
inform their customers and employees of the requirements of the
copyright laws and the need for adherence to and support of
those laws.  This should include working to educate the public
that the purchaser of a photograph does not automatically obtain
the right to make copies.

4.  Provide reasonable notice to customers that the permission
of the photographer is necessary under federal copyright law in
most circumstances for copying or other manipulation of a
photograph.

5.  Support and work together to obtain amendment of the
Copyright Act to eliminate copyright registration as a
precondition for statutory damages and attorneys' fees in cases
involving photographs, provided, however, that the amendments
also bar any award of statutory damages or attorneys' fees for
innocent infringement.  The parties will work together and with
Congress to make clear the meaning of "innocent infringement."

6.  Recognize that when infringement occurs that's not innocent,
statutory damages and attorneys' fees may be awarded.
Substantial awards should be made in cases of willful
infringement, or repeat infringement after notice.  Where
infringement is innocent, no statutory damages or attorneys'
fees should be awarded.

7.  Endorse the development of a voluntary identification system
for copyrighted photos so that labs and other users may properly
locate, seek permission from, and compensate copyright owners
for their copyrighted work.

8.  Work together to promote the growth of the industry and
ensure that new imaging technologies are used in responsible
ways consistent with the rights of all concerned.

In addition, photographers should:

1.  Prior to completion of the sales process, provide notice to
customers of the photographer's ownership of copyright, in an
effort to avoid confusion about the rights of the photographer.

2.  Provide customers with the information necessary to obtain
additional copies of the photographs.

3.  Where reasonably possible, identify and mark their
photographs sufficiently to permit others to know whom to
contact to obtain permission to copy, electronically or
otherwise manipulate, or prepare other derivative uses of the
photo.

4.  Respond promptly to requests for permission to copy,
electronically or otherwise manipulate, or prepare other
derivative uses of the photo, although there is no obligation to
grant such permission.

5.  Give written notice to the photo processor when a
photographer believes his or her copyright has been infringed,
in an effort to prevent further infringement, to determine the
cause of the alleged infringement, and to permit possible
resolution of the matter without the need for litigation.

In addition, photo processors should:

1.  Notify customers that the photo processor does not copy or
manipulate photos bearing a copyright notice without the
permission of the copyright owner named in the notice.

2.  Provide notice to customers, where practicable, that
copyrighted photographs will not be accepted without the
permission of the photographer (e.g., "No Copyrighted Photos"),
when photo processors use promotional techniques, such as mail
order and drop boxes that are within their control.  Where the
promotional techniques are not within the control of the photo
processor, the person in control should be requested to provide
such notice.

3.  Educate and inform responsible employees about their
responsibilities under copyright law and established policies
and practices.

4.  Inspect the front and back of photographs submitted for
copying to determine if a copyright notice or other notice that
the work is professional (such as a studio name or logo) is
present or appears to have been removed.  In either event, the
photo processor should decline to copy or manipulate the
photograph unless the customer reasonably establishes that
copying is permissible.

5.  Inspect the front and back of an unmarked image submitted
for copying to determine if it is reasonably recognizable as a
professional photograph.  Questionable cases should be separated
from routine orders and brought to management's attention.
Reasonable efforts should be made to determine whether the image
is a professional image.

6.  Utilize the following guidelines in evaluating a request to
copy photographs which the photo processor has reason to believe
may be professional.

a.  It is generally reasonable for a photo processor to rely on
a written consent to copying or other manipulation from the
photographer or studio named in a copyright notice or other
marking.

b.  Where the image is identified as a professional photograph
by a mark, or it reasonably appears that a mark has been altered
or removed, it generally is not reasonable to rely solely on
statements by customers claiming a right to copy the photograph.

c.  Where there is no marking identifying a photograph as a
professional photograph, but there is a question about whether
the photograph is professional, it is generally reasonable for a
photo processor to rely on a written statement by the customer
that the customer understands that copies must be authorized by
the photographer and that he or she is the photographer, or has
received such authorization.

d.  Circumstances such as prior written warnings from a
photographer or prior dealings with a customer may indicate that
further confirmation is necessary.

e.  Copying or restoring a photograph for the personal use of a
customer may be reasonable in cases where the age of the
photograph or the circumstances are such that the photographer
or studio is unlikely to object to copying and all reasonable
efforts have been made to obtain permission from the
photographer.  The industry will work together to develop
further guidelines for such copying.

7.  Document a claim of "fair use" in writing by an identified
customer, with a description of a legitimate fair use, and the
copy or manipulation should be appropriate and limited to the
fair use purpose which is claimed.  The industry will work
together to develop further guidelines for such copying.  These
guidelines are not intended to strengthen or weaken the doctrine
of fair use as incorporated in the Copyright Act and as
developed by the courts.

General:

These guidelines only deal with activities by industry members
and are not intended to excuse or mitigate customer infringement
liability under current copyright law.  While the customers'
knowledge and application of copyright law and practices may
have a significant impact on the industry, guidelines for the
customers' behavior are not provided.  An industry member's
efforts to follow these guidelines should be viewed on their own
merits.

The Photo Industry agrees to work together to develop further
guidelines and practices relating to:

1.  Practical and effective means of identifying photographs as
professional photographs.

2.  Standardized copyright warnings.

3.  "Fair use" copying.

4.  Restoration and copying of photographs where the age of the
photograph or the circumstances are such that the photographer
or studio is unlikely to object to copying.

5.  Processing of undeveloped customer film on automated
equipment, where determination of the content of the latent
images and the detection of infringement may not be possible.

THESE GUIDELINES ARE PREMISED ON THE BELIEF THAT LITIGATION IS
DETRIMENTAL TO THE PHOTO INDUSTRY, AND FOLLOWING THE GUIDELINES
WILL HELP AVOID IT.  THE GUIDELINES RECOMMEND TO THE COURTS THAT
IN CASES WHERE AN INFRINGEMENT HAS BEEN FOUND TO HAVE OCCURRED,
THE EXTENT OF THE GOOD FAITH EFFORTS BY THE PARTIES TO FOLLOW
THESE GUIDELINES SHOULD BE CONSIDERED IN DETERMINING WHETHER THE
INFRINGEMENT IS INNOCENT, NEGLIGENT OR WILLFUL.Photo Wars




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet
January 26, 1996

No Secrets
UNDAUNTED BY CRYPTO LITIGATION, CYLINK PLANS IPO

Despite a 1 1/2-year-old court battle with onetime partner RSA
Data Security that gets topsier and turvier by the month, Cylink
Corp. is planning to go public.

The Sunnyvale, California, company bares all about its fight
with RSA in documents now on file with the Securities and
Exchange Commission.  RSA and Cylink are fighting over the
breakup of their patent pool that once controlled all the key
patents teaching public key cryptography, a bedrock upon which
electronic commerce will be built, if it is to be built at all.

 They are at odds in four suits and an arbitration, all
involving the validity of licensing of patents.  Cylink plays
down a negative outcome in any of the disputes, except one
involving the so-called Schnorr patent that RSA, a sublicensee,
claims covers the U.S. government's digital signature standard.
Cylink is seeking a ruling that a license for the patent is not
needed to build DSS equipment but acknowledges that its business
could be "materially and adversely affected" by a loss in that
case.

Cylink, which reported sales of $26 million during the first
nine months of 1995, hopes to raise nearly $50 million through
the sale of 5 million shares, or about 18 percent of the
company.  RSA has also reportedly considered a public offering.

It's no wonder.  The market for information security products
has never been hotter, now that the Internet is starting to show
its potential of becoming a commercial marketplace.  Lemon Into




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet
January 26, 1996

NO COMMENT

The following letters were received recently by Simba
Information, Inc., a newsletter publisher, from Microsoft Corp.

"Microsoft currently subscribes to your publication entitled:
Electronic Education Report (the "Publication").  Because your
publication resides in our library at Microsoft we may receive
requests from employees for copies of particular articles from
the Publication.  The Microsoft Library would like to include
this Publication in its list of approved publications for
article reproduction.  We request that you sign this letter and
consent to Microsoft reproducing copies of articles from the
Publication obtained from any source and in any format, whether
print or electronic, for distribution solely to employees of
Microsoft for internal use only.  If you have any questions
regarding this matter, please feel free to contact me.  Please
return the signed letter to my attention in the enclosed
envelope.  If we do not hear from you we will assume your
approval of this agreement."

After Simba denied Microsoft, it received the following letter:

".  .  .It has come to my attention that due to an error in the
generation of the report from our serials tracking database,
your publication was mistakenly selected as one requiring
contact for possible permission.  The report erroneously
generated the letter you received.

"Noting the error, I have confirmed that we did indeed receive a
response from your company denying our request for copyright
license and that your response is on file.  We do honor your
instruction as the copyright holder and include proper notation
in both our library catalog and with the shelved copies in our
collection.  .  ."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet
January 26, 1996

Inquiring Minds Want To Know:
THE 200 NEWS GROUPS YOU CAN'T READ ON COMPUSERVE

alt.binaires.pictures.erotica.teen
alt.binaries.erotic.senior-citizens
alt.binaries.multimedia.erotica
alt.binaries.pictures.black.erotic.females
alt.binaries.pictures.erotic.anime
alt.binaries.pictures.erotic.centerfolds
alt.binaries.pictures.erotic.senior-citizens
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.amateur.d
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.amateur.female
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.amateur.male
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.animals
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.anime
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.art.pin-up
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.balls
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.bears
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.bestiality
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.black.females
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.black.male
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.blondes
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.bondage
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.breasts
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.butts
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.cartoons
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.cheerleaders
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.d
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.disney
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.female
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.female.anal
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.fetish
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.fetish.feet
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.fetish.hair
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.fetish.latex
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.fetish.leather
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.furry
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.gaymen
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.latina
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.male
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.male.anal
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.midgets
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.oral
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.orientals
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.plushies
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.pornstar
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.pornstars
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.pre-teen
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.pregnant
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.redheads
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.spanking
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.tasteless
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.teen
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.teen.d
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.teen.female
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.teen.fuck
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.teen.male
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.terry.agar
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.transvestites
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.uncut
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.urine
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.voyeurism
alt.binaries.pictures.erotica.young
alt.binaries.pictures.groupsex
alt.binaries.pictures.lesbians
alt.binaries.pictures.lolita.misc
alt.binaries.pictures.nude.celebrities
alt.binaries.sounds.erotica
alt.homosexual
alt.magick.sex
alt.magick.sex.angst
alt.motss.bisexua-l
alt.politics.sex
alt.recovery.addiction.sexual
alt.recovery.sexual-addiction
alt.religion.sexuality
alt.sex
alt.sex.aliens
alt.sex.anal
alt.sex.animals
alt.sex.asphyx
alt.sex.balls
alt.sex.bears
alt.sex.bestiality
alt.sex.bestiality.barney
alt.sex.bestiality.hamster.duct-tape
alt.sex.bondage
alt.sex.bondage.furtoonia
alt.sex.bondage.sco.unix
alt.sex.boredom
alt.sex.boys
alt.sex.breast
alt.sex.brothels
alt.sex.carasso
alt.sex.children
alt.sex.cthulhu
alt.sex.disney
alt.sex.doom.with-sound
alt.sex.dylan
alt.sex.enemas
alt.sex.erotica.market.place
alt.sex.erotica.marketplace
alt.sex.escorts.ads
alt.sex.escorts.ads.d
alt.sex.exhibitionism
alt.sex.extropians
alt.sex.fat
alt.sex.femdom
alt.sex.fencing
alt.sex.fetish.amputee
alt.sex.fetish.diapers
alt.sex.fetish.drew-barrymore
alt.sex.fetish.fa
alt.sex.fetish.fashion
alt.sex.fetish.feet
alt.sex.fetish.hair
alt.sex.fetish.jello
alt.sex.fetish.motorcycles
alt.sex.fetish.orientals
alt.sex.fetish.peterds.momma
alt.sex.fetish.power-rangers.kimberly.tight-spandex
alt.sex.fetish.robots
alt.sex.fetish.scat
alt.sex.fetish.size
alt.sex.fetish.smoking
alt.sex.fetish.sportswear
alt.sex.fetish.startrek
alt.sex.fetish.the-bob
alt.sex.fetish.tickling
alt.sex.fetish.tinygirls
alt.sex.fetish.trent-reznor
alt.sex.fetish.waifs
alt.sex.fetish.watersports
alt.sex.fetish.wet-and-messy
alt.sex.fetish.white-mommas
alt.sex.fetish.wrestling
alt.sex.first-time
alt.sex.fish
alt.sex.furry
alt.sex.gangbang
alt.sex.girl.watchers
alt.sex.girls
alt.sex.guns
alt.sex.hello-kitty
alt.sex.historical
alt.sex.homosexual
alt.sex.incest
alt.sex.intergen
alt.sex.jesus
alt.sex.jp
alt.sex.magazines
alt.sex.marsha-clark
alt.sex.masturbation
alt.sex.midgets
alt.sex.modem-kamikaze
alt.sex.motss
alt.sex.movies
alt.sex.necrophilia
alt.sex.nudels.me.too
alt.sex.oral
alt.sex.orgy
alt.sex.pedophilia
alt.sex.pedophilia.boys
alt.sex.pedophilia.girls
alt.sex.pedophilia.pictures
alt.sex.pedophilia.swaps
alt.sex.pictures
alt.sex.pictures.d
alt.sex.pictures.female
alt.sex.pictures.male
alt.sex.plushies
alt.sex.pre-teens
alt.sex.prostitution
alt.sex.reptiles
alt.sex.safe
alt.sex.services
alt.sex.sgml
alt.sex.sm.fig
alt.sex.snakes
alt.sex.sounds
alt.sex.spanking
alt.sex.stories
alt.sex.stories.d
alt.sex.stories.gay
alt.sex.stories.hetero
alt.sex.stories.moderated
alt.sex.stories.tg
alt.sex.strip-clubs
alt.sex.super-size
alt.sex.swingers
alt.sex.tasteless
alt.sex.telephone
alt.sex.toons
alt.sex.trans
alt.sex.ugly
alt.sex.uncut
alt.sex.video-swap
alt.sex.voxmeet
alt.sex.voyeurism
alt.sex.wanted
alt.sex.wanted.escorts.ads
alt.sex.watersports
alt.sex.weight-gain
alt.sex.wizards
alt.sex.young
alt.sex.zoophile
alt.sexy.bald.captains
alt.stories.erotic
alt.support.disabled.sexuality
alt.tv.tiny-toon.sex
clari.news.crime.sex
clari.news.gays
clari.news.sex aus.sex de.talk.sex es.
alt.sexo fido.ger.sexfido.sex-ger
fido7.ru-sex fido7.ru-sex.adv
fido7.russian-sexfinet.sex
fido7.other.russian.sex
fido7.ru.sex
gay-net.behinderte
gay-net.btx-ecke
gay-net.coming-out
gay-net.dfue
gay-net.erotic-stories
gay-net.gruppen.general
gay-net.guide.bundesweit
gay-net.guide.weltweit
gay-net.haush
altgay-net.international
gay-net.kontakte
gay-net.labern
gay-net.lederecke
gay-net.spiele
gay-net.test
rec.arts.erotica
shamash.gayjews
slo.sex
soc.support.youth.gay-lesbian-bit-netz.sex
t-netz.sex-stories
ucb.erotica.sensual
uw.alt.sex.beastiality
uw.alt.sex.bestiality
uw.alt.sex.bondage
uw.alt.sex.stories
uw.alt.sex.stories.d zer.t-netz.sex
zer.t-netz.sex




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
INFORMATION LAW ALERT: A VOORHEES REPORT via NewsNet
January 26, 1996

ONE YEAR AGO IN INFORMATION LAW ALERT

Unisys Corp.'s demands for royalties on a popular method of
compressing data was causing anxiety and anger in those sections
of the online community unaccustomed to concerning themselves
with patents.  (Unisys has quietly been signing licensees,
including America OnLine, Prodigy, Software Publishing Corp.,
Symantec, Sierra Semiconductor, Goldstar, and 3Com Corp.)

The International Trademark Association formed a task force to
identify and examine the difficulties in protecting corporate
identities on the Internet.  Several recent cases had exposed
the conflicts between trademark law, which is based on a
first-to-use basis, and the registration of Internet addresses,
which occurs on a first-applied, first-registered basis without
regard to trademark rights.  (InterNIC, the government-funded
entity registry of Internet addresses, has revised its policy of
assigning names, but the changes provided cold comfort to
trademark owners.)

Lawyers for Phil Zimmermann, the inventor of PGP, met with the
U.S. Attorney's office in San Jose in an attempt to ward off an
indictment.  The government is investigating how PGP, a powerful
encryption program, made its way overseas in violation of
federal law prohibiting the export of such programs without
proper licenses.  (See related story, this issue.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-2</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B046-318</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/la15.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033211 text/html 10809
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:30:19 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:59 GMT
Content-length: 10622
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/la15.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
LAW OFFICE TECHNOLOGY REVIEW via NewsNet <BR>
January 29, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>3D Fax: A Fix to an Imperfect Mode of Communication</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1290 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>Crimefighter's Handbook</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(194 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Web of the Week</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(57 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
LAW OFFICE TECHNOLOGY REVIEW via NewsNet
January 29, 1996

3D Fax: A Fix to an Imperfect Mode of Communication

Summary: 3D Fax provides increased capability and security and
lowered transmission times for lawyers and clients who really
should be using e-mail, instead.  But if you must use fax to
transfer long, confidential documents, 3D Fax provides an
interesting way to do it better.

                    ==========================

     We're certain that e (for "electronic") mail will be the
most important mode of non-verbal law office communications some
day soon. It might have happened much sooner had inexpensive and
easy to use "fax" machines not arisen to take e-mail's rightful
place in the communications pantheon.  But fax is only as secure
as the sending and receiving machines and all you get is a paper
copy of whatever message or document was sent; if you want to
revise the document, you still have to get it into your computer.
     This week we'll look at 3D Fax Professional, a program that
converts computer files of all sorts to easily faxable graphics,
then reads the graphics and converts them back to computer files.
The program is not particularly easy to work with, but may
present a solution, of sorts, to some of the inherent weaknesses
of the fax communication process.

[3D Fax]
     3D Fax Professional converts any computer file, including a
word processor or spreadsheet document or even a program, to
blocks of gray looking graphics, and eventually converts those
graphics blocks back to its original form.  The program's
standard format divides the 8-1/2 by 11 inch page into quarters,
with one  block occupying each quarter. A "fast" mode, usable
only in computer to computer setups, sends one large block on
each page.
     The user can send a graphics file from a computer fax card
to the recipient's computer fax board, or to the recipient's fax
machine.  If the latter, the recipient must scan the fax printout
to her computer, using a minimum of a 300 dots per inch (dpi)
scanner; the manual suggests a Hewlett Packard Scanner or
compatible, or any scanner conforming to the Twain standard.

[Installation / Documentation / Support]
      An automatic installation program run under Windows 95
placed about 1.25 Megabytes of programs and sample data on our
hard disk.  For some reason, 3D Fax wouldn't work with TSFax from
Commworks, fax support program we had been using.   Customer
support suggested we re-install the fax software; instead, we
installed Delrina's WinFax Pro 4, which worked without
difficulty.
     Toll free telephone support is available Monday through
Saturday from 7:00 AM to Midnight, Eastern time, however the
manual notes that the service is free only for two calls, at a
maximum of 10 minutes each.  In fact, we called several times
without difficulty.  The first time we called, the support person
could not answer our questions, took our telephone number and
called back with the answers a couple of hours later.
     A 150 page manual and good Windows help system provided
reasonable documentation.


[Using 3D Fax]
     3D Fax comes with a "macro installer" which provides macros
to use the program with Ami Pro, WordPerfect, or Microsoft Word 2
or 6.  (The installed doesn't really install a macro for
WordPerfect, but does tell the user how to do it.) We didn't
bother with these frills, but proceeded to work with files we had
previously saved.
     We loaded the 3D Fax "Send" module and selected the file we
wished to send.  3D Fax converted the file and "sent" it to the
previously selected WinFax Pro, launching that program.  We gave
the fax program the phone number of the intended recipient and
the graphics file was sent to the recipient fax machine.  We then
attempted to fax the pages back to the computer, but the 3D Fax
"Receive" module was unable to deal with those files.  We tried
printing the original graphics file to our laser printer and
faxing that back to the computer, but that didn't work either.
     The publisher told us a 300 dpi scanner was required.  We
hooked one up and after some image adjustment were able to deal
both with the laser printed and  faxed version.  We're not sure
why a 300 dpi scanner is needed to scan what is basically no more
than a 200 dpi fax paper printout, but that appears to be the
case.  We were not able to achieve 100 percent results, and
sometimes had to rescan the faxed printout to obtain the results
we wanted.
     Reading the scanned file required firing up the 3D Fax
Receive module, selecting the scanned file, then saving the
reconverted files back to our hard disk.

[Computer to Computer]
     Fax card to fax card operation worked without fail.  We
achieved the same result by converting a computer file to the 3D
Fax format and simply sending the file as a binary file, then
reconverting with the Read module.
     The vendor claims advantages of compression in conversion
from computer file to graphics.  To test this we created a 50
page ASCII text file, approximately 149,300 bytes long.  We ran
this file through 3D Fax Send and WinFax Pro 4, ending up with a
52 kilobyte graphics file which faxed to 3 pages of four blocks
each, and a last page consisting of one block. The full pages
took about 70 seconds, each, to fax from computer to a fax
machine, or less than five minutes for the entire package.
Faxing the 50 pages of text would have taken the better part of
an hour; of course, sending the uncompressed text file between
two 14,400 kilobit per second modems would have taken less than
three minutes. With standard compression, we might have reduced
transmission time to less than a minute.
     3D Fax Pro also boasts a password security feature. The
publisher is quick to note that the program does not use the 8
character password to encrypt the file as it converts it to
graphics, but merely sets the header to require the password
before 3D Fax will reconvert the file to its original computer
format.  We assume that one out of three high school students
could easily bypass the password requirement, but it should be
sufficient to prevent most secretaries and mail room attendants
from viewing the text until the password is supplied.
     3D Fax comes in three flavors: a free version has a limited
Send module, but can receive from all versions of the product.  A
one hundred dollar "standard" version is not limited in the size
of the file that may be sent, but does not have the password,
compression, redundancy and other advanced features of the two
hundred dollar "professional" version.
     3D Fax adds security, cuts transmission time, permits
transfer of computer programs and complex data, as well as
letters and contracts, over common phone lines to unattended fax
machines maintained by clients and other attorneys who are not
yet equipped for e-mail.  Of course, a scanner will be needed at
the other end to actually read the text.  We still prefer e-mail,
but if your correspondents don't, we suggest you play with a copy
of the free version of 3D Fax and see whether it meets your
needs, and theirs.

[Details]
     3D Fax Professional, Version 1.5.  Requires IBM PC or
compatible running Microsoft Windows 3.1 or higher,  4 megabytes
free hard disk space, fax modem, scanner, fax machine. Price:
$199.00. Standard Version, $99.00. InfoImaging,Inc., 3977 East
Bayshore Road,
Palo Alto, CA 94303.  Phone: (800) 966-1140 or (415) 960 0100.
Fax:(415) 960 0200. WWW:
URL = http://www.infoimaging.com The free version of 3D Fax
mention in this column is available on the publisher's web page,
http://www.infoimaging.com.  If you don't have internet access,
send a formatted disk and a self addressed stamped envelope to
Law Office Technology Review, P O Box 2577, Homewood, IL 60430.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
LAW OFFICE TECHNOLOGY REVIEW via NewsNet
January 29, 1996

Crimefighter's Handbook

Summary: Computer Crime: a Crimefighter's Handbook is designed
for computer crime investigators, but should prove valuable to
any lawyer engaged in the representation of clients using
computers.

                  ==============================

     The criminal bar is increasingly called upon to prosecute
and defend "computer crime" matters, and corporate lawyers are,
no doubt, being asked for advice involving delicate computer
matters.   According to the preface, Computer Crime, the book,
began life as an FBI training manual. The book is authoritative
and reads well, and  includes listings of state and federal
computer crime laws, a sample search warrant, instructions on how
to execute the warrant, how to obtain computer evidence
(including evidence on how and why to gather than computer itself
as evidence).  We don't agree with all of the advice, but suspect
that the book will be getting wide circulation in law enforcement
circles, making it particularly important for lawyers on "the
other side".

[Details]
     Computer Crime, a Crimefighter's Handbook, by David Icove,
Karl Seger and William VonStorch. 437 pages, paper. Price:
$24.94. ISBN 1-56592-086-4.    O'Reilly & Associates, Inc., 103
Morris St., Sebastapol CA 95472. Phone: (800) 338-6887 or (707)
829-0515. Fax: (707) 829-0104. Internet: order@ora.com.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
LAW OFFICE TECHNOLOGY REVIEW via NewsNet
January 29, 1996

Web of the Week

     We are pleased to note that the Securities and Exchange
Commission has taken over the Internet dissemination of EDGAR
files.  We haven't had a chance to thoroughly review the SEC Home
Page, but on first blush it seems well thought out and easy to
use. The downloads, of course, are free of charge.  The URL is
http://www.sec.gov.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-3</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B046-360</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/la30.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033251 text/html 69680
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:30:35 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:56 GMT
Content-length: 69493
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/la30.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>UNITED STATES:  CLOSURE IS ONLY OPTION FOR MIAMI FIRM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(510 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>UNITED KINGDOM:  GRANT THORNTON SURVEY SHOWS LEVEL PROFITS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(159 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>GERMAN FIRMS GRANTED LICENCES IN CHINA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(284 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>RUSSIA:  LAWYERS RESERVE JUDGMENT ON EFFECTS OF ELECTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(298 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>EUROPE:  COURT RULES ON ESTABLISHMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(403 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>RUSSIA:  FOREIGN FIRMS APPLY FOR LICENCES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(241 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>IRELAND:  SOLICITORS MAY ACHIEVE HIGHER STATUS IN COURTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(273 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS BRIEF</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>DECHERT PRICE & RHOADS TAKES ON FIVE LAWYERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(53 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>INTERNATIONAL BAR ASSOCIATION LAUNCHES HUMAN RIGHTS INSTITUTE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(138 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>SHARWOOD EYERS WILKIE LOOKS AT MERGERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(61 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>US LAW FIRM CLOSURES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(100 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>RHODES RESIGNS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(52 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>SINGAPORE LAW SOCIETY APPOINTMENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(42 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>EU CARTEL PROPOSALS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(87 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>NEW MANAGING PARTNER FOR STEPHENSON HARWOOD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(26 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>JEREMY BROWN ELECTED PRESIDENT OF LICENSING EXECUTIVES SOCIETY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(38 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>EU BIOTECHNOLOGY PROPOSALS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(82 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>MARK ANDREWS TO BECOME SENIOR PARTNER AT WILDE SAPTE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(32 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>FRANKFURT PRACTICE APPOINTMENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(84 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>WEIL GOTSHAL & MANGE ACQUIRES FINANCE LAWYERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(81 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>PACKER CHANGES FIRM BUT STAYS IN PRAGUE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(70 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>GUILD OF RUSSIAN LAWYERS REAFFIRMS COMMITMENT TO JURY SYSTEM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(39 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>JAMES RICHARD TO JOIN COUDERT BROTHERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(78 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>NABARRO NATHANSON ANNOUNCES LINK-UP IN HONG KONG</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(50 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>SINGAPORE RULE CHANGE FOR NOTARIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(43 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>NEW SOUTH WALES LAW SOCIETY SUBSIDIARY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(71 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>ARTHUR ANDERSEN IN NEGOTIATIONS WITH DORMAN JEFFREY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(67 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>LAW SOCIETY CONVEYANCING PLANS IN DISARRAY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(68 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>OCCUPATIONAL HAZARDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(591 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FEATURE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>EC ISSUES DRAFT ON BANKING DIRECTIVE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1765 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>AN INTERNATIONAL BONANZA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3272 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

UNITED STATES:  CLOSURE IS ONLY OPTION FOR MIAMI FIRM

Christmas has not brought warm tidings for Miami-based Mershon Sawyer
Johnston Dunwody & Cole. Following the collapse of merger talks with
Shutts & Bowen, one of Florida's best-known firms, the firm decided to
close its doors permanently at the end of 1995.

The 75-year-old practice, which had three offices in its home state as
well as an office in London, employed over 100 lawyers at its height
but this number has dwindled in recent years. At the time of the
announcement, it is estimated that there were about 50 lawyers employed
in the firm.

According to marketing director Angela Spall, the firm suffered from
involuntary downsizing in recent years from several rounds of
defections to rival firms including Shutts & Bowen. The defections may
have been the result of a lack of direction within the firm.

"It was a very democratic firm and it was hard for one group to manage
well." said Spall. "It was like herding cats. There was no strong
visionary leader and too many agendas."

The final blow

The final blow came in September when the entire trust and state
department, which was regarded as the firm's flagship, left to set up a
new firm, Dunwody White & Landen.

"After that, the firm did not have the right mix of practice group,"
Spall commented. Other key practice areas within the practice were
litigation, tax and health care.

Before winding up operations, Mershon Sawyer approached several firms
in the city about the possibility of a merger, including litigation
practice Tew & Beasely and Shutts & Bowen. It was the final blow when
the Shutts & Bowen talks broke down and management responded by voting
to dissolve. The chairman of the executive committee at Shutts & Bowen,
Bowman Brown, reported that a lawyer who had moved to Shutts & Bowen
from Mershon Sawyer approached the management committee concerning a
merger. The proposal was considered because Mershon Sawyer was a well
respected firm.

However, Bowman said that discussions never went beyond the
preliminaries. "We reviewed the situation with a consultant and decided
that we already provided the services that they provide and saw no
significant advantage in a merger," said Bowman.

Strong financial position

The perception in some quarters was that the talks fell through because
Mershon Sawyer had made too many demands. However, Spall noted that the
firm was negotiating from a strong financial position:"The firm's
problems were not financial. We were very stable financially and held
on to our institutional clients." Clients included Citibank, First
Union National Bank, Mercedez-Benz, Chrysler and Miami University.

The fate of the lawyers working in Mershon Sawyer's offices outside
Miami is secure. The London operations were acquired by another Miami-
based firm Steel Hector & Davis, and the 11-lawyer West Palm Beach
office was bought out by Orlando firm Akerman Senterfit. The Naples
office has opted to go on its own and the Key West office is a one-
person operation.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

UNITED KINGDOM:  GRANT THORNTON SURVEY SHOWS LEVEL PROFITS

Profits at UK law firms have levelled in the last year with some firms
experiencing a reduction, according to Grant Thornton's 1995
Solicitors' Interfirm Comparison.

Firms in the five to nine-partner group emerged as the group that had
suffered most with the number of firms earning high profit margins and
profit levels declining. Overall average profits per partner was down
from #71,000 ($108,686) to #61,000 this year.

Profits per partner for larger firms with more than 20 partners also
declined from #100,000 to #92,000. The results, however, of the most
successful firms continued to improve with profits per partner
averaging #178,000. The most successful regions outside London were
Northern England and Scotland.

Profit per equity partner (#1,000)

No of partners     95        94

 1-4               58         52
 5-9               60         71
10-19              70         64
 1-19              62         63
20+                92        100

Source: Grant Thornton Solicitors' Interfirm Comparison

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

GERMAN FIRMS GRANTED LICENCES IN CHINA

German firms Beiten Burkhardt Mittl & Wegener and Schulz Noack
Barwinkel have been granted licences to operate in China. Their arrival
strengthens the German contingent in Beijing where Punder Volhard Weber
& Axster, among the first batch of foreign law firms to enter the
country, had been the sole representative for several years.

According to Juergen Burkhardt, who will be heading Beiten Burkhardt's
operations in Beijing, German industry is very aware of the
opportunities to be gleaned in China, an awareness which was further
heightened by Chancellor Kohl's recent visit.

Along with Burkhardt, there will be a Chinese-qualified lawyer and a
German-qualified lawyer on board. The office will mainly be involved
with negotiating joint ventures for German companies and has gained
some work through one of Germany's leading banks Bayerische-
Vereinsbank. The China venture will be complemented by a new Hong Kong
office which opened at the same time.

Strategically, Burkhardt sees the move as beneficial for his firm with
China's economy set to explode over the next few decades. "European
industry has to benefit from the low labour costs and huge markets."

But there is a learning curve. Burkhardt believes that the Chinese
Government has become more restrictive in an effort to channel
investment with the result that growth may be limited. "We will have to
be patient," he said."Chinese are not used to the accounting system,
they are not used to working in a strict and orderly fashion - we all
have to adjust."

Schulz Noack Barwinkel is a small Hamburg firm whose arrival shows that
interest in China is high among law firms of every size.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

RUSSIA:  LAWYERS RESERVE JUDGMENT ON EFFECTS OF ELECTION

With communists and nationalists the main victors in Russia's
parliamentary elections, foreign investors are worried. But
international lawyers are adopting a wait-and-see attitude.

"The parliamentary elections are unlikely to have a substantial effect
on foreign investment," noted Jacky Baudon, managing partner at the
Moscow office of UK firm Freshfields. "The presidential elections in
June and the election of the regional governors over 1996 should be
more telling."

LeBoeuf Lamb Greene & MacRae's resident partner Brian Zimbler is
keeping a close eye on the situation: "We are continuing to see a large
flow of investment and we understand that there will be political ups
and downs. The results are the sign of the difficulties of conversion
to a market economy."

Glenn Faass of Canadian firm Macleod Dixon said it is unlikely that a
communist president will be elected in June, but if it should arise,
the situation would be more difficult. But how much more difficult is
not easy to determine. "It is not clear what the communists are
standing for," said Fass. "They seem to sell a message to the audience
that the audience wants to hear."

LeBoeuf's Zimbler recently attended a meeting with Gennady Zyuganov,
the head of the Communist Party, and found him to be conciliatory to
foreign investment: "So if you take him at his word, there should be
nothing to worry about."

This is good news, but Faass warned:"The next six months will be a
period of uncertainty, and foreign investors who do not have to spend
money will not. This may turn out to be a self-fulfilling prophecy,
because if foreign investors do not continue to show support for
reform, then the voters may look the other way."

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

EUROPE:  COURT RULES ON ESTABLISHMENT

With the European Commission about to report to the European Parliament
on the draft directive on the rights of establishment of lawyers, the
European Court of Justice has confirmed that lawyers may, in some
circumstances, set up in another member state under home title without
ever having to register with the local bar association.

The court ruled in favour of a German lawyer who had been prevented
from operating in Italy by the Milan Bar Association.

Reinhard Gebhard, who is registered as a German rechtsanwalt in
Stuttgart, had operated in Italy since 1978. However, the Milan Bar
Association initiated disciplinary proceedings against him. It
reproached him for using the term "avvocato" and designating his office
as "Studio Legale Gebhard".

The Italian authorities sought an interpretation of the 1977 Directive
on Lawyers' Services and Article 52 of the Treaty of Rome, particularly
focusing on when a member state could intervene to regulate activities.

The court determined that this could not be done unless a number of
conditions were met to justify that the restrictions were in the public
interest.

The judgment is being hailed as a victory for the liberal
interpretation of establishment rights which won the overwhelming
support of European lawyers at the November meeting of the CCBE in
Dresden. At that meeting, lawyers voted in favour of a permanent right
of establishment under home title against opposition from the French,
Spanish and Luxembourg bar delegations.

Patrick Oliver, the Brussels representative of the Law Society of
England and Wales, said bar associations will now have to look at what
activities are being performed by foreign lawyers to determine which
conditions are reasonable or not. It is likely the French will put up a
vigorous defence to show that restrictions in French law are compatible
with the public interest.

The judgment strongly suggests, however, that it would be unreasonable
for a bar association to seek registration for a lawyer who is
practising his own or EC law in another member state. But, Oliver
cautioned, the judgment is "fairly general and only gives pointers with
regard to the establishment debate". It does not, for example, give
specific details on when a local bar can seek registration.

But he added that the legal position"is becoming clearer and clearer",
something that has eluded European lawyers for the last decade.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

RUSSIA:  FOREIGN FIRMS APPLY FOR LICENCES

In spite of a lack of clarity surrounding the registration procedure
for foreign lawyers in Russia, most foreign firms have decided to apply
for the relevant licences.

Among the firms contacted by LI, most had either received the licence
or were in the process of applying for one.

US firm LeBoeuf Lamb Greene & MacRae has already received a licence and
its resident partner in Moscow, Brian Zimbler, said the application
process took only a few weeks and the attitude of the government was
friendly. "The situation is that the licence entitles you to advise on
law in which your lawyers are licensed," Zimbler said. "Nevertheless,
the situation is not really that clear, it is clear that the government
is recognising us officially. Yet it is not clear how the licence works
and the scope of the licence is also unclear."

Another lawyer, however, whose firm has also applied for the licence,
looks on the confusion in a different light and believes the lack of
clarity is just an excuse made up by some firms which did not want to
comply.

"Public policy requires that one must impose guidelines on the legal
profession and Russia has been one of the last countries to do so," he
said."Indeed, the restrictions are less onerous than in the
jurisdictions that the people who are complaining about the rules come
from."

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

IRELAND:  SOLICITORS MAY ACHIEVE HIGHER STATUS IN COURTS

In a controversial move, the Irish Government has permitted solicitors
to become supreme and high court judges after serving four years as a
circuit court judge. Previously, solicitors were only allowed to be
appointed district judges, the lowest ranking judge in Ireland.

The decision comes after a heated debate between the rival professional
bodies governing solicitors and barristers with the donning by
solicitor-judges of the judge's wig forming a major stumbling block.

In the event, the original government proposal - that solicitors be
eligible for direct appointment to the higher court benches -
 was watered down to the general satisfaction of the barristers.

James Nugent, chairman of the Irish Bar which represents barristers, is
happy with the decision. However, the law society's attorney general,
Ken Murphy, merely looks on the decision "as a small step in the right
direction".

With countries such as the UK, Australia and New Zealand allowing the
direct appointment of solicitors to the upper reaches of the bench, the
solicitors are likely to continue pressing for change."To exclude
solicitors from judicial positions is a relic of history and works
against the public interest," Murphy said.

With both sides lobbing well-worn arguments back and forth, a working
group is to be set up by the government to monitor the progress and
suggest changes. Representatives from both professional groups and
third party observers will sit on it.

Nugent does not foresee that there will be further change in the next
few years. However, Murphy intends to use the working group to actively
lobby the government.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

DECHERT PRICE & RHOADS TAKES ON FIVE LAWYERS

The Washington, DC office of Dechert Price & Rhoads has taken on five
lawyers from New York firm Mudge Rose Guthrie Alexander & Ferdon which
went into liquidation recently. The lawyers are Leonard Garment, Lewis
Libby, Ralph Oman, Joseph Aronica and Edith Albert.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

INTERNATIONAL BAR ASSOCIATION LAUNCHES HUMAN RIGHTS INSTITUTE

The International Bar Association (IBA) has launched a human rights
institute which will operate through five committees located across the
globe. The institute will be headed by New South Wales Director of
Public Prosecutions Nicholas Cowdery QC and the former head of the Oslo
Bar, Tor Bohler. Speaking at the launch, IBA president Ross Harper
highlighted the importance of supra-national courts in securing human
rights gains. "The question of human rights is too important to be left
to the whim of an individual government," he said."While a government
may protest about a decision before the Court of Human Rights, it must
accept the decision. This is the essence of the rule of law - the right
of representation, a fair hearing and a proper determination must be
accepted."

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SHARWOOD EYERS WILKIE LOOKS AT MERGERS

Sharwood Eyers Wilkie, the legal firm affiliated to accountants Arthur
Andersen in Australia, is looking at merging with a medium-sized
Australian firm within the next year. The firm was set up a year ago by
a team of lawyers who defected from Blake Dawson Waldron, one of
Australia's premier law firms.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

US LAW FIRM CLOSURES

In the wake of the collapse of New York firm Mudge Rose, two more US
firms have gone under. In New York, 20 lawyer-firm Townley & Updike
announced it is shutting its doors following the failure of merger
talks with Coudert Brothers and Winthrop Stimson Putnam & Roberts. In
Philadelphia, Cohen Shapiro Polisher Sheikamn & Cohen has closed after
suffering some important staff defections. Recently, a group of 21
lawyers moved over to rival firm Drinker Biddle & Reath. At the time of
the closure, the firm had 66 lawyers.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

RHODES RESIGNS

Paul Rhodes is giving up his position as managing partner of UK firm
Dibb Lupton Broomhead. Rhodes, who headed the firm's London office
before becoming managing partner, had been a driving force in the
expansion of the firm from its Leeds base.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SINGAPORE LAW SOCIETY APPOINTMENTS

Chandra Mohan of Singapore law firm Tan Rajah & Cheah and Annable Ess
of Khattar Wong & Partners have been re-elected as president and vice-
president respectively of the Singapore Law Society.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

EU CARTEL PROPOSALS

Proposals to encourage companies to inform on illegal price-fixing
cartels were put forward by the European Commission in December. Based
on successful moves in the US, the plans envisage the waiving of fines
for companies that are the first to inform on cartels, and reduce fines
for those that co-operate once an investigation has started.
Competition commissioner Karel Van Miert said it is preferable to
eliminate illegal price-fixing cartels, rather than imposing fines when
they are discovered.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

NEW MANAGING PARTNER FOR STEPHENSON HARWOOD

Shipping lawyer David Slade will replace Anthony Isaacs as managing
partner of UK firm Stephenson Harwood.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

JEREMY BROWN ELECTED PRESIDENT OF LICENSING EXECUTIVES SOCIETY

Linklaters & Paines partner Jeremy Brown has been elected president of
the Licensing Executives Society International, an international
organisation for practitioners in the technology transfer and licensing
field.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

EU BIOTECHNOLOGY PROPOSALS

A new proposal for a directive on the legal protection of
biotechnological invention has been put forward by the European
Commission. The absence of a directive would discourage European
research and put the European Union at a disadvantage relative to its
competitors elsewhere, according to commissioner Mario Monti. The
proposal takes into account the ethical concerns and calls for clarity
expressed by the European Parliament, which rejected a similar proposal
in January.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

MARK ANDREWS TO BECOME SENIOR PARTNER AT WILDE SAPTE

Mark Andrews will replace Charles Leeming as senior partner at UK law
firm Wilde Sapte. Leeming has held the position since 1987.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

FRANKFURT PRACTICE APPOINTMENTS

UK firm Linklaters & Paines and German firm Schon Nolte Finkelnberg &
Clemm have chosen the lawyers to head their new joint Frankfurt
practice, Linklaters & Schon SNFC. Linklaters corporate finance lawyer
Casper Lawson will replace Tony Kickinbotham who is returning to the
firm's London office. Schon Nolte will be sending partners Joachim Von
Falkenhausen and Nikolaus Lorenz and assistant Klaus Kamlah to staff
the office on the German side from February next year.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

WEIL GOTSHAL & MANGE ACQUIRES FINANCE LAWYERS

US firm Weil Gotshal & Mange continues to aggressively build up its
London office with the acquisition of two high-profile finance lawyers
to form the core of its capital markets department. Nia Morris, a
partner in Linklaters & Paines capital markets department, joins the
firm with Nick Holt, a banking lawyer whose experience includes time at
Clifford Chance, Hong Kong bank Jardine Mathesdon, merchant bank Smith
New Court and Merril Lynch.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

PACKER CHANGES FIRM BUT STAYS IN PRAGUE

Marc Packer, head of the Prague office of Skadden Arps Slatec Meagher &
Flom, who was due to return to the firm's New York head office, is
leaving to head up the joint Prague office of US firm Dewey Ballantine
and UK firm Theodore Goddard. The appointment was effective from
December 1 last year and Packer joins as a partner.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

GUILD OF RUSSIAN LAWYERS REAFFIRMS COMMITMENT TO JURY SYSTEM

The Guild of Russian Lawyers has reaffirmed its commitment to the jury
system, recently reintroduced in Russia, following press speculation
that the government is about to abandon jury trials.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

JAMES RICHARD TO JOIN COUDERT BROTHERS

James Richard, a banking lawyer specialising in eastern Europe, is
leaving UK firm McKenna & Co where he was a partner, to join the London
office of Coudert Brothers. Richards has worked on banking and capital
markets projects in central and eastern Europe, including work with the
Central Bank of Russia on payments and settlements, and issues relevant
to the development of a better market in government debt.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

NABARRO NATHANSON ANNOUNCES LINK-UP IN HONG KONG

UK law firm Nabarro Nathanson has announced a link-up in Hong Kong and
a new office in the former Soviet Republic of Georgia. In Hong Kong,
the firm has signed a co-operation agreement with a local firm Livasiri
& Co.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SINGAPORE RULE CHANGE FOR NOTARIES

In Singapore, public notaries and commissioners for taking oaths
appointed from January 1 1996 will only be able to hold the post for
one year. Previously, they were appointed for an indefinite period.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

NEW SOUTH WALES LAW SOCIETY SUBSIDIARY

Clients of solicitors in the Australian state of New South Wales may
have unwittingly subsidised the state's main professional body, the NSW
Law Society. A recent financial report found that the law society
received almost A$723,000 ($534,290) from the Solicitors' Trust Account
Fund (STAF). The money came from interest paid on trust funds held on
behalf of clients by the STAF.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ARTHUR ANDERSEN IN NEGOTIATIONS WITH DORMAN JEFFREY

Arthur Andersen continues to push into the legal services market. The
firm is believed to be in negotiations with Scottish firm Dorman
Jeffrey, although the Glasgow-based firm has officially denied any link-
up. However, any involvement by Arthur Andersen is likely to be in the
form of an association as Scottish professional rules forbid multi-
disciplinary partnerships.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

LAW SOCIETY CONVEYANCING PLANS IN DISARRAY

Plans by Martin Mears, the controversial new head of the English Law
Society, to set conveyancing fees have fallen into disarray. Attempts
to withdraw indemnity insurance from lawyers offering cut-price
conveyances failed when the proposal went to vote at a recent council
meeting. Meanwhile, the law society is seeking a QC's opinion on the
legality of the plan.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

OCCUPATIONAL HAZARDS

Bob Gordon of Hanover Park Legal Services discusses important areas of
risk to partners and partnerships that are rarely considered until it
is too late

ALL PARTNERSHIPS are potentially exposed to a reduction in cashflow by
the temporary absence of a partner. And while the absentee's workload
might be spread among his or her colleagues in the short term, longer-
term cashflow inevitably suffers.

The following four examples highlight the risks and the importance for
law firms to secure appropriate insurance cover.

Example: A partner is expected to generate fees of about #300,000
($500,000) during the next 12 months. None of the individual colleagues
either possesses the skill or has the confidence of clients that would
allow the practice to generate this income in the partner's absence. If
the lawyer is ill, he or she will receive an income of #100,000 per
annum during the first 12 months of absence.

The exposure of the practice is therefore the lost fees of #300,000,
plus the #100,000 that the partner will receive at a time when they are
generating no income - a total of #400,000. This is bound to have an
impact on the income of the other partners, who must shoulder the
resulting financial burden. If spread among ten partners, the cost
would be #40,000 each.

The partnership also risks having to buy out colleagues who retire due
to ill-health. The sources of credit available to partnerships are less
extensive than those to which incorporated companies can turn and,
unlike companies, partnerships do not have large amounts of liquid
assets on the balance sheet which can be used to pay a "golden good-
bye".

Example: A partner suffers a stroke and can no longer perform demanding
duties. The fellow partners must buy him out, each paying #300,000.
There are two sources of finance available: personal assets or borrowed
money. The former eats into personal hard-won wealth, while the latter
creates a debt to be serviced and repaid.

The above problems also affect individual partners, especially where a
disabled partner has skills not possessed by his or her colleagues or
whose personal contacts generate income.

The major partner risk, however, relates to permanent incapacity.
Senior lawyers will normally be taxed under Schedule D. Being self-
employed, they cannot participate in an occupational pension scheme,
but will instead have personal pensions to provide income after
retiring.

Two factors create a considerable risk:

* Contributions payable under a personal pension are restricted by the
Inland Revenue. One would have to contribute the maximum possible
amount for many years before a large fund would have accrued.

* Such a fund would be used to purchase an annuity, the "cash for
pension exchange rate", which will be principally determined by the
individual's age. The younger the person, the worse the annuity rate,
and thus the lower the pension.

The younger one is, therefore, the smaller the pension fund and the
worse the annuity rate. Solicitors are in a precarious position when it
comes to early retirement enforced by ill-health.

Example: A 50-year-old partner has to retire due to ill-health. He has
paid maximum contributions allowed by the Inland Revenue and has
amassed a pension of #300,000. The annuity rate for a 50-year-old
provides a"cash for pension exchange rate" of 30:1. A fund of #300,000
therefore provides a pension of only #10,000 per annum. This is 10
percent of his pre-disability income of #100,000.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

EC ISSUES DRAFT ON BANKING DIRECTIVE

The European Commission has just published a draft communication on two
key aspects of the Second Banking Directive (89/646/EEC). Chris Ffinch
of Cameron Markby Hewitt, Brussels, explains its implications

THE DRAFT communication on the Second Banking Directive defines what
amounts to providing cross-border services, and also provides guidance
about what restrictions host states may impose on banks as being in the
"general good".

The Second Banking Directive came into force on January 1 1993. It
provides for a single EU-wide banking authorisation (or "passport").
This allows for a streamlined notification procedure when credit
institutions - and in some cases their banking subsidiaries - wish to
conduct banking activities across borders (right to provide services)
or to establish a branch in another member state (right of
establishment).

All a credit institution's banking activities throughout the EU are
subject to supervision by the authorities in the member state where its
head office is located. This is known as "Home State Control".

"Host States" - member states where a bank exercises its right of
establishment or its right to provide services - have very limited
supervisory functions. They can only insist that a "foreign" credit
institution operating there complies with certain rules - rules which
they have to justify as being "in the general good".

The draft begins by reminding readers that all credit institutions must
comply with the notification procedure laid down in the directive
before they start to provide cross-border services. It then comments
that, since the obligation is to notify only when cross-border services
are carried on for the first time, some credit institutions may not
need to go through this procedure.

These exemptions are for credit institutions which had carried on cross-
border services before the directive came into force, even if banking
services were only provided on one occasion. The only condition the
commission would impose is that the provision of such cross-border
services must have been lawful.

What is cross-border banking?

The draft then examines exactly what amounts to providing cross-border
banking services. It considers that this can be done in three ways.

The first is where there is "movement on the part of the service
provider", that is, the credit institution itself. This would, for
example, include where deposits are accepted in a different member
state other than through a subsidiary or branch. Deposits - or more
likely perhaps withdrawals - might be made from an electronic machine.

Alternatively, the credit institution might send its own
representatives for a short period to another member state, or it might
temporarily appoint a local agent there.

The second possibility is where it is the customer who "moves". The
draft considers that, where a customer leaves his state of residence
and obtains banking services from a credit institution in another
member state, there may be provision of cross-border services - but
only if he has been subject to "commercial canvassing".

In effect, where the customer acts on his own initiative, no
notification is necessary. On the other hand, if there has been
commercial canvassing by the credit institution in the member state of
the customer's residence, it has conducted cross-border services
business there. This way of providing services is likely to come as an
unwelcome surprise to some banks. Many have been under the impression
that, as long as they do not move any of their operations abroad, they
have not conducted cross-border business.

The third way in which cross-border services can be provided is where
it is the service itself which moves. This covers what the draft calls
"modern" means of communication, such as the telephone, fax, telex and
electronic mail.

Again, the draft distinguishes between whether the service is provided
on the customer's initiative, or whether it follows commercial
canvassing by the credit institution in the state where the customer
resides.

Advertising or canvassing?

The draft states clearly that canvassing amounts to providing cross-
border banking services. It reasons that canvassing amounts to an
intention to carry on cross-border services, therefore a notification
is necessary. This must be questionable. Effectively, a mere offer to
provide services is treated identically to actually providing those
services.

The draft then attempts to explain what canvassing is. It comments that
advertising is not necessarily canvassing, although making the
distinction is not always easy. The starting point is that advertising
is "simple promotion". Canvassing, on the other hand, can be one of two
activities.

First, it is where an advertisement is placed and is followed by a
journey to the member state concerned by the credit institution in
order to conclude a contract. So, where a credit institution places an
advertisement and intends to follow this up with a visit to the
consumer's state of residence, it provides cross-border services. It
must go through the notification procedure before contacting the
consumer.

The other way of canvassing is to issue an "actual invitation", at a
distance, to enter into a contract. According to the draft, an actual
invitation is an advertisement which contains sufficient information
(e.g. as to interest rate, duration and cost) for the consumer to be
able to make up his mind, or one in which, thanks to the methods used,
it is possible to conclude the contract at a distance (e.g. by reply
slip or telephone).

So, if an advertisement does not contain sufficient information for the
contract to be concluded without the consumer needing physically to
visit the credit institution, it cannot be an "actual invitation". The
advertisement does not amount to canvassing.

This is not an easy test to apply. What amounts to sufficient
information for one customer is not necessarily sufficient for another.
The test also seems unnecessarily strict; there is a danger that, by
including what it considers to be no more than minimal details and a
contact telephone number in an advert published in another member
state, a credit institution may be considered to be carrying on
services business there.

What credit institutions see as no more than a routine advertising
campaign may amount to canvassing and necessitate a notification.

Provision of services and establishment

Different notifications are necessary, depending on whether the credit
institution wishes to set up a branch in the host state, or to conduct
cross-border services there. Again, distinguishing these two is not
always easy.

The main conceptual difference is that providing service is more
temporary in nature, whereas establishing a physical presence in the
form of a branch has more of an air of permanence, But there is no
reason why cross-border services should not be provided permanently.

The draft focuses on a number of problem areas. One is independent
intermediaries. The key issues are how much authority the
intermediaries have to bind the credit institution, and how much
freedom they have. This freedom relates both to the extent to which
they are subject to the control of the credit institution (the more,
the more likely it is to be a branch) and the extent to which they are
free to bind the credit institution in relation to third parties
(again, the more, the more likely it is to be a branch).

In order to be a branch, there must also be an element of permanence.
The draft provides a cursory review of the case law and concludes that,
in order to be considered a branch, an independent intermediary must
act exclusively for a single credit institution, must be able to
negotiate on behalf of the credit institution and commit the latter,
and must operate on a permanent basis.

This conclusion is open to question. Certainly, case law does not
really support the exclusivity point; in fact, it seems rather to
contradict it.

Where an office is staffed by the credit institution's own staff, the
draft communication states that a distinction must be made. Where the
staff carry on banking activities, it is likely to be a branch. On the
other hand, where they are simply part of a contact (representative)
office, it is probably not a branch.

Finally, the draft discusses the consequences of a failure by the
credit institutions to notify, and the consequences of the wrong type
of notification. It considers that notification is an administrative
procedure and cannot have an impact on the validity of any banking
contracts.

The general good

The Second Banking Directive states that credit institutions operating
either a branch or by way of cross-border services must obey the rules
of the host state adopted in the interest of the general good.

The first main difficulty is that the draft confirms that, under EC
law, member states do not have to provide details of exactly what these
rules are. Clearly, this does not make complying with them any easier.
A more robust approach from the commission would be welcome.

The draft communication reviews the case-law relating to the general
good and confirms that any such measure must:

* protect the general good;

* be non-discriminatory and apply to the host state's "own" credit
institutions as well as to"foreign institutions"; and

* be proportionate to the objective pursued. It should be noted that
provisions in the general good cannot be applied to areas which have
already been harmonised, such as in relation to the solvency ratio or
large exposures. This would amount to duplication.

Examples of rules protecting the general good include consumer
protection, the prevention of fraud, the cohesion of the taxation
system and protection of the reputation of the national financial
services industry.

The draft also highlights what is often overlooked. In assessing the
proportionality (a sort of reasonableness test) of a host state's
restrictions, a different measure applies, depending on whether the
restriction is applied to a branch or to the provision of services. In
general, less onerous measures should be applied to services business.

Regrettably, the draft does little more than review the case law. It
does not comment on actual banking restrictions imposed by some member
states.

The commission's decision to consult on its draft communication is to
be welcomed. It should lead to a better text. Certainty is desired by
those credit institutions wishing to exercise their passport rights.

Nevertheless, a number of difficulties do exist with the text as it
stands. Interested parties have until the end of February 1996 to send
their comments on the draft to the commission.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
LAWYER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

AN INTERNATIONAL BONANZA

With the domestic economy flat, Canadian law firms are looking abroad
for expansion opportunities. Michael Fitz-James reports

In the domestic legal services market, Canada's 45,000 practising
lawyers are facing tough times as a flat economy means fewer clients to
go around. But on the international scene, things are getting brighter
and brighter, as firms large and small share in a bonanza from a
growing global legal services market.

Gordon Proudfoot, president of the Canadian Bar Association (CBA), is a
lawyer with the Boyne Clarke firm in Halifax, Nova Scotia and laments
the number of law students being "churned out by Canada's 22 law
schools".

This has, he said, created a dramatic oversupply of legal labour and
when students can't land jobs, they go into business as sole
practitioners. There are now 9,000 of them - 20 percent of the lawyers
in Canada - many working "out of their homes with a cellular phone and
a laptop and low overheads", Proudfoot said.

They effectively compete with small to medium-sized law firms and have
resulted in a net drop in legal fees across the country.

The only way for firms to survive, according to Proudfoot, is to
specialise, and that's led to the "boutique" law firm - six or seven
lawyers who practise in a highly-specialised area, like intellectual
property, taxation or labour law.

Other medium-sized firms have been broken up by poor market conditions,
with some members forming into boutiques and others being swallowed up
by the big firms, which increasingly consolidate into larger entities.

But there is growth in selling legal services beyond Canada's borders,
and that's being driven both by the increasing globalisation of all
economic activity and rapid technological change.

Wynton Semple, a partner in the medium-sized Toronto firm Zammit Dash
and Semple, has client relationships and business being developed in
jurisdictions as far away as Australia, and the firm keeps in touch
through e-mail and other communications technology.

The firm specialises in computer technology law and it increasingly
finds clients' problems arise outside Canada, mostly in the US, where
many opportunities exist because of the North American Free Trade
Agreement.

For the giant "national" firm McCarthy Tetrault, which has 560 lawyers
in seven Canadian cities and in London, growth is unquestionably being
driven by the firm's international work.

"If we were limiting our activities to the Canadian domestic market,
there would clearly be a limit on our growth," said James McCartney,
Q.C., a senior McCarthy partner.

"The phenomenon of globalisation is affecting other high Canadian
corporations. With the rapid development of technology and the
reduction of trade barriers around the world, you can go anywhere and
essentially provide your services - hook up with your base in Canada,
produce documents and deal with specialists in the same way as if
they're down the hall at the office," McCarthy said.

For large firms, McCartney said, there are three "building blocks" for
the development of an international legal business strategy:

* working with foreign investors who want to set up deals in Canada;

* working with Canadian companies seeking deals abroad; and

* foreign "project work" which doesn't involve Canada, but which relies
on Canadian legal expertise.

It's project work where McCarthy Tetrault and other Canadian firms see
big opportunities for growth, particularly when their specialisation
positions them to offer foreign clients a particular expertise.

Canada's resource-based economy has contributed to McCarthy Tetrault's
extensive experience in the highly-regulated electrical energy, oil-gas
and mining sectors. As well, Canada is a telecommunications leader, and
the firm also has considerable experience there as well.

The firm has been able to market that expertise in a number of deals
around the globe including the privatisation of a gold mine in
Kazakhstan and setting up a telecommunications regulatory
infrastructure for the Indonesian Government.

"Internationally," said the CBA's Gordon Proudfoot, "Canadian lawyers
are nicely positioned for international work, because of the politics
of our country and the reputation we have internationally. We are not
as aggressive as the Americans are perceived to be, yet we do have all
those interesting nuances that come from the English law - plus Quebec
has a civilian legal tradition. We're seeing Canadian lawyers doing
very well abroad - that's a real trend that will continue to grow. The
international Canadian lawyer has a very prosperous future ahead."

While technological change may assist the globalisation phenomenon,
others see a worrisome trend in its efficiencies actually reducing the
need for legal labour.

"The understanding of legal problems and the search for their solutions
is increasingly being viewed as a branch of software development,"
pointed out Toronto's Wynton Semple.

"The client who used to pay $150 for a will can find a similar level of
service provided for $29.95 on the shelves of the local software store.
This `canned intelligence' presents a challenge to the practice of law
in Canada and lawyers are making a serious mistake if they believe
these packages are only purchased by low-level consumers," Semple
said.

Indeed, McCartney said, in larger firms, much corporate finance work
has been replaced by a multiple-jurisdiction software which clients
purchase themselves and use to generate prospectuses and disclosure
documents formerly prepared by lawyers.

In other technology trends, firms large and small are leaping on the
Internet bandwagon.

"The Internet phenomenon is amazing," Proudfoot said. "Canada is a
sparsely populated country and we love communications gizmos. Lawyers
are falling in love with the Internet - the concerns about its security
are falling away rapidly."

Governments both federal and provincial in Canada have finally decided
to reduce their staggering public debt load and that too is having a
major impact on the legal services marketplace.

It's an opportunity for larger firms, McCartney said, as "debt
reduction is driving a need to finance infrastructure in new ways - the
private sector is increasingly involved in financing roads, sewers and
waterworks. We're even acting for the province of New Brunswick in
building a new provincial jail that will be operated by the private
sector."

As well, in Canada's largest province, a newly-elected Conservative
Government is vowing to privatise many public undertakings - including
the giant Ontario Hydro, North America's largest electrical utility.
That will have a "major impact" on the legal services market, McCartney
predicted.

But for smaller firms and sole practitioners, major cutbacks on legal
aid are having a less-than-salutary impact on lawyers, who see their
incomes declining and a longer wait for their bills to be paid.

Many are looking for other areas of practice said legal marketing
consultant Mary Ann Freedman of Toronto, who predicted a dramatic rise
in professional negligence suits, particularly since provincial
governments are expected to allow American-style contingency fees,
where a winning lawyer is paid from the lawsuit proceeds.

Finally, there has been a significant rise in the number of in-house
corporate counsel in Canada, as companies seek to minimise the cost of
legal services. The number, according to Michael Crawford, editor of
Canadian Lawyer magazine is now around 5,000 and the trend of the late
1980s for companies to"outsource" all legal work to law firms has
reversed itself.

McCarthy Tterault's James McCartney said it is true the number of in-
house lawyers is on the rise but these handle mostly routine corporate
work which is fast disappearing from the larger firms' workload.

Now the work outside firms get tends to be in more specialised areas -
like taxation, labour and intellectual property.

The large firms, he said, have the people and resources to develop this
kind of specialisation and offer it competitively to larger companies,
which appear to be eager takers.

LEADING CANADIAN LAW FIRMS: RANKED BY NUMBER OF LAWYERS

                     Total      Total
                     number of  number of   Number of
                     lawyers(1) partners(2) partners
                     as of      as of       as of
                     September  September   September Total   Lever-
Firm name            30 1995    30 1995     30 1995   staff   age(3)

McCarthy Tetrault    565        325         327       1,503   0.7
Blake Cassels &
 Graydon             322        155         164         867   1.1
Gowling Strathy &
 Henderson           260(4)     n/a         904         n/a   n/a
Osler Hoskin &
 Harcourt            257(5)     134         134         747   0.9
Stikeman Elliott     249        124         124         770   1.0
Fraser & Beatty      206         86          86         528   1.4
Tory Tory DesLauriers
 & Binnington        202         91         106         620   1.2
Fasken Campbell
 Godrey              200        115         120         350   0.7
Goodman Phillips &
 Vineberg            200         82          80         457   1.4
Borden & Elliot      194        115         155         566   0.7
Lang Michener        185(4)     113(4)      113(4)      275(4)0.6(4)
Smith Lyons Torrance
 Stevenson & Mayer   180(4)     n/a         804         450(4)n/a
Bennett Jones
 Verchere            179         92          92         454   0.9
Ogilvy Renault       169        109         109         461   0.6
Milner Fenerty       155        n/a          86         344   n/a
Lavery de Billy      144         85          85         222   0.7
Desjardins Ducharme
 Stein Monast        125         63          77         312   1.0
McMillan Binch       125         69          69         386   0.8
Russell & DuMoulin   110        n/a          66         173   n/a
Davis & Company      107         54          54         251   1.0
Davies Ward & Beck   104        n/a          80         350   n/a
Ladner Downs         103         57          57         314   0.8
Bull Housser & Tupper 96         62          62         262   0.5
Lawson Lundell Lawson
 & McIntosh           76         45          45         200   0.7
Byers Casgrain        68         31          31         175   1.2
Lafleur Brown         60         35          43         147   0.7
Hudon Gendron Harris
 Thomas               52         18          21         122   1.9
Mackenzie Gervais     47         23          23         122   1.0
Baker & McKenzie      42         18          18         101   1.3
Meighen Demers        31         22          23          92   0.4

(1) Includes partners and associates but excludes paralegals, patent
agents, trainees and other
(2) Equity partners participate in profits and losses at the firm
(3) Number of lawyers less number of equity partners divided by
number of equity partners
(4) Estimated by LI
(5) Figures for Jan 95

n/a = not available

NOTE:  This list is not intended to be exhaustive. Other firms were
contacted but did not respond

Source:  Lawyer International

LEADING CANADIAN LAW FIRMS: OFFICES AND ASSOCIATIONS

Baker & McKenzie
No. of offices:               53
Offices in Canada:            Toronto
Offices elsewhere:            52 additional offices worldwide
Affiliations/Associations(1): None

Bennett Jones Verchere
No. of offices:               5
Offices in Canada:            Calgary, Edmonton, Montreal, Ottawa,
                              Toronto
Offices elsewhere:            None
Affiliations/Associations(1): n/a

Blake Cassels & Graydon
No. of offices:               5
Offices in Canada:            Calgary, Ottawa, Toronto, Vancouver
Offices elsewhere:            London
Affiliations/Associations(1): Lex Mundi,
                              International Bar Association,
                              Lavery de Billy (Montreal)

Borden & Elliot
No. of offices:               2
Offices in Canada:            Toronto
Offices elsewhere:            London(2)
Affiliations/Associations(1): Borden DuMoulin Howard Gervais

Bull Housser & Tupper
No. of offices:               3
Offices in Canada:            Surrey, Vancouver
Offices elsewhere:            Shanghai(3)
Affiliations/Associations(1): McMillan Bull Casgrain

Byers Casgrain
No. of offices:               2
Offices in Canada:            Montreal
Offices elsewhere:            Shanghai(3)
Affiliations/Associations(1): McMillan Bull Casgrain

Davies Ward & Beck
No. of offices:               1
Offices in Canada:            Toronto
Offices elsewhere:            None
Affiliations/Associations(1): None

Davis & Company
No. of offices:               5
Offices in Canada:            Ottawa, Vancouver, Whitehorse,
                              Yellowknife
Offices elsewhere:            London(40
Affiliations/Associations(1): Fasken Martineau, Thomas & Davis
                              (Ottawa)

Desjardins Ducharme Stein Monast
No. of offices:               2
Offices in Canada:            Montreal, Quebec City
Offices elsewhere:            None
Affiliations/Associations(1): Lex Mundi,
                              Lawson Lundell Lawson & McIntosh,
                              Tory Tory DesLauriers & Binnington

Fasken Campbell Godrey
No. of offices:               2
Offices in Canada:            Toronto
Offices elsewhere:            London(4)
Affiliations/Associations(1): Fasken Martineau, Dyer Brown (Ontario)

Fraser & Beatty
No. of offices:               4
Offices in Canada:            Ottawa, Toronto(2), Vancouver
Offices elsewhere:            None
Affiliations/Associations(1): Interlex Group,
                              Pacific Rim Advisory Council,
                              M'Master Meighon (Montreal)

Goodman Phillips & Vineberg
No. of offices:               6
Offices in Canada:            Montreal, Toronto
Offices elsewhere:            Beijing, Hong Kong, New York, Paris
Affiliations/Associations(1): World Law Group

Gowling Strathy & Henderson
No. of offices:               5
Offices in Canada:            Cambridge, Kitchener, Ottawa, Toronto
Offices elsewhere:            Moscow
Affiliations/Associations(1): n/a

Hudon Gendron Harris Thomas
No. of offices:               1
Offices in Canada:            Montreal
Offices elsewhere:            None
Affiliations/Associations(1): n/a

Ladner Downs
No. of offices:               1
Offices in Canada:            Vancouver
Offices elsewhere:            None
Affiliations/Associations(1): n/a

Lafleur Brown
No. of offices:               3
Offices in Canada:            Montreal, Toronto
Offices elsewhere:            Brussels
Affiliations/Associations(1): Russell, Commercial Law Affiliates

Lang Michener
No. of offices:               5
Offices in Canada:            Calgary, Mississauga, Ottawa, Toronto,
                              Vancouver
Offices elsewhere:            None
Affiliations/Associations(1): Terralex

Lavery de Billy
No. of offices:               3
Offices in Canada:            Montreal, Ottawa, Quebec City
Offices elsewhere:            None
Affiliations/Associations(1): Blake Cassels & Graydon (Toronto)

Lawson Lundell Lawson & McIntosh
No. of offices:               2
Offices in Canada:            Vancouver, Yellowknife
Offices elsewhere:            None
Affiliations/Associations(1): Tory Tory DesLauriers & Binnington,
                              Desjardins Ducharme Stein Monast

Mackenzie Gervais
No. of offices:               2
Offices in Canada:            Montreal
Offices elsewhere:            London(2)
Affiliations/Associations(1): Borden DuMoulin Howard Gervais

McCarthy Tetrault
No. of offices:               9
Offices in Canada:            Calgary, London, Ottawa, Montreal,
                              Quebec City, Surrey, Toronto,
                              Vancouver
Offices elsewhere:            London
Affiliations/Associations(1): None

McMillan Binch
No. of offices:               3
Offices in Canada:            Mississauga, Toronto
Offices elsewhere:            Shanghai(3)
Affiliations/Associations(1): McMillan Bull Casgrain

Meighen Demers
No. of offices:               1
Offices in Canada:            Toronto
Offices elsewhere:            None
Affiliations/Associations(1): None

Milner Fenerty
No. of offices:               2
Offices in Canada:            Calgary, Edmonton
Offices elsewhere:            None
Affiliations/Associations(1): n/a

Ogilvy Renault
No. of offices:               7
Offices in Canada:            Montreal, Ottawa, Quebec City
Offices elsewhere:            (Hong Kong, London, Paris,
                              Singapore(5))
Affiliations/Associations(1): Osler Renault

Osler Hoskin & Harcourt
No. of offices:               8
Offices in Canada:            Calgary, Ottawa, Toronto
Offices elsewhere:            (Hong Kong, London, Paris,
                              Singapore(5)), New York
Affiliations/Associations(1): Osler Renault

Russell & DuMoulin
No. of offices:               2
Offices in Canada:            Vancouver
Offices elsewhere:            London(2)
Affiliations/Associations(1): Borden DuMoulin Howard Gervais,
                              Perkins Coie (Seattle),
                              Vincent TK Cheung Yap & Co (Hong Kong)

Smith Lyons Torrance Stevenson & Mayer
No. of offices:               5
Offices in Canada:            Ottawa, Toronto, Vancouver
Offices elsewhere:            Hong Kong, Kiev
Affiliations/Associations(1): n/a

Stikeman Elliott
No. of offices:               12
Offices in Canada:            Calgary, Montreal, Ottawa, Toronto,
                              Vancouer
Offices elsewhere:            Budapest, Hong Kong, London, New York,
                              Paris, Taipei, Washington DC
Affiliations/Associations(1): Morin Marinov (Sofia)

Tory Tory DesLauriers & Binnington
No. of offices:               3
Offices in Canada:            Toronto
Offices elsewhere:            Hong Kong, London
Affiliations/Associations(1): Lawson Lundell Lawson & McIntosh,
                              Desjardins Ducharme Stein Monast

(1) Represents associations or other significant relationships with
law firms
(2) Through Borden DuMoulin Howard Gervais, which is a national
association of four Canadian law firms:  Borden & Elliot, Russell &
DuMoulin, Mackenzie Gervais and Howard Mackie (this firm declined to
respond)
(3) Through McMillan Bull Casgrain, which is a national association
of three Canadian law firms:  Bull Housser & Tupper, Byers Casgrain
and McMillan Binch
(4) Through Fasken Martineau, which is a national association of
three Canadian law firms;  Martineau Walker, Fasken Campbell Godrey
and Davis & Company
(5) Through Osler Renault, which is a national association of two
Canadian law firms:  Ogilvy Renault and Osler Hoskin & Harcourt

Source:  Lawyer International
}

LEADING CANADIAN LAW FIRMS: WHO'S WHO

Baker & McKenzie
Suite 2100
BCE Place
181 Bay Street
Toronto
Ontario M5J 2T3
Tel: 1-416-863 1221
Fax: 1-416-863 6275
Contact person: Stewart Saxe

Bennett Jones Verchere
4500 Bankers Hall East
855 2nd Street SW
Calgary
Alberta T2P 4K7
Tel: 1-403-298 3100
Fax: 1-403-265 7219
Contact person: John Richels

Blake Cassels & Graydon
PO Box 25
Commerce Court West
Toronto
Ontario M5L 1A9
Tel: 1-416-863 2400
Fax: 1-416-863 2653
Contact person: James Christie

Borden & Elliot
Suite 4400
Scotia Plaza
40 King Street
West Toronto
Ontario M5H 3Y4
Tel: 1-416-367 6000
Fax: 1-416-367 6749
Contact person: J D 'Arcy Brooks

Bull Housser & Tupper
PO Box 11130
3000 Royal Centre
1055 West Georgia Street
Vancouver
British Columbia V6E 3R3
Tel: 1-604-687 6575
Fax: 1-604-641 4949
Contact person: George Burke

Byers Casgrain
Suite 3900
1 Place Ville Marie
Montreal
Quebec H3B 4M7
Tel: 1-514-878 8800
Fax: 1-514-866 2241
Contact person: David McAusland

Davies Ward & Beck
PO Box 63
Suite 4400
1 First Canadian Place
Toronto
Ontario M5X 1B1
Tel: 1-416-863 0900
Fax: 1-416-863 0871
Contact person: David Brown

Davis & Company
2800 Park Place
666 Burrard Street
Vancouver
British Columbia V6C 2Z7
Tel: 1-604-687 9444
Fax: 1-604-687 1612
Contact person: Douglas Buchanan
                Ralph Elischer

Desjardins Ducharme Stein Monast
Suite 2400
66 rue de la Gauchtiere Ouest
Montreal
Quebec H3B 4L8
Tel: 1-514-878 9411
Fax: 1-514-878 9092
Contact person: Jacques Paquin

Fasken Campbell Godrey
PO Box 20
Suite 4200
Toronto-Dominion Centre
Toronto
Ontario M5K 1N6
Tel: 1-416-366 8381
Fax: 1-416-364 7813
Contact person: Richard Potter

Fraser & Beatty
PO Box 100
1 First Canadian Place
Toronto
Ontario M5X 1B2
Tel: 1-416-863 4642
Fax: 1-416-863 4592
Contact person: Ian Currie

Goodman Phillips & Vineberg
Sutie 2600
1501 McGill College Avenue
Montreal
Quebec H3A 3N9
Tel: 1-514-841 6400
Fax: 1-514-841 6499
Contact person: Peter Mendell
                Dale Lastman(1)

Gowling Strathy & Henderson
Suite 2600
160 Elgin St Ottawa
Ontario K1P 1C3
Tel: 1-613-232 1781
Fax: 1-613-563 9869
Contact person: Hugh Cowan

Hudon Gendron Harris Thomas
27th Floor
630 boulevard Rene-Levesque Ouest
Montreal
Quebec H3B 1S6
Tel: 1 -514-871 1398
Fax: 1-514-871 9987
Contact person: Claude Gendron
                Jean-Francois Hudon

Ladner Downs
PO Box 48600
1200-200 Burrard Street
Vancouver
British Colombia V7X 1T2
Tel: 1-604-687 5744
Fax: 1-604-687 1415
Contact person: J Don Rose

Lafleur Brown
Suite 920
1 First Canadian Place
Toronto
Ontario M5X 1E1
Tel: 1-416-869 0994
Fax: 1-416-362 5818
Contact person: M Steven Alizadeh

Lang Michener
PO Box 747
Suite 2500
BCE Place
181 Bay Street
Toronto
Ontario M5J 2T7
Tel: 1-416-360 8600
Fax: 1-416-365 1719
Contact person: Warren Seyffert

Lavery de Billy
Suite 4000
1 Place Ville Marie
Montreal
Quebec H3B 4M4
Tel: 1-514-871 1522
Fax: 1-514-871 8977
Contact person: Andre Laurin

Lawson Lundell Lawson & McIntosh
1600 Cathedral Place
925 West Georgia Street
Vancouver
British Columbia V6C 3L2
Tel: 1-604-685 3456
Fax: 1-604-669 1620
Contact person: Neil Marshall

Mackenzie Gervais
Suite 1300
770 Sherbrooke West
Montreal
Quebec H3A 1G1
Tel: 1-514-842 9831
Fax: 1-514-288 7389
Contact person: Tass Grivakes

McCarthy Tetrault
Suite 4700
Toronto-Dominion Centre
Toronto
Ontario M5K 1E6
Tel: 1-416-362 1812
Fax: 1-416-868 0673
Contact person: Arthur Scace

McMillan Binch
Suite 3800
Royal Bank Plaza
South Tower
Toronto
Ontario M5J 2J7
Tel: 1-416-865 7000
Fax: 1-416-865 7048
Contact person: Robert McDermott

Meighen Demers
PO Box 11
Suite 1100
200 King Street West
Merrill Lynch Tower,
Toronto
Ontario M5H 3T4
Tel: 1-416-977 8400
Fax: 1-514-977 5239
Contact person: Peter Lockie

Milner Fenerty
30th Floor
Fifth Avenue Place
237 4th Avenue SW
Calgary
AB T2P 4X7
Tel: 1-403-268 7000
Fax: 1-403-268 3100
Contact person: Debbie Cook(2)

Ogilvy Renault
Suite 1100
1981 McGill College Avenue
Montreal
Quebec H3A 3C1
Tel: 1-514-847 4747
Fax: 1-514-286 5474
Contact person: Raymond Crevier

Osler Hoskin & Harcourt
PO Box 50
1 First Canadian Place
Toronto
Ontario M5X 1B8
Tel: 1-416-362 2111
Fax: 1-416-862 6666
Contact person: Laurence Hebb
                J Edgar Sexton

Russell & DuMoulin
2100-1075 West Georgia Street
Vancouver
British Columbia V6E 3G2
Tel: 1-604-631 3131
Fax: 1-604-631 3232
Contact person: Michael Fitch

Smith Lyons Torrance Stevenson & Mayer
Suite 6200
Scotia Plaza
40 King Street West
Toronto
Ontario M5H 3Z7
Tel: 1-416-369 7200
Fax: 1-416-369 7250
Contact person: Frederick Benn

Stikeman Elliott
40th Floor
1155 Rene Levesque boulevard
Montreal
Quebec H3B 3V2
Tel: 1-514-397 3000
Fax: 1-514-397 3222
Contact person: James Grant

Tory Tory DesLauriers & Binnington
PO Box 270
Suite 3000
Aetna Tower
Toronto-Dominion Centre
Toronto
Ontario M5K 1N2
Tel: 1-416-865 0040
Fax: 1-416-865 7380
Contact person: Brian Flood

(1) Based in Toronto
(2) Marketing administrator

Source:  Lawyer International

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-4</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B047-25</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/la18.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033322 text/html 72239
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:31:17 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:59 GMT
Content-length: 72052
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/la18.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>** FROM THE ALERT **</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>WHAT'S IN THIS ISSUE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(234 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>** LEAD ARTICLE **</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>EDGAR Update: The Proliferation of Commercial Products&nbsp;By Bonnie Fox Schwartz</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2833 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>** FOR YOUR INFORMATION **</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>Items on Legal Tech, IAC, Matthew Bender & Folio, Lawyers Coop & Shepard's&nbsp;Personnel, CCH Sold, Thomson Acquisitions, RIA Group, Legal Info&nbsp;Management, Marquis Who's Who Lawsuit, Where to Get SEC Documents, AND MORE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1468 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>** THE FRUGAL LIBRARIAN **</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>By Michael Saint-Onge -- Items on Internet Time Charges, Good Industry&nbsp;Magazines, Owning Two Treatise Sets, Time Wasters, CD Recycling, Employee&nbsp;Incentives, CLE Information Publication</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(994 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>** NEW PUBLICATIONS **</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>Publishers' addresses and telephone numbers are listed in the "PUBLISHERS"&nbsp;department.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(38 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>EMPLOYMENT LAW --&nbsp;Privacy in Employment Law</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(422 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>EMPLOYMENT LAW --&nbsp;Sex Discrimination in the Legal Profession</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(626 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>ENERGY & ENVIRONMENT --&nbsp;ELR: The Environmental Law Reporter</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(326 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>HEALTH LAW --&nbsp;When Life Ends: Legal Overviews, Medicolegal Forms, and Hospital Policies</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(457 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY --&nbsp;BNA's Intellectual Property Library on CD-ROM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(471 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY --&nbsp;Legal Research Guide to Mechanical Patent Litigation</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(241 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY --&nbsp;Software and Intellectual Property Protection:&nbsp;Copyright and Patent Issues for Computer and Legal Professionals</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(604 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>INTERNATIONAL & FOREIGN LAW --&nbsp;European Union Law Guide</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(489 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>TAXATION --&nbsp;OnPoint System: All States Tax Guide</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(424 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>** CALENDAR **</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>Seminar and show dates for law librarians.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(306 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>** PUBLISHERS **</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>The following is the contact information for items reviewed in this issue.&nbsp;Please mention the ALERT when inquiring about them.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(134 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

WHAT'S IN THIS ISSUE

I can't believe that this is the start of our 15th year! Little did I think
that U.S. Law Library Alert, as it was first design-ed, would evolve into
the LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT of today. When we started, law librarians had
only the AALL newsletter, chapter newsletters, and us. Then Bob Berring
started Legal Reference Services Quarterly, and others followed. Some are
still with us . . . and some have fallen along the wayside.

We are glad to still be here. We love this business--there is always
something new to learn! Do you realize how different legal publishing and
legal research are today from 15 years age? Throughout this coming year we
plan to keep you informed about the coming publishing and research
changes--and we expect lots of them!

Bonnie Fox Schwartz, who writes for both this newsletter and its sister
publication, BUSINESS INFORMATION ALERT, tells us all about EDGAR's current
commercial variations. The choice is yours, but she helps guide you through
the maze.

We hope you read all the reviews in each issue. Sometimes there are ones
worth noting here. Be sure to read Sex Discrimination in the Legal
Profession. Then buy it for your managing partner/administrator/dean.

Finally, a big thank you to our readers, reviewers, authors, publishers,
and advertisers. We couldn't have done it without you! Happy New Year!

--Donna Tuke Heroy
Editor & Publisher



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

EDGAR Update: The Proliferation of Commercial Products
By Bonnie Fox Schwartz

On October 1, 1995, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) unveiled
its home page, with access to the EDGAR database as its centerpiece. This
event occurred after the demise of the Town Hall EDGAR site and the offer
by commercial vendors--notably Disclosure and Global Securities
Information--to provide EDGAR access through their Internet home pages to
publicize their value-added products. EDGAR users are now blessed with
several Net sites, as well as a proliferation of related on-line and CD-ROM
products from database producers and document delivery services.

EDGAR, the acronym for Electronic Data Gathering and Retrieval, symbolizes
the vast collection of corporate filings made directly and electronically
to the SEC. With more than 15,000 public companies required by law to
report on such activities as quarterly and annual financials, stock
ownership changes, and securities offerings; the SEC, by the 1980s, was
literally flooded with documents. Therefore, in a move toward a paperless
world, an effort was launched to automate the process of filing, reviewing,
and disseminating SEC information.

Voluntary participants engaged in a pilot project in 1984; and after eight
years, the fully operational system was launched in 1992. By August 1995,
when two additional groups were phased in, approximately 6,500 registrants
were EDGAR filers. All companies will be required to file electronically by
May 1996. Without EDGAR, the SEC would stagger under 10 million pages a
year.

With the full functioning of EDGAR almost accomplished, debate now centers
on how to make this electronic data accessible to the public. Even though
all the information is supposed to be available without cost, the data
exists on the SEC database only in the form of gigabytes, raw numbers, and
ASCII text.

The SEC initially chose Mead Data Central (now Lexis-Nexis since its
acquisition by Reed-Elsevier) to handle the dissemination of EDGAR
information to interested parties on a wholesale basis. (Mead also enjoyed
the contract to develop the initial EDGAR database.) Under this agreement,
the SEC would receive only microfiche copies of the filings, with Mead
retaining the electronic records and providing terminals for the public in
SEC reading rooms in Washington, New York, Chicago, and other regional
offices.

While Mead constructed the "back end" of this system, Compu-Serve won the
communications contract, which includes the receipt and notification of
EDGAR filings to companies. With EDGAR Link, registrants can file online
through CompuServe's network or via a direct connection to the SEC.

The EDGAR database has proven a daily necessity to a variety of
professionals, including attorneys, investment analysts, management
consultants, accountants, librarians, and information brokers. Since each
of these groups has specific needs, retailers of SEC filings compete to
provide products that access and search EDGAR filings easily and
efficiently. Each commercial vendor repackages and formats the electronic
data, in the process adding different software interfaces and search
engines to ease the retrieval process and make the information usable. In
addition, these competitors offer other products, integrated with EDGAR
data, to enhance the information and its presentation.

In the past, EDGAR "updates" consisted of endless recitals of statistical
charts detailing how many companies were electronic filers, how many
records were in the database, and phasing in schedules with future
projections. Now that three out of four companies file electronically, with
all expected to be computerized this year, an appropriate EDGAR update is
an overview of commercial EDGAR products as well as EDGAR on the Internet.
In addition, while law librarians, paralegals, and attorneys who use EDGAR
data share many priorities with accountants, investment analysts, and other
professionals, information needs peculiar to the legal environment will be
the focus here in evaluating EDGAR products.

Everyone insists on timeliness and accuracy: How quickly are the filings
posted? Are the companies listed correctly and in a standardized format?
Are tender offers and other ownership-related filings listed by target or
bidder/owner? Beyond these basics, users must always remember that the
EDGAR universe is not the complete world of SEC filings. Foreign issuers,
sovereigns, initial public offerings, and certain forms (like 20Fs,
Schedule Bs, 6Ks, ADVs, TAs) are not yet electronically filed. Likewise,
EDGAR documents cannot always include graphs and other visual materials.
Historical filings also are not on EDGAR. When a complete list of documents
is required, such limitations must be considered.

Searching capabilities are also crucial, whether the question involves a
particular corporation or precedent research. How easily can a company's
stock purchase agreements be located or can examples of specific types of
contracts with particular language be easily found? Can sections and pages
be quickly located, saved to disk, and printed out in customized reports?
This review will address such issues.

====================
Moody's Company Data

Moody's Investors Service, owned by Dun & Brad-street, offers EDGAR in
conjunction with its Company Data database. This product combines detailed,
descriptive information on companies (from the Manuals) with SEC filings on
EDGAR. One can search Moody's Company Data for more than 10,000 public
corporations and simultaneously access EDGAR filings on CD-ROMs. Moody's
EDGAR discs contain the full ASCII text of all mandated filings since
August 1993. Multi-font, multi-column printouts can be customized, and the
data can be directly downloaded to spreadsheet programs.

Features that enhance the accessibility of Moody's EDGAR files include:
searching by word or phrase with an EDGAR document; reviewing the index by
company name, filing, or file date; section and exhibit jumping; cutting
and pasting; and integrating document printouts with the Company Data
database. Moody's proprietary MoodEASE software allows searching by 160
variables including word, phrase, and financials. The program also enables
sorting by variables as well as peer group analysis. Printing options
reduce the number of pages as well as save on cost, volume, and time, with
an optional dual-column compressed print function.

Moody's also is filling the gaps both for pre-EDGAR historical filings and
for the most recent documents electronically filed after the last CD-ROM
was pressed. For old paper documents, Moody's promises to add the Workload
Index, a compendium of all filings with a computerized-link order form for
hard copies (those not available electronically) from Docutronics, Moody's
recently purchased subsidiary specializing in document delivery. For the
latest EDGAR filings, Moody's offers EDGAR Edge, a real-time dedicated
server with unlimited access, monitors for watches, word search capability
across all EDGAR documents, and additional indexes and tags.

Moody's presents a handsome, comprehensive package, especially for those
who have not previously invested in a large CD-ROM collection. Its Company
Data database, combined with EDGAR filings, covers a broad range of
business and financial information needs; and Moody's also offers other
discs on foreign companies--an attractive supplement. When anticipated
products are in place and all SEC filings are EDGARized, Moody's will be a
formidable competitor in the EDGAR arena.

===========================
Global Securities' LIVEDGAR

LIVEDGAR, produced by GSI Online, a division of Global Securities
Information, Inc., provides real-time, dial-up access to EDGAR filings,
with documents available as soon as they are filed. Although GSI Online
connects to the database via a dedicated line, its on-demand dial-up
service is a cost-effective means of obtaining EDGAR filings from any
personal computer with a modem.

LIVEDGAR is a Windows-based, menu-driven system, that enables searching of
filings in the entire EDGAR universe, since April 10, 1993. LIVEDGAR is
also the only commercial source at present to research the text of unusual
filings like S6s (unit investment trusts), mutual fund documents on N2 or
N1A, and other unfamiliar forms.

One can access the database by company name, SEC file number, or by
example. After a company name or file number is entered, a list of
documents appears. Once a particular document is selected, the user has the
option to search for a word or string of terms within the document. The
split screen--a convenient search feature--provides the filings list along
with a glimpse of the full-text with the term(s) highlighted.

Searching by example offers a choice of fields, including form, date
ranges, state of incorporation, stock exchange, SIC code, and free-text
terms. This capability over the entire EDGAR database makes LIVEDGAR an
excellent resource for precedents. When the search is completed, a list of
documents is generated, again with a split screen that gives a partial view
of the full-text with the search term(s) highlighted.

LIVEDGAR's printing capabilities have pluses and minuses. Exhibits are
always separated for easy access and printing of specific items. But if an
entire document is desired, a worksheet must be called up on a separate
menu, and a cover page is generated for each exhibit.

While LIVEDGAR is cost-effective, easy to use, and opens doors to filings
heretofore unsearchable, Global Securities does not fill the non-EDGAR gaps
with additional products. They must be supplemented by a competitor's
offerings for the complete documents picture.

==========================================================
Disclosure's Access Disclosure, Laser D II, and EDGAR PLUS

Disclosure Inc.--historically a supplier of SEC paper filings on microfiche
and CD-ROM--has now integrated EDGAR into its product offerings, with
Access Disclosure, EDGAR PLUS, and Laser D II.

Access Disclosure (formerly known as Electronic Company Filing Index or
ECFI) lists all documents available via Disclosure. While its major purpose
is to facilitate ordering, Access Disclosure also can serve as a research
tool because it integrates the EDGAR filings with the paper documents as
well as a range of non-SEC materials (like stock exchange listing
applications, annual reports of foreign companies, Euro prospectuses, and
Canadian filings) all into a single list by company, which dates back to
1968. EDGAR filings are clearly noted and can be viewed and printed from
the same computer terminal. Documents are not textually searchable on
Access Disclosure, however, although sections and exhibits are broken out
for selective printing. The first page of EDGAR documents is supposed to be
available for viewing free of charge, as a check for accuracy, but this
screen is frequently blank.

For specific document and precedent research Disclosure has introduced
EDGAR PLUS for word searching EDGAR filings. This CD-ROM product is updated
monthly. EDGAR PLUS is a full-text, value-added database of EDGAR filings
that includes extracts of non-electronic SEC documents. The composite of
information allows menu searching on Disclosure's 300 fields and format
tags, keyword searching, and displays of specific categories without wading
through entire documents. EDGAR PLUS features also are integrated into
Disclosure's Laser D II, which supports its formatting and navigational
tags for electronic filings on its laser discs.

Because of Disclosure's long prominence in SEC document delivery,
subscribers are familiar with its products and coverage and can adapt
easily to the new EDGAR product offerings. No other service, at present,
can match the retrospective coverage in the filing index, combined with
foreign company and sovereign filings, as well as non-SEC documents. Those
familiar with Compact D SEC and Compact D New Issues, will have no problem
using EDGAR PLUS, but may hesitate to rely on yet another disc, when
alternative online competitive products are available.

===============================
EDGAR PLUS on Lexis and Westlaw

Both the Lexis and Westlaw databases have contracts with Disclosure to
offer EDGAR PLUS. Since law firms subscribe to these providers and legal
information searchers are familiar with these systems, this convenient
access to electronic SEC filings provides a comfortable alternative.
However, users need to be aware of the currency of the filings as well as
the extent of the coverage. At present, periodic EDGAR filings (10Ks,
proxies, 8Ks) are searchable full-text, but the Williams Act filings
(tender offers) will be phased in.

Again, searchers must realize that not all companies are EDGAR filers, and
certain registration statements (like initial public offerings) are not yet
filed electronically. In the EDGAR PLUS files, all exhibits included with
the document are available online separately. Those documents filed prior
to September 1994, however, include only selected exhibits. While these
products have the advantage of familiar search commands, they do not cover
the complete EDGAR picture.

=============================
Federal Filings' EDGAR Direct

Produced by Federal Filings, Inc., a Dow Jones company, EDGAR Direct
provides real-time online access to SEC electronic filings the instant they
are available. EDGAR Direct is received through a dedicated line, as
opposed to a dial-up service. Windows-based software uses the "find"
command to search for particular documents and cut-and-clip sections;
converts to word processing or spreadsheet programs; downloads directly to
a network or e-mailbox; and manipulates fonts and text sizes. Searching can
be done by company name and file form, with the ability to create profiles
to filter out desired documents. Generated lists of filings can be grouped
by all, mergers and deals, high yield, or convertibles; and they can be
viewed simultaneously with specific filings sorted into appropriate
windows.

EDGAR Direct promises additional search capabilities in the future, such as
by ticker symbol, SIC code, and other fields. Most customers run the system
all day long so users are aware as soon as documents are filed. Such real-
time access is especially useful for investment analysts who need EDGAR
information instantaneously.

=====================
EDGAR on the Internet

The availability of the EDGAR database on the Internet marks the final
realization of Progressive Era and New Deal securities legislation
sponsors, who envisioned that public disclosure of company information
would enable investors to make prudent decisions. When the SEC awarded Mead
the contract to develop EDGAR and disseminate the data on a wholesale
basis, public-interest groups demanded free access to this information.
Jamie Love, of Ralph Nader's Taxpayer Assets Project (TAP), who has lobbied
for years to make publicly funded government data available, considers the
SEC EDGAR database one of the "crown jewels."

Ed. note: For background information, see the January 1995 issue of LEGAL
INFORMATION ALERT, a special guide featuring "Assault on the Citadel:
Romancing the Crown Jewels of West Publishing."

At the same time, Carl Malamud, who formed the Internet Multicasting
Service (IMS), in October 1993 teamed up with New York University on a two-
year National Science Foundation grant, to make EDGAR available on the
Internet. With additional support from corporations like Sun Microsystems,
HarperCollins, Persoft, and UUNET Technologies, the project was supervised
by NYU's Stern School of Business, while the database management was
subcontracted to IMS, who made EDGAR available on its Town Hall Internet
site (http://www.town.hall.org).

The Town Hall project provided a variety of mechanisms to access the EDGAR
database, from low-end and e-mail interfaces to high-end Mosaic
connections. This Internet EDGAR Dissemination Project allowed users to
obtain electronic filings made since 1994 on a "day-delayed" basis. Search
capabilities as well as printing options were not as sophisticated as
commercial products, but for the individual user or small information
center, the cost only amounted to basic Internet provisions.

With the end of the grant and the Town Hall project on October 1st, the SEC
inaugurated its home page on the Internet (http://www.sec.gov) with access
to the EDGAR database. Since this server is "under construction" at the
time of this writing and is expected to undergo changes over the next few
months, I will describe the menus offered.

The SEC Internet site enables retrieval of 1994 and 1995 electronic filings
available to the public. The service has two types of access: via Web
browsers or via anonymous file transfer protocol (ftp). You can log on as
user "anonymous" with a password consisting of your electronic mail
address. Searchers can use OR, AND, and ADJ, when entering terms, and
results are generated in a list of filings posted by form and in reverse
chronological order. Other retrieval tools include a quick forms lookup,
current events analysis, mutual funds retrieval/prospectus search, Schedule
13D ownership report, and executive compensation test extracted from proxy
(DEF 14A) filings. The prospectus report, for example, gives all "485"
filings pertaining to mutual funds of choice.

While the SEC Internet site appears to offer an equivalent replacement for
Town Hall (including a trade off between limited search capabilities and
low cost) two commercial vendors also offer access to EDGAR through their
home pages. Disclosure entered into an agreement with New York University
to continue providing full access to EDGAR by allowing NYU to maintain its
Web site without interruption. NYU can be accessed directly
(http://EDGAR.stern .nyu.edu) or through a link from Disclosure's home page
(http://www.disclosure.com). Its search menus seem almost identical to the
SEC's home page EDGAR site. At the same time, Global Securities offers free
real-time access to LIVEDGAR via its home page (http://www.gsionline.com),
although this service is a scaled-down version of the commercial product
and must be downloaded to a disk and added to the program manager through a
"special client program".

With EDGAR a reality, SEC information specialists must determine the best
means to access the database, search it, and present the data. Priorities
like currency, coverage, search capabilities, and value-added features
should be considered when choosing EDGAR products to meet your specific
information needs.

--Bonnie Fox Schwartz is a reference librarian in New York City.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Items on Legal Tech, IAC, Matthew Bender & Folio, Lawyers Coop & Shepard's
Personnel, CCH Sold, Thomson Acquisitions, RIA Group, Legal Info
Management, Marquis Who's Who Lawsuit, Where to Get SEC Documents, AND MORE

By Donna Tuke Heroy

==========
Legal Tech

In November of 1995, I attended the Legal Tech show, which is sponsored by
Price Waterhouse. Held three times a year, it is clearly a marketing
vehicle for Price Waterhouse's legal technology consulting department.
Legal Tech differs from other technology-related shows in that it targets
large law firms as its primary market.

There were more research-oriented presentations than at previous Price
Waterhouse Legal Tech shows, and the sessions I attended were uneven in
quality. Sabrini I. Pacifici from Sidley & Austin's Washington, D.C. office
gave an excellent presentation on the use of technology in law libraries.
In "New Legal Research Tools," Professor J.C. Smith, a Canadian legal
theorist, attempted to explain FlexLaw, a product whose object is to
automate the management of legal information based on linguistic
connections between words. I'm at a loss to explain what this system adds
to the online landscape.

Another presentation by a partner at Baker & McKenzie, titled "Going
Online: Electronic Research by Trial Lawyers," was a thinly veiled overview
of what's new on Lexis.

More electronic legal research products were exhibited than at previous
shows. Lexis-Nexis is focusing on its Office product (which we will be
reviewing) in many of its trade show appearances. West Publishing Company
demonstrated its West Legal Network, which is still in beta testing and
also will be reviewed in LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT.

The Microsoft Network (MSN), a new commercial online service available as a
fee-based option to Windows 95 users, introduced its new Law Office
product. In the coming months MSN will be looking for partners to help
build its online venture. One of the first services to be offered is
Platinum Pages, a global collection of online directories of attorneys,
legal experts, and vendors.

The exhibits at this show are always worthwhile, but given the lack of
quality I witnessed in many of the presentations, I cannot recommend paying
the high fee to attend the seminar portion. Pre-registrants may view the
exhibits for free; otherwise, there is a fee ($20) at the door. For
information about future Legal Tech dates, contact PW Corporate
Presentations, 212-877-5619.

==========
IAC Update

Many readers have asked when our newsletters will be available on
Information Access Company's Newsletter Database. As you may know, the
ALERT signed the agreement to do so over a year ago. One issue of BUSINESS
INFORMATION ALERT was formatted and sent electronically. However, it was
not completely loaded by IAC onto its database, nor was it loaded in a
manner acceptable to the ALERT.

I felt that this was unethical. We have asked IAC representatives to reload
that issue in its entirety and as originally formatted. As soon as we are
able to independently confirm that our newsletter is electronically
represented on Information Access' Newsletter Database as we originally
intended it to be, we will commence formatting and sending future ALERT
newsletters.

In the meantime, both LEGAL INFORMATION and BUSINESS INFORMATION ALERT are
still available on NewsNet and can be retrieved for an extremely fair
price: $5 for an article (usually an entire article or review) and $20 for
the whole issue. The ALERT is seriously looking for additional online
outlets for our publications. If you have suggestions about where you would
like to see our publications, please let us know.

================================
Matthew Bender Converts to Folio

Abandoning its proprietary CD-ROM search-and-retrieval software, Matthew
Bender is converting its CD-ROM Practice Libraries to Folio, the industry
standard. By the time you read this 18 Practice Libraries should be
converted. This was one of the first things that MB's new CEO, Katherine
Downing, ordered when she joined the company in September 1995.

For more information on Matthew Bender products call 800-223-1940. For more
information on Folio, see our September 1995 article, "Folio Corporation Is
Improving Your Future," written by Kevin Miles of Haynes & Boone.

=================
Personnel Changes

Erik J. Heels has joined American Lawyer Media as Director of Internet
Product Development. He came from Lawyers Cooperative where he served as
Internet Systems architect. Heels is well known for The Legal List,
published for several years on the Internet and, most recently, in print
format as The Legal List, Internet Desk Reference, Law-Related Resources on
the Internet and Elsewhere from Lawyers Cooperative.

Gary Spivey has been promoted to Vice-President, Electronic Product
Development at Shepard's/McGraw-Hill. He was previously in charge of
citations development.

============
Merger Mania

CCH has been acquired by Wolters Kluwer for the sum of $1.9 billion. This
was a surprise to many law librarians. We hope that the incredibly high
price paid in the merger will not result in higher prices for CCH products.

Thomson Corporation is on a buying spree. Thomson Legal Publishing (TLP)
has acquired the topical products and other non-citation legal information
products from Shepard's/McGraw Hill. This includes some 270 print titles,
23 desktop codes, and 30 software products.

Librarians will be hearing from Thomson in a letter introducing the new
publisher. However, during the first quarter of 1996, servicing will be
done by a Shepard's transition team. Products will be divided as follows:
specialty titles to Clark Boardman Callaghan, state-specific titles to
Lawyers Cooperative Publishing or Bancroft-Whitney, and tax titles to a new
RIA Group (see below). Interestingly, Brian Hall, current president of
Thomson Legal Publishing used to be with Shepard's/McGraw Hill.

Thomson, through its Bancroft-Whitney division, has acquired Legal
Solutions Inc., a publisher of California-specific computer generated legal
forms. Recently Thomson also agreed to work with the Association of Trial
Lawyers of America to develop legal research products for trial lawyers.
These products will include national and state-specific print and
electronic products.

=======================
Thomson Forms Tax Group

Thomson Corporation has formed the Research Institute of America Group (RIA
Group), which is comprised of the former Research Institute of America,
Practitioners Publishing Company, and Warren Gorham & Lamont. Euan Menzies
who has been president of RIA for the past two years was appointed
president and CEO of this new group, which will focus on the tax and
accounting information markets. RIA Group parallels Thomson Legal
Publishing, and both groups report to the Thomson Financial and
Professional Publishing Group.

Visit RIAWeb at http://www.riatax.com for weekly tax news.

==================================
Legal Info Management Reports Sold

Legal Information Management Reports has been sold to Library Specialists,
Inc., of Marietta, Ga., which will continue the title starting with Volume
8, 1996. This is the first newsletter venture of Library Specialists, a
library research and management firm.

President Jane Miller says, "The purchase of such a well-respected
publication is a natural addition to the information services provided by
our company. Our goal is for our clients to be able to obtain all their
information needs from one source."

Future topics to be covered include an update on copyright issues and using
commercial online services. Back issues also will be available from Library
Specialists. For more information contact Susan Flugman at 800-578-6200, e-
mail libspec@ic.netcom .com or 71501.3431@compuserve.com.

===============================
Marquis Who's Who vs. Who's Who

Are you confused by mailings from a company called Who's Who Worldwide
Registry, Inc.? Don't worry. A federal court for the Second Circuit Court
of Appeals in New York has affirmed an award of money damages of more than
$1.6 million to the real McCoy, Marquis Who's Who. Ironically, Who's Who
Worldwide Registry, from Lake Success, N.Y., has declared bankruptcy.

===================
Need SEC Documents?

After you've read this month's lead article on the variety of EDGAR
products springing up, note this additional source for SEC products: FDR
InfoCenters. In the past, researchers had to go to Disclosure, FDR's parent
company. The change was made to convenience FDR customers.

Look for other new products from FDR, including a biweekly fax newsletter
(free to clients) called FDR Facts. For more information on FDR
InfoCenters, call 800-874-4337.

============
Briefs . . .

The 1996 Directory of Law-Related CD-ROMs contains more than 1,000 titles.
Macintosh-based products have increased dramatically too. Contact 201-836-
7072.

IN SITE: New Internet Site Additions: A Current Awareness Fortnightly for
the Information Professional--this succinct Internet newsletter identifies
sites of interest to librarians. Arranged by topic, the newsletter lists
the site name and address. For a copy, send an e-mail message to the
editor, Gary Price at Libref@aol.com asking to be added to the list. At
this time the list is free.

A survey of attorneys at leading law firms revealed that keeping pace with
technology is a top priority. As for budget allocations, the largest will
be for high-tech spending. The survey was done by The Affiliates, a
temporary staffing service for lawyers. For more information, call 415-854-
9700.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

By Michael Saint-Onge -- Items on Internet Time Charges, Good Industry
Magazines, Owning Two Treatise Sets, Time Wasters, CD Recycling, Employee
Incentives, CLE Information Publication

===============================
Watch the Clock When on the Net

The Information Superhighway sounds great in theory, doesn't it? The
problem arises when actually trying to locate relevant material when you
need it. For example, if it takes you an hour to find something "for free"
on the Internet, but it was available for a minimal price on one of the
indexed commercial providers, it was not a bargain.

If you know exactly where something is located on the Internet and have
downloaded or printed such material from that site previously, it may be
worth your while to explore the Internet option before turning to
commercial providers. If it is unfamiliar information you need, now is
probably not the time to go exploring new territory--especially if you're
billing your time to the client. Later, after the information has been
passed along to the appropriate party, try looking on the Internet for it.
If you find it, you will know in the future where it is located. Also, when
you have questions about the source or doubts about accuracy, commercial
providers are always your best bet.

===============
Stay Up to Date

To find out what your users are most interested in, glance over magazines
such as ABA Journal, National Law Journal, or local bar association
journals. Since few of us have time to read these periodicals cover-to-
cover, nor do we want to, just scan them to see what topics are important
to your users. This can help alert you to upcoming trends and prepare you
for related questions. It also may help you when a patron asks, "I remember
reading something somewhere about . . ."

=======================
Keep Two Sets in Motion

Can't afford two completely up-to-date sets of a looseleaf treatise? If you
have two sets but stagger under the cost of keeping a second "convenience"
set current, try keeping the superseded pages of one set to interfile in
the older set. The older set then will be only one release behind in
currency, but may still be relied upon for quick reference. Caveat: Mark
the convenience copy prominently, and remind users of the importance of
checking the current set before relying on the information.

======================
Watch for Time Wasters

One of the biggest obstacles to working efficiently can be those subtle
time wasters. Here are some time wasters and ways to deal with them:

1) Being placed on hold. Use the speakerphone while you are on hold so that
you can work on other projects. Once the person on the other end picks up
the receiver, though, you should do the same. Most people feel that using
the speakerphone during one-on-one conversations is pretentious.

2) Friendly interruptions. It is difficult at times to find the proper
balance between being friendly and getting your work done, especially for
reference librarians who want to be available and approachable for work-
related inquiries, but not distracted or interrupted for chatting. If you
are working at your desk, try standing up when it becomes obvious that the
patron does not have a real question but just wants to talk. This often
signals to the individual that the conversation is drawing to a close. If
you are already standing, pick up a file or a book, or even the telephone
receiver. If none of these work, try simply saying, "Well, I guess I should
get back to work."

3) Meetings. Most meetings suffer from a lack of focus, thereby lasting
longer than they need to. Begin with an agenda. Gently bring people back to
the agenda when the conversation begins to wander. Set a clearly defined
time limit and stick to it. Such restrictions can help keep the focus on
the business at hand.

===========
Recycle CDs

If you feel guilty throwing away those superseded CDs, now you have an
option. As reported on law-lib, the listserve for law librarians, Digital
Audio Disc Corporation recycles old CDs. They may be sent to JADCORE, c/o
DADC Recycling Program, 300 N. Fruitridge Ave., Terre Haute, IN 47803.

Please follow these simple guidelines when sending discs for recycling:

*  All shipments must be prepaid and are the responsibility of the sender.

*  Send only the compact discs and plastic jewel cases, no cardboard
containers or other packaging components.

You might want to designate a storage box for superseded compact discs and
mail it off when it gets full rather than mailing one at a time. There are,
of course, postal charges associated with this program, but at least you
know you are doing your part for the environment.

======================
Inexpensive Incentives

The October/November 1995 issue of ALA News (from the Association of Legal
Administrators) suggests some quick and inexpensive gift ideas for
extending kudos to your staff members:

*  items with the institution's logo or name, such as t-shirts, water
bottles, coffee cups, fanny packs
*  movie passes or magazine subscriptions
*  lunch/dinner certificates
*  flowers, cookies, balloons, picture frames
*  free parking for a week or a month
*  time off or casual day
*  individual recognition, such as "Library Staff Member of the Month" on
the library's bulletin board
*  freebies from the AALL Annual Meeting
*  membership in an AALL Special Interest Section.

==========================
Additional CLE Information

In a previous column, I suggested routing MCLE seminar announcement
materials to interested individuals. Mark Carroll of ALI-ABA sent me a copy
of an excellent publication entitled The CLE Journal and Register. This
bimonthly publication lists CLE courses by date, by state, and by subject,
and also includes a listing of CLE Sponsors with addresses and phone
numbers, in addition to articles relevant to CLE issues.

If you oversee the CLE functions in your institution, you will find this
serial very useful. The cost is $75 and subscriptions can be obtained from
ALI-ABA, 4025 Chestnut St., Philadelphia, PA 19104.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Publishers' addresses and telephone numbers are listed in the "PUBLISHERS"
department.

Prices given are U.S. list prices, exclusive of postage, handling, and
shipping charges. Available discounts are not listed. Contact publisher
representatives for further details on multiple-user pricing and other
options, especially those pertaining to CD-ROMs and computer software.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

EMPLOYMENT LAW --
Privacy in Employment Law

Matthew W. Finkin. 1995. BNA Books.
Hardcover. 477p. ISBN: 0-87179-883-2. $110.

Rapid advances in technology have made electronic eavesdropping a
possibility for an ever-increasing number of companies. Global competition
has only intensified long-standing employer interest in hiring the best
possible employees, monitoring their productivity, and ensuring that costs
are kept as low as possible (especially healthcare costs). These
developments have wrought conflict over privacy in the workplace.

For an emerging area of law governed by a tangle of state and federal
statutes, regulations, nonbinding administrative guidance, constitutional
provisions, and common law principles, a fully developed treatise would be
a welcome addition to any labor and employment lawyer's bookshelf.
Unfortunately, this is not the objective of Finkin's Privacy in Employment
Law, nor may it be a realistic ambition given the immaturity of this area
of law. The goal of his work is to offer a set of guideposts through the
maze of privacy rights in the workplace.

Privacy in Employment Law is a three-part work consisting of a primer,
state statutes, and sample business forms. The intended scope of the primer
is ambitious given its brevity. It covers medical, genetic, drug, alcohol,
tobacco and psychological screening; disclosure and access to records;
background and credit checks; monitoring employee performance through
surveillance, electronic interception, and eavesdropping; and employer
control of employee political, religious, and sexual conduct and
expression. Finkin does not seek to develop legal theories for testing the
law in the private employment sector. Nevertheless, because it is such an
unsettled area of the law, an author cannot help but indulge in speculation
on the shape of the law yet to be written.

Part 2 reprints state statutes on polygraph and lie detection, drug
testing, use of tobacco and alcohol, and access to personnel records from
BNA's Individual Employee Rights Manual. Part 3 comprises sample business
forms reprinted from BNA's Policy and Practice Series.

For individual attorneys and small firms with very limited labor and
employment practices, Finkin's Privacy in Employment Law will serve as a
handy and convenient finding tool. However, in these times of tight
budgets, it is not a best buy for libraries that support significant
employment practices and already subscribe to BNA's Policy and Practice
series and Labor Relations Reporter. The cost of this one-volume work is
competitive with the companion volumes published by Wiley, which consists
of Decker's Employee Privacy Law and Practice and Employee Privacy: Forms
and Procedure, but it also is largely duplicative.

--Linda Hauck, Schnader Harrison
Segal & Lewis, Philadelphia



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

EMPLOYMENT LAW --
Sex Discrimination in the Legal Profession

Bernard F. Lentz & David N. Laband. 1995. Quorum Books.
Hardcover. 256p. ISBN: 0-89930-928-3. $49.95.

Using the 1984 and 1990 National Surveys of Career Satisfaction/Dissatis-
faction administered by the Young Lawyers Division of the ABA, economists
Bernard Lentz and David Laband explore the complex dynamics of sexual
discrimination as experienced by women lawyers. This book is the result of
their effort to reconcile their 1991 study--which showed no significant
differences in salary and promotion between women lawyers and their male
counterparts--with those of two other earlier studies that came to contrary
conclusions.

The authors conclude that the earlier raw numbers showed an income gap
between male and female lawyers that can be explained by reasons other than
discrimination: primarily by the fact that women entered the profession in
large numbers relatively recently and were, therefore, less experienced and
less likely to be partners than men as a group. Because the experience gap
had narrowed by 1990, when Lentz and Laband undertook their study, that
factor had become statistically insignificant.

This book is an extended quantitative analysis of the data produced by the
ABA surveys; therefore, it may be heavy-going for attorneys without the
appropriate background. If nothing else, the book explores the complex
nature of sexual discrimination and demonstrates how little of the picture
can be seen through the simplest, usually evaluated, indicators, namely
earnings and promotions. Although there seems to be no significant
differences between the two groups based on these measures, the ABA surveys
showed a significant difference in the perceptions of the female attorneys.

How can we explain the discrepancy between the hard numbers and the
perceptions of the individuals within the profession? The authors postulate
that because attorneys are familiar with the law on sex discrimination,
they now make sure that there is no disparity on these measures. However,
the authors could not discount the convictions of the women surveyed that
such discrimination is still prevalent. This caused them to move beyond the
data in the surveys and discuss the multitude of ways that sex
discrimination can occur--whether by superiors, coworkers, clients, judges,
or juries.

Covert discrimination breeds intimidation and lack of trust, which causes
women to alter their behavior and thereby give employers the justification
they need to discriminate on performance grounds. The higher percentage of
women in the corporate, public sector, or small firm settings may be the
result of women choosing these settings due to the discrimination they
experience in other areas. Or, a client may complain to a woman's
supervisor that she didn't perform adequately when, in reality, the client
simply dislikes working with women.

Similarly, a jury may not reach a verdict for a woman's client due to
sexual bias on the part of some jury members. That adverse result may
consequently affect her standing in the firm, because that underlying bias
is not apparent to those judging her performance. It is because this third-
party bias is not always apparent to employers that the authors conclude
that the Title VII imposition of liability on employers for third-party
bias is probably inefficient.

Ironically, the authors ultimately conclude that the data's "objective
factors," such as earnings and promotion, don't tell the real story.
Therefore, they use the survey figures on individuals' perceptions of
discrimination to conclude that these feelings of discrimination cannot be
dismissed. For this reason, it may be unconvincing to those searching for
hard evidence. However, Sex Discrimination in the Legal Profession is
invaluable in showing the gap between individuals' perceptions of men and
women lawyers, and in developing arguments of how the complex dynamics of
sex discrimination may belie the figures.

--Charlotte L. Bynum, Associate Librarian
for Reference Services, Detroit College of Law
at Michigan State University



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

ENERGY & ENVIRONMENT --
ELR: The Environmental Law Reporter

Environmental Law Institute. 1995. Clark Boardman Callaghan.
CD-ROM service, monthly & ELR Update supplements, 36 per year. $2,295.

The Environmental Law Reporter, already one of the finest environmental
reporters on the market in its looseleaf format, will probably become one
of the finest environmental reporters in CD-ROM format. I say "probably"
because with each release, Clark Boardman Callaghan (CBC) improves the
product, even though they are three to four weeks late each month. We
subscribe to both the print and CD-ROM, and our preference is moving toward
the CD-ROM for its ease of use and accessibility on the Wide Area Network.

Using the popular Folio software, this product makes research easy to
accomplish. Printing documents, however, is another matter. Rather than
inputting each document as a record, CBC has made each sentence a record,
which necessitates blocking the text to be printed. CBC developers need to
correct this and I am sure they will. It also would help if documents could
be printed as they appear in the print product: in dual-column format.

Product features include providing access through 10 formal information
categories. The categories, which follow the printed materials closely,
include Administrative Materials, Cases, Code of Federal Regulations, News
and Analysis, Statutes, State Regulations, Federal Register, Litigation
Documents, International Treaties, and Index. Each category may be opened
and searched, and there are plenty of jump-links to other documents.

How mature is this product? Well, each release is a tighter, better-linked
product than the previous one. If one Folio CD-ROM product could be held as
a standard for its ease of use and maturity, in my opinion it would be
Lawyers Cooperative's United States Code Service. ELR: The Environmental
Law Reporter is not far behind.

I recommend this product for high-volume researchers trying to reduce
online costs. It also would be ideal for organizations moving into the
electronic library concept.

--Kevin Miles, Manager of Library Services,
Haynes & Boone, Dallas



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

HEALTH LAW --
When Life Ends: Legal Overviews, Medicolegal Forms, and Hospital Policies

Arthur S. Berger. 1995. Praeger Publishers.
Hardcover. 208p. ISBN: 0-275-94620-7. $59.95.

The Patient Self-Determination Act was enacted in 1990 to promote citizen
awareness of and participation in advance directives for health care.
Although its aim was to encourage individuals and families to thoughtfully
discuss and make healthcare decisions in advance; for most patients, the
introduction to options regarding treatment and advance directives comes
upon admission to a healthcare facility. At that time, patients are often
too sick, confused, or panicky to make thoughtful decisions; and family
members face, in addition to fear and stress, a bewildering paper blizzard.
One hospital study showed that less that one percent of the patients
surveyed later understood or were aware of the materials on advance
directives that they had received upon admission.

Obviously, better methods of communications are needed. Medical personnel,
healthcare administrators, social workers, and attorneys should all be more
familiar with advance directives in order to inform individuals of their
rights. These professionals also should encourage their clients to prepare
for these situations and work to ensure that the healthcare institutions
with the appropriate policies in place are prepared to honor the advance
directives of their patients.

In the first part of the book, author Berger discusses in plain language
six areas of concern: refusal of life-sustaining treatment, advance
directives, surrogate decision making, withholding/withdrawing life-
sustaining treatment, DNR orders, and PSDA. Berger clearly and succinctly
analyzes the legal, ethical, and medical questions involved--always
emphasizing the individual's rights. He ties in the landmark legal cases,
and points out the essential elements of institutional policies and
medicolegal forms for each topic.

In the second half, sample policies and forms--including optional clauses
for pregnant or minor patients and other exceptional situations--are
numerically keyed to the text. Berger suggests that using such forms and
policies--first, to ensure that patients' wishes are expressed and honored,
and second, to protect the medical personnel and institutions from
liability--also will promote patient-centered health care. A detailed
index, a table of cases, a bibliography, and a list of legal citations
provide access to both the contents and to other related materials.
Specific state statutes are not included.

Although written primarily for physicians and hospital administrators, When
Life Ends is certainly appropriate, and perhaps even essential reading for
attorneys (and their clients) working in health fields, estate planning,
and elder law, as well as for social workers, clergy, and private citizens.
End-of-life decisions will surely touch many of us either as caregivers,
relatives, or patients. When Life Ends provides an objective framework for
this often difficult, emotional subject. It is unreservedly recommended for
law libraries, medical libraries, and social services collections in
universities.

--Kelly Browne, Reference Librarian,
University of Tennessee Law Library, Knoxville



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY --
BNA's Intellectual Property Library on CD-ROM

1995. The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc.
CD-ROM. 2 discs. $1,750. Monthly updates.

BNA's Intellectual Property Library on CD-ROM contains the full-text of
BNA's U.S. Patents Quarterly (USPQ), 1st and 2nd Series, which comprises
all intellectual property decisions of the federal and state courts and
administrative agencies, as well as U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal
Circuit decisions.

The archival disc covers volumes 68 to 231 of the USPQ, 1st Series (1946 to
1986 cases). The subscription disc, which is updated monthly, covers the
Second Series of USPQ and the Federal Circuit cases. Each disc also
contains Finding Aids, Topical Index, Classification Outline, Conversion
Table, and Parallel Citations.

This is a Folio Views product that runs in the Windows environment. There
are hypertext links, easy-to-use pull-down menus, and the capacity to
manipulate and customize text, store the executed searches, download, and
print. BNA provides numerous helpful resources to facilitate use of this
CD-ROM. There is a "Quick Start Guide," a "Quick Reference Card," and a
complete looseleaf user guide. The user guide is updated each month by
online and print versions of CD News, which includes "User Hints" and "List
of New Cases." Online help, an online tutorial, and a 22-minute video,
"Getting the Most Out of BNA's Intellectual Property Library on CD-ROM,"
round out a useful introduction to the product's features. BNA also
provides excellent telephone support and search assistance.

There are three customized query templates for conducting searches.
Template 1 searches by "Words of Phrases," template 2 by "Any Field
Combination," and template 3 by "Case Citation." Any Field Combination is
most useful because it allows searching by all of the following: attorney
name, case name, citation number, cited cases, classification number,
decision date, docket number, headnotes, judge, jurisdiction, particular
patents (by patent number or description), and words in the text of the
case. Intellectual Property Library also has the ability to expand or limit
your searches, for example, to include or exclude unpublished cases.

The Words or Phrases template is quite limited because the search logic
used in proximity searching is so unconventional. For example, to search
"trademark within 3 words of infringement," you enter "trademark
infringement"@3. Complex queries are very difficult because truncated terms
cannot be used within the proximity search.

It would be helpful if BNA added a time-tracker for accurate time-keeping;
as well as an opening-screen notice indicating the disc date and the latest
USPQ included therein. This information is provided in the print and online
versions of CD News.

Except for the phrase-searching limitations mentioned above, BNA's
Intellectual Property Library on CD-ROM is a very useful product. It will
save research time as well as online research costs.

--Susan E. Gindin, Manager of Library and Information Services,
Lerner, David, Littenberg, Krumholz & Mentlik, Westfield, N.J.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY --
Legal Research Guide to Mechanical Patent Litigation

Adam V. Floyd. 1995. William S. Hein & Co.
Hardcover. 95p. ISBN: 0-89941-906-2. $37.

This volume, the "culmination" of a student research project, is one of
many research guides published by Hein. According to the author, it
attempts to provide novice patent attorneys with methods and tips for
researching patent litigation. However, the guide is so well written, it
also is suitable for law students and the general public. New attorneys
will find the guide helpful, and those with experience in the area may want
to consult it as a refresher.

It is divided into three main sections: best, secondary, and primary
sources. The author also includes a people sources section, with
information on locating attorneys, judges, and associations that have
knowledge of mechanical patent law and litigation. This volume has a table
of contents (but no index), a table of abbreviations, and charts of patent
and patent-related databases on Westlaw and Lexis. The subsection on
locating books includes a brief discussion of Internet searching.

The research guide provides only cursory coverage of computer patent and
bio-technical litigation, pre-constitutional sources of patent protection,
and patent statutes before the Patent Act of 1952. Additionally, patent
prosecution sources and transactional aspects of patents are not included.
This research guide to mechanical patent litigation is appropriate for law
firms specializing in patent litigation, law school libraries, and
depository libraries that house patent information.

--Deanne Morgan, Legal Research Services,
Bloomington, Ill.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY --
Software and Intellectual Property Protection:
Copyright and Patent Issues for Computer and Legal Professionals

Bernard A. Galler. 1995. Quorum Books.
Hardcover. 224p. ISBN: 0-89930-974-7. $55.

Author Bernard A. Galler is not an attorney, but an expert witness on
computers who has participated extensively in some of the most influential
trials involving software disputes. In this book, Galler aims to inform
readers about copyright and patent issues that affect computer and legal
professionals.

Almost everyone uses computers in their homes or in their workplaces to
some extent, so almost everyone uses software and hardware. Having become
such an integral part of life in the 1990s, computers seem to have been
around much longer, but in fact have only come of age in the last 45 years.
Therefore, the body of law that developed to protect intellectual property
earlier in the century is inadequate to address the legal issues of today's
computer age. With the rise in importance of computers there likewise comes
a pressing need for laws that govern the intellectual property rights of
computer hardware and software inventors.

Galler has made every effort to make the current state of computer software
and intellectual property laws accessible to his varied intended audience
of business executives, legal professionals, and the general public. For
readers with little computer background, Galler has included an extensive
appendix, which details the basic fundamentals of computer technology.

The book begins with an overview of the laws governing computer
intellectual property, and the remainder of the book focuses on the common
law and judicial interpretation of the related statutes. Chapters 1 and 2
discuss the basic copyright issues; chapter 3, software-related patents;
and chapters thereafter involve the copyright issues and litigation that
have been influential in the software copyright arena.

In many respects Galler realizes his goal of writing a book that is
accessible to his wide audience. He does not use complex sentence
structures nor overuse technical terminology. He emphasizes understanding
the fundamentals of copyright law and goes forward from that established
foundation. A good example is his discussion of the difference between an
expression and an idea. "An idea that leads to a particular kind of
invention can be patented, while the expression of an idea must be
copyrighted to be protected."

A separate outline of the cases discussed allows interested readers to
grasp the courts' actions and roles in making the laws. In addition, he
includes an example of a patent and an excerpt from a court opinion. These
all help readers to visualize what the court is examining in trials and
what the lawyers are examining to determine that law. Numerous hypothetical
situations also convey the information in an understandable way. Galler
does not include many endnotes (which sometimes tend to discourage lay
readers)--unnecessary since most of his discussions are based on the cases.

Sometimes Galler's work becomes laborious--not the fault of his writing
style or technique, but of the subject matter. Often the decisions in
intellectual property cases involving computer hardware or software turn on
very technical details. Without an understanding or a basic explanation of
the technical issues at stake, the gravity of the decision and the
distinctions that the court draws will make no sense to readers.

This book is excellent for an academic collection, because it will help
those considering a career in intellectual property. It also is helpful for
lay readers who foresee becoming entangled in an intellectual property
dispute. Finally, for attorneys who do not typically practice in this area,
Software and Intellectual Property Protection provides a broad overview of
the current status of the copyright laws impacting software.

--Melinda Elder, Librarian,
Winstead Sechrest & Minick, Houston



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

INTERNATIONAL & FOREIGN LAW --
European Union Law Guide

Philip Raworth, ed. 1995. Oceana Publications, Inc.
Looseleaf. 3v. ISBN: 0-379-10175-0. $495. Quarterly supplements.

The continuing process of European integration, including the discussions
leading to a common European monetary system, has furthered an interest in
the documentation and legislative process of the European Union in both
academic and private sectors. A major component of this interest involves
the acquisition and use of the documentation generated by the Union. While
the Union generates voluminous amounts of material, researching Union law
has never been an easy process. The Union itself provides no subject
compilation of its law, and the indexes provided by private publishers
usually do not provide the actual documents. European Union Law Guide,
aimed at law firms and academic libraries, attempts to fill this breach.

The guide is essentially a collection of documents with little or no
narration or analysis. It is a worthwhile addition to experienced
researchers' libraries, especially if they do not have access to a
collection of the Union's Official Journal, since the majority of the
documents in the collection are from this source. The table of contents
checklist includes references to "all legislation of any importance," the
most important documents are reproduced.

Currently, the guide offers access to the commercial and constitutional
documents of the Union. Arranged in subject areas familiar to American
lawyers, the goal is to provide access to all applicable Union legislation.
Among the subject areas included are public procurement law; banking law;
and the law of gender equality. When completed, the series will consist of
five binders that will include materials on social as well as agricultural
policies. A binder on the history, politics, and institutions of the Union
is also planned.

The guide strives to provide "comprehensive legal and political coverage of
the Union." While this is a worthy objective, it does come at a hefty
price: $495. Four to five updates per years are planned at $150 to $170
each. As with many looseleaf products, the cost of maintenance will soon
exceed the cost of the basic subscription.

While this work does provide access to many important documents, it does
not provide the analysis and narrative needed to place them in context. In
comparison, Ralph Folsom's European Union Business Law, published by West,
includes both a volume of narrative analysis and a volume of source
material. Although not completely duplicating the European Union Law Guide,
the West product provides a similar breadth of source material along with
an index of authorities and subject index at a cheaper price.

This guide is useful for firm or academic institutions that need a
collection of Union documentation but do not have access to a collection of
the Union's Official Journal. For those with access to the Official
Journal, this is an expensive compilation of material already available.

--William T. Ryan, Foreign, International & Circulation Librarian,
Washington College of Law Library,
The American University, Washington, D.C.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

TAXATION --
OnPoint System: All States Tax Guide

RIA Group. CD-ROM. $400.

A question that recently appeared on the Internet is worth repeating here.
If vendors cancel their print products, forcing subscribers to purchase the
CD-ROMs, was the paper product of any value in the first place? During the
past 24 months I can recall this happening with the BNA Environmental
Reporter, the CCH Health Care Facilities Manual, and the RIA All States Tax
Guide. I have no answer to the question.

In either format, the RIA State and Local Taxes is a valuable resource
investment. In its CD-ROM format, OnPoint System: All States Tax Guide is
easy to use because of the Folio software. A one-year subscription can be
purchased as an option within the State and Local Tax Service of OnPoint
System for $375.

I reviewed this CD-ROM in the DOS format, which requires the use of the tab
key to navigate between the link tokens. The opening screen is divided into
51 states (including the District of Columbia), the Spidell California Tax
Letter, State and Local Taxes Weekly, What's New, User Support, and a
Catalog. For currency in state and local tax information, the What's New
section does a superb job. This screen is divided into three columns: the
link token to get to the full-text; the state and date; and a one-line
description.

The heart of the information, state and local taxes, is further divided
into 12 areas: corporate income, property, estate-gift, fuel and mineral,
general provisions, initial, sales use, licenses and other taxes, public
utilities, special local, chart-calendar, and search all. I found each of
these sections to be informative and easy to navigate.

While I found this product extremely useful and easy to use, I was somewhat
disappointed by the amount of information provided. Specifically--and this
is offered as a suggestion for improvement--I wanted to see state
Department of Revenue rulings in full-text.

Back to the Internet question: I wonder if products like this will have a
future if states begin to offer full-text documents on the Internet. As
with any CD-ROM product, librarians need to do a full cost-benefit analysis
to determine whether online or CD-ROM formats would provide maximum benefit
for the least cost. We determined that CD-ROM meets our needs and will
stretch our budget.

I recommend OnPoint System: All States Tax Guide to those firms whose
practices warrant having this information in this format. It also is an
ideal CD-ROM product for law schools.

--Kevin Miles, Manager of Library Services,
Haynes & Boone, Dallas



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Seminar and show dates for law librarians.

FEBRUARY 26-MARCH 1, 1996
11th Annual Computers in Libraries '96: North America's Largest Technology
Conference and Exhibition for Librarians and Information Managers. Hyatt
Regency Crystal City, Arlington, VA. Contact Information Today, 609-654-
6266, fax 609-654-4309.

FEBRUARY 29-MARCH 1, 1996
Procurement Law Research Workshop. George Washington University National
Law Center, Washington, DC. Contact the Government Contracts Program, 202-
223-2770.

MARCH 21-23, 1996
10th Annual TECHSHOW. Sheraton Hotel, Chicago. Contact the American Bar
Association's Law Practice Management Section, 312-988-5619, e-mail lpm@
attmail.com.

APRIL 14-20, 1996
National Library Week. Contact the American Libraries Association at 800-
545-2433 for a tip sheet.

MAY 14-16, 1996
17th National Online Meeting, "Online Retrieval in Transition," New York
Hilton. Contact National Online Meeting, Information Today, Inc., 609-654-
6266, fax 609-654-4309.

OCTOBER 17-20, 1996
Libraries Without Borders: Legal Information Partnerships in the 21st
Century, Third Northeast Regional Conference. Toronto Marriott Eaton Centre
Hotel. Contact Kathie Sullivan at 518-447-3266, or Anne Matthewman at 416-
327-6012.

======================
Seminars Also of Note:

Intellectual Property Seminar Series. One-day seminar held across North
America that focus on patent and scientific information provided by
Derwent. Contact Derwent, 800-451-3451.

The Public Records Seminar: Using Public Records for Informed Business
Decisions. One-day seminar held across the U.S. Helen Burwell, instructor.
Contact Information Professionals Institute, 713-537-8344, fax 713-537-
8332, e-mail 75120.50@compuserve.com.

Citation Checking and Using WESTCheck. One-day seminar held at West
Publishing's Information Centers across the U.S. Contact the information
center near you.

Family Law. One-day seminar held at West Publishing's Information Centers
across the U.S. Contact the information center near you.

Public Records on Westlaw. One-day seminar held at West Publishing's
Information Centers across the U.S. Contact the information center near
you.

WestCheck. One-day seminar held at West Publish-ing's Information Centers
across the U.S. Contact the information center near you.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
LEGAL INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

The following is the contact information for items reviewed in this issue.
Please mention the ALERT when inquiring about them.

BNA BOOKS
The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc.
300 Raritan Center Pkwy.
P.O. Box 7814
Edison, NJ 08818-7814
800-960-1220
Fax: 908-417-0482
E-mail: info@bna.com
URL: http://www.bna.com

CLARK BOARDMAN CALLAGHAN
375 Hudson St.
New York, NY 10014
800-854-3926

WILLIAM S. HEIN & CO., INC.
1285 Main St.
Buffalo, NY 14209-1987
800-828-7571
Fax: 716-883-8100
E-mail: wsheinco@delphi.com

OCEANA PUBLICATIONS, INC.
75 Main St.
Dobbs Ferry, NY 10522
914-693-8100
Fax: 914-693-0402
E-mail: oceana@panix.com

PRAEGER PUBLISHERS
88 Post Rd. West
P.O. Box 5007
Westport, CT 06881
203-226-3571
Fax: 203-222-1502

QUORUM BOOKS
88 Post Rd. West
P.O. Box 5007
Westport, CT 06881
800-225-5800
Fax: 203-222-1502

RIA GROUP
90 Fifth Ave.
New York, NY 10011
800-431-9025 x4
URL: http://www.riatax.com

======================
Address Change to Note

Adams & Ambrose Publishing
P.O. Box 259684
Madison, WI 53725-9684



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-5</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B047-59</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/la17.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033339 text/html 37037
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:31:43 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:59 GMT
Content-length: 36850
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/la17.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet <BR>
March, 1992<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>***MAJOR LEGAL PUBLISHING START-UPS, ACQUISITIONS AND NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>AMERICAN LAWYER INTRODUCES VIDEO SUPPLEMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(267 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>JOINT VENTURE LAUNCHES SERVICE FOR LEGAL AVIATION FIELD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(172 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>PASHA WINS RULING DEALING WITH PHOTOCOPYING OF NEWSLETTERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(243 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>PRICE COMM. SELLS INTEREST IN N.Y. LAW PUBLISHING; SEEKS TO&nbsp;RESTRUCTURE DEBT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(188 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>BNA BEGINS INFORMATION SERVICE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL DUE&nbsp;DILIGENCE NEEDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(173 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>"DAILY ENVIRONMENT REPORT" FROM BNA; DISABILITIES ACT&nbsp;MANUAL ALSO RELEASED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(237 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>NEWSLETTER COVERING MEXICO-US TRADE LAUNCHED BY&nbsp;THOMPSON-LESSER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(141 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>EMPLOYMENT LAW LETTERS FOR WISCONSIN, LOUISIANA AND&nbsp;COLORADO RELEASED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(164 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION OFFERING SUB PACKAGE FOR 49&nbsp;PUBLICATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(219 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>COMMERCE CLEARING HOUSE RELEASES "EMPLOYMENT TAX FORMS"</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(222 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>***BOOKS AND REFERENCES***</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>ASBESTOS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(69 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>BANKING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(55 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>COMPUTER LAW</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(88 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>EMPLOYMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(108 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>ENVIRONMENTAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(66 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>EVIDENCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(111 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(60 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>INTERNATIONAL LAW</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(49 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>JURY TRIALS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(67 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>LABOR LAW</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(81 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>LEGAL RESEARCH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(71 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>LITIGATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(83 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>PUNITIVE DAMAGES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(80 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>SECURITIES LAW</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(51 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>REAL ESTATE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(56 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>RICO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(78 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>***RELATED NEWS IN BRIEF***</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>BURAFF ACQUIRES BANK LITIGATION NEWSLETTER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(33 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>NEW TAX REFERENCE FROM WG&L</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(100 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>NEW DIRECTORY OF ENVIRONMENTAL LAWYERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(70 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>FEW FEMALE PARTNERS, SURVEY SAYS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(79 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>D.C. LAW GROUP RELEASES PUBS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(83 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>FIRM PUBLISHES GUIDE TO CLEAN AIR ACT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(35 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>LAW FIRM MANAGEMENT VIDEOS FROM ABA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(94 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#34"><LI>TOP LITIGATION VERDICTS DOWN IN 1991</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(64 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#35"><LI>TWO PUBS FROM CCH INTERNATIONAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(87 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#36"><LI>ADDITIONS TO WESTLAW DATABASE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(102 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

AMERICAN LAWYER INTRODUCES VIDEO SUPPLEMENT

"American Lawyer" magazine, published by American Lawyer
Media (New York), has begun the production of "Video Trial
Report" with the March issue. "Video Trial Report" is a
special video supplement to be released with each issue of
the magazine.

Published ten times a year, "American Lawyer" has a paid
circulation of 17,700. It is targeted to and edited for
lawyers practicing in large law firms and corporate
counsel.

Each issue of the video supplement will examine what the
company calls "trial lawyering." American Lawyer said that
the video is designed as a companion to the magazine and
will contain the critical arguments and testimony discussed
in the feature article of the magazine. The videotape will
contain clips from coverage of "Court TV", a cable venture
started last year by a partnership between American Media,
Time Warner, NBC, Cablevision and Liberty Media Corp.

The first supplement contains coverage of a double-murder
trial in Dubuque (Iowa) through clips of the trial and
additional "expert" commentary from trial lawyers. The
April issue contains clips and commentary of the William
Kennedy Smith trial. American Lawyer Media president Steven
Brill emphasized that the videotape was not meant to take
the place of the magazine. It is intended strictly as a
supplement to the publication's main article. "This is not
the video version of 'American Lawyer'", he said.

Brill said that each video issue cost between $30,000 and
$50,000 to produce and that he expects to sign up about
2000 subscribers in the first year. "American Lawyer"
readers and other interested parties can subscribe to the
video for $19.50 for each issue.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

JOINT VENTURE LAUNCHES SERVICE FOR LEGAL AVIATION FIELD

"Aviation Daily", a newsletter published by McGraw-Hill,
Inc. (New York), and the Federal Bar Association
(Washington, D.C.) have begun the production of "AvLex", an
independent reporting service for the legal aviation
community and those organizations who need coverage of
legal actions affecting the field of aviation.

The new monthly loose-leaf service will provide "current
and comprehensive reporting" of major aviation decisions,
opinions and orders issued by U.S. governmental agencies.
Key legal documents will be indexed and an editorial board
of FBA attorneys will take "an active advisory role" in the
service, McGraw-Hill said.

McGraw-Hill also said that "AvLex" will index, digest and
provide full-text for FAA chief counsel interpretations,
FAA civil penalty decisions, DOT economic orders and NTSB
 accident/ investigation decisions.

"Aviation Daily" editor Edmund Pinto said that "attorneys
are not the only users who will benefit" from the new
service. He said that aviation organizations will "gain
insight into the government's philosophy on aviation
issues, and ('AvLex') will provide air carriers with
optional guidance."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

PASHA WINS RULING DEALING WITH PHOTOCOPYING OF NEWSLETTERS

A U.S. District Court in Dallas has ruled that the
photocopying of a newsletter is illegal and has permanently
banned Enmark Gas Corp. (Dallas, TX), a gas distributor,
from cover-to-cover copying and facsimile transmission of
"Gas Daily", a newsletter published by Pasha Publications
(Arlington, VA).

The ruling is the first to clearly prohibit the complete
photocopying and in-house distribution of a subsription
newsletter. Although there have been similar suits in the
past, they have all been settled out of court, before
judicial rulings were given. Terms of the settlement were
not revealed, prohibiting disclosure of whether Enmark will
pay damages to Pasha.

The federal court said that the photocopying of the letter,
and its subsequent distribution to other Enmark employees
without the publisher's permission, blatantly infringed on
Pasha's copyright. The ruling came despite the fact that
the judge found that Enmark was unaware that its actions
were improper or illegal. In explaining the ruling, the
court said that the copying of the letter "had an obvious
detrimental effect on the potential (subscription) market"
for the newsletter.

Under the federal copyright law's fair use doctrine,
photocopying of publications is legal for research and
non-commercial use. Newsletter publishers have argued for
some time that some subscribers have taken advantage of
that doctrine to distribute full text copies of newsletters
to their employees, thereby reducing the number of
potential subscribers. Some newsletter publishers offer
rewards to subscribers who identify illegal copiers.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

PRICE COMM. SELLS INTEREST IN N.Y. LAW PUBLISHING; SEEKS TO
RESTRUCTURE DEBT

Price Communications (New York) has sold its majority
interest in New York Law Publishing Co. (New York) to
Apollo Investment Fund L.P. (New York) for $67.8 million,
with little cash involved. Apollo Investment is one of
Price's major debt holders. According to terms of the deal,
Apollo will assume about $48 million in Price bank debt and
will tender $19.2 million of debt it currently holds for
75% of face value.

New York Law Publishing publishes "National Law Journal"
and "New York Law Journal" magazines. Price purchased its
interest in the company in June 1985 for $20.5 million from
SFN Companies (Glenview, IL). NYLP publisher Jame
Finkelstein was "not available" for comment.

The sale comes as Price is attempting to reach a debt
agreement with a new restructuring plan. The company has
threatened to file bankruptcy if it cannot reach agreement
with creditors. The company has about $282 million in
subordinated debt. Under the plan, Price would convert
outstanding debt to 93% of its common equity. Agreement by
at least two-thirds of both its stock and debt holders is
needed for the plan to be implemented.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

BNA BEGINS INFORMATION SERVICE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL DUE
DILIGENCE NEEDS

The Bureau of National Affairs (Washington, D.C.) has begun
the publication of "BNA's Environmental Due Diligence
Guide", a new information service that covers environmental
due diligence requirements for real estate transactions and
related deals.

Targeted to lenders, sellers and buyers, the publication
addresses the impact of environmental laws on real estate
transactions and illustrates the appropriate use of due
diligence for personal, corporate and client protection
from superfund liability and related environmental risks.

The publication contains information on the sources and
nature of environmental liability, identification of
contaminated properties through site assessment, and the
reduction of liability through contractual language,
insurance, warranties, covenants and indemnifications.

The guide consists of a 1000-page reference annual updated
monthly with the latest information on techniques,
procedures, strategies and tactics, court cases, laws, and
rules affecting parties involved in real estate
transactions. Also, each month subscribers will receive a
newsletter (see related story) which reports on
legislative, regulatory, and judicial developments and
lists relevent publications and upcoming conferences. An
annual subscription to the service costs $595.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

"DAILY ENVIRONMENT REPORT" FROM BNA; DISABILITIES ACT
MANUAL ALSO RELEASED

The Bureau of National Affairs (Washington, D.C.) has begun
the publication of "Daily Environment Report" newsletter
and has also released "BNA's Americans with Disabilities
Act Manual". The former publication is the company's first
daily publication since the launch of the "Daily Tax
Report" in 1954.

"Daily Environment Report" is an information service that
provides coverage and analysis of environmental news,
legislative and regulatory action, and legal decisions in
the U.S. and worldwide. It is being targeted to
professionals who require regular briefings on
environmental issues and policy matters. Editorial also
includes full text of proposed and final legislation,
committee reports, agency directives, and and final
regulations.

Each issue contains summaries of news stories, articles and
in-brief items, a calendar of events, coverage of hearings
and executive orders, and regular round-ups of state
activities. Subjects covered include air and water
pollution, hazardous substances and waste, solid waste, oil
and gas drilling, oil spills, radioactive waste and
pollution prevention and remediation. The publication also
covers legislation and regulation affecting major federal
pollution regulations.

BNA has also released "Americans with Disabilities Act
Manual", a resource for employers. It provides guidance on
the public accomodations and employment sections of the
American Disabilities Act. It features a policy and
practice section, a resource section covering accessibility
requirements and summaries of key legal decisions
interpreting ADA. Subscribers to the manual will also
receive a monthly newsletter and manual updates.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

NEWSLETTER COVERING MEXICO-US TRADE LAUNCHED BY
THOMPSON-LESSER

Thompson-Lesser Publishing (Washington, D.C.) has begun the
publication of "U.S.-Mexico Free Trade Reporter"
newsletter. A subscription to the letter, published 26
times a year, costs $597.

The company said that editorial for the newsletter includes
information on trade, investment, free trade negotiations
between the two countries, and related trans-border issues.
The publication is being targeted to law firms,
associations and public and private companies either doing
business with Mexico or involved in free-trade issues and
negotiations with that country.

Editorial for the letter covers such topics as U.S.
politics and its relation to Mexico, agricultural policies,
cross-border investments, Latin and Central American trade,
common environmental issues, and related manufacturing and
trade with Canada.

The company has editorial offices in Mexico City and
Washington. A seven person advisory board is consulted
concerning editorial content.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

EMPLOYMENT LAW LETTERS FOR WISCONSIN, LOUISIANA AND
COLORADO RELEASED

M. Lee Smith Publishers & Printers (Nashville, TN) has
begun the publication of state-specific, employment law
newsletters for the states of Wisconsin, Louisiana and
Colorado. The three publications join similar letters for
21 other states published by the company.

"Colorado Employment Law Letter", "Wisconsin Employment Law
Letter" and "Louisiana Employment Law Letter" are all
targeted to attorneys, ceo's, managers and human resource
executives who need to keep current with new developments
in the employment law field. Emphasizing their own states,
editorial for each letter summarizes recent court
decisions, new laws and enforcement actions. Coverage of
actions by federal agencies, including EEOC, NLRB, the
Department of Labor and other related agencies, is also
included, the company said.

The letter covers such subjects as enforcement of the
Americans with Disabilities Act, wrongful discharge suits,
workers' compensation laws, taxes and related topics.

The company said that each letter is researched, edited and
written by one or more employment and labor law attorneys
practicing in that state.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION OFFERING SUB PACKAGE FOR 49
PUBLICATIONS

The American Bar Association (Chicago, IL) is offering a
"package plan" for law libraries and firms who need to
subscribe to a variety of legal publications. Under the
plan, subscribers will receive 49 different legal
publications, all published by the ABA, at an annual rate
of $680.

The publications include: 14 magazines, including such
titles as "Criminal Justice", "Probate & Property" and
"Litigation"; 12 journals, including such quarterlies as
"Business Lawyer", "International Lawyer" and "Family Law
Quarterly"; and 22 newsletters and reports, including such
titles as "Construction Lawyer", "Air & Space Lawyer" and
"Communications Lawyer".

The ABA said that all package plan subscribers will receive
listings of those periodicals that were sent on the plan
during the preceding quarter period. The plan begins on
Septmber 1 and extends to August 31 of the following year.
Subscriptions entered after September 1 will be billed on a
pro rata basis.

In addition, subscribers to the plan will have the option
of receiving additional ABA titles at a 25% discount (the
"guaranteed standing order program") or receiving
notification of the release of upcoming titles with the
option to purchase at a 20% discount ("selective discount
program").

Libraries that currently subscribe to some of the 49
publications can join the program and cancel their single
subscriptions, with payments credited to the group
subscription.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

COMMERCE CLEARING HOUSE RELEASES "EMPLOYMENT TAX FORMS"

Commerce Clearing House (Chicago, IL) has released
"Employment Tax Forms", a new loose leaf publication that
provides, in a reproducible format, the necessary federal
and state employment tax forms required of employers under
tax and employment statutes. An annual subscription costs
$240.

CCH said that the reports will be issued on a quarterly
basis with additional frequency in the Fall and Winter when
new forms are issued and revised. The two-volume
publication provides copies of the appropriate forms as
well as presenting selected federal revenue procedures
applying to federal withholding and information filing
requirements, the Social Security Administration's
publication for voluntary software standards, and edit
criteria for employer payroll reporting and the technical
information bulletin.

Among the procedures covered are Rev. Proc. 90-9, Magnetic
Tape Reporting of Form W-4 Information; Rev. Proc. 91- 36,
Paper Substitutes for Forms 1096, 1098, 1099, W-2G and
5498; Rev. Proc. 83-63, Substitutes for Forms W-2c and
W-3c; Rev. Proc. 91-45, Privately Printed Substitutes for
Forms W-2 and W-3; and electronic filing requirements.

Also included is a federal due date calendar. Survey
results from states on their requirements for accepting
federal forms in lieu of state forms are also provided.
Volume Two provides individual state forms finding lists,
and individual state rules for reproduction and acceptance
of federal forms in lieu of state forms.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

ASBESTOS

"Asbestos Abatement" is one of the latest releases from
Butterworth Legal Publishers (Salem, NH). As volume 5 of
the "Sourcebook on Asbestos Diseases", "Asbestos Abatement"
discusses the legal obligations of building owners,
brokers, sellers and buyers, landlords, contractors and
tenants with regard to asbestos abatement. It contains a
"primer" on the law regarding asbestos. Editorial includes
information on respiratory protection, abatement
techniques, regulations, warning and risk procedures and
requirements.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

BANKING

"Commercial Finance Guide", published by Matthew Bender
(New York), provides coverage of commercial financial
products other than basic loan agreements. Part I of the
new loose leaf publication deals with specialized financing
techniques. Part II deals with security arrangements, while
Part III analyzes legal and financial considerations. The
publication is updated with supplements and revisions.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

COMPUTER LAW

"Scott on Computer Law", published by Prentice Hall Law &
Business (Englewood Cliffs, NJ), is a new updated and
expanded two-volume publication that deals primarily with
intellectual property rights and commercial transactions.
Volume 1 deals with intellectual property rights as they
relate to hardware, software, semiconductor chips and
databases. Volume 2 deals with transactions in computer
products and services and addresses the related issues of
tort liability, constitutional rights, criminal law and
evidence. Some editorial also looks at copyright, patent,
trade secret and semiconductor chip protection law.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

EMPLOYMENT

"Supervisor's Guide to Documenting Employee Discipline" is
the latest release from Parker and Son Publications
(Carlsbad, CA). The book provides supervisory personnel
with proper procedures for documenting employee behavior
and discipline. It attempts to show how to be objective in
verbal and written documentation and in counseling
regarding behavior and discipline problems.

"Employee Benefits Guide" has been published by Matthew
Bender & Co. (New York). The publication attempts to
provide professionals with advice and guidance about how to
administer, submit, create, and comply with the law as it
pertains to employee benefits. It tries to identify
potential problems and opportunities likely to be
encountered on a routine basis.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

ENVIRONMENTAL

International Library Law Book Publishers (Gaithersburg,
MD) has published "Environmental Law Anthology, Vol. 1
(1990-1991)". The volume is a compendium of U.S.
environmental law review articles for 1990-1991. Printed as
published, the articles are selected from over 900 law
review publications and journals. It contains 30 complete
articles. Similar anthologies are also available for the
advertising, public utilities, banking and insurance law
fields.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

EVIDENCE

The National Institute for Trial Advocacy (NITA, Notre Dame
University) has released "A Practical Guide to Federal
Evidence: Objections, Responses, Rules and Practice
Commentary". Written for both the law school student and
the trial lawyer, the guide provides information on the
Federal Rules of Evidence. Editorial includes coverage of
definitions, foundations, forms of objections, responses,
text of pertinent federal rules and commentary.

The NITA has also published "Trial Evidence: Making &
Meeting Objections". The publication is a series of 62
"vignettes" designed to develop proper objection procedure
through example and argument. Each section gives a
background description of the case and is followed by a
short "direct examination/cross examination" section.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY

New York Law Publishing Co. (New York) has released
"Intellectual Property Law: Commercial, Creative and
Industrial Protection". The reference covers a wide range
of subjects from protection of computer-industry
developments to trade secrets to patents. The one-volume
loose leaf publication also includes information on
trademark infringment, licensing and fair use, products of
patented products, and invalid intellectual property.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

INTERNATIONAL LAW

"Legal Guide to International Business Transactions", from
Carswell Publishers (Scarborough, Ont.), provides an
introductory view of the legal issues to be considered at
each stage of an international business transaction.
Editorial focuses on the sale of goods and services abroad
and outlines the legal considerations from planning to
implementation.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

JURY TRIALS

The Michie Co. (Charlottesville, VA) begun the publication
of "Sponsorship Strategy: Evidenciary Tactics for Winning
Jury Trials". The book compares and contrasts the authors
advice to that given by other trial manuals. The book
attempts to give logical principles for developing an
overall case strategy along with information on tactical
decisions in the courtroom. The book addresses opening and
closing arguments, direct examinations, objections and
cross-examinations.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

LABOR LAW

"Benefits of Doubt: A Comparative Study of the Unemployment
Benefit Schemes and Reintegration Opportunities of Great
Britain, Germany, France and the Netherlands" is a manual
published by Kluwer Law & Taxation Publishers (Cambridge,
MA). The book contains an overview from the 19th century to
the present. Editorial describes adjustments to the schemes
in order to meet different siutations from a legal point of
view, taking into account the economic and political
contexts. The book also compares and contrasts the
different schemes.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

LEGAL RESEARCH

Targeted to both lawyers and law librarians, "Legal
Research and Law Library Management", published by New York
Law Publishing (New York), is a guide that helps locate,
evaluate and analyze books, periodicals, videotapes, and
electronic and CD-ROM products. Editorial includes coverage
of the planning of a law library, hiring consultants and
librarians, how to use indexes and retrieval services, and
the proper role of "legislative intent" in arguing a case.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

LITIGATION

Butterworth Legal Publishers (Salem, NH) has released
"Sanctions in Federal Litigation". The new loose leaf
publication provides background and analysis of the law of
sanctions so that attorneys may recognize and understand
their responsibilities, avoid sanctions, and more
effectively pursue a sanctions motion where one is
appropriate. It also examines the statutory and case law
regarding sanctions against attorneys and clients in
federal court. Supplements to the new publication will be
issued on anannual basis, free if issued within three
months of subscribing.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

PUNITIVE DAMAGES

"Punitive Damages: A State-By-State Guide to Law &
Practice" has been published by West Publishing Co. (St.
Paul, MN). The 500-page book shows how to recover or defend
against punitive damages in all 50 states. It discusses
conduct required for recovery, defenses, jury instructions,
tax consequences, insurability, reinsurance, and conflict
of law issues. It also analyzes a recent U.S. Supreme Court
case which upheld damages against constitutional
challanges. A bibliography lists damages by type of action.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

SECURITIES LAW

Clark Boardman (New York) has published "Securities Law
Handbook for Financial Planners". The sourcebook provides
financial planners with guidelines on the application of
securities laws to planning activity. Coverage includes
information on securities laws registration, consequences
of becoming a registered advisor, fraud, compensation
limits, SEC proceedings, civil liability and related
topics.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

REAL ESTATE

The American Bar Association (Chicago, IL) has released
"Current Developments in Real Estate Law". The book
summarizes appelate and adminstrative decisions affecting
real estate law and abstracts cases from both state and
federal venues. Decisions are organized by topic and
subdivided by specific headings. Each summary analyzes its
decision within the context of the larger topic.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

RICO

"Civil RICO Litigation", published by Prentice Hall Law &
Business (Englewood Cliffs, NJ), contains coverage of the
statute as well as strategies and techniques for trying
RICO cases. It attempts to provide explanations of the
meaning of the law. Subjects covered include: RICO
legislative history; drafting a RICO complaint;
understanding the concept of 'enterprise'; liability
standards; fraud as a predicate offense; derivative
liability in civil RICO claims; and analysis of key fraud,
predicate acts in commercial RICO claims.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

BURAFF ACQUIRES BANK LITIGATION NEWSLETTER

Buraff Publications (Washington, D.C.) has purchased
"Bank/Thrift Litigation and Enforcement News" from Atlantic
Information Services (Washington, D.C.). Buraff will merge
the acquired property with its "Bank Bailout Litigation
News" newsletter.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

NEW TAX REFERENCE FROM WG&L

Warren, Gorham & Lamont (New York) has begun the
publication of "U.S. International Taxation", a reference
that provides information and analysis of the laws
governing U.S. taxation of U.S. persons with foreign income
and foreign persons with U.S. income. It is being targeted
to tax attorneys and accountants working for multinational
corporations as well as those in private practice with
clients who are involved in international transactions.
Topics include: taxation of corporations owned by U.S.
citizens; foreign tax credits; impact of tax treaties; IRS
notice changes, and related subjects. The two-volume set
costs $295.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

NEW DIRECTORY OF ENVIRONMENTAL LAWYERS

Prentice Hall Law & Business (Englewood Cliffs, NJ) has
released the first edition of "Directory of Environmental
Attorneys 1992". The new publication features profiles of
more than 5000 environmental attorneys in corporations and
law firms. The one-volume directory includes data about the
size of each attorney's practice in 70 areas of
concentration in the environmental field, significant cases
and clients, and recent articles or books written by each
attorney.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

FEW FEMALE PARTNERS, SURVEY SAYS

A survey conducted by "Massachusetts Lawyers Weekly",
published by Lawyers Weekly Publishing (Boston, MA), says
that female lawyers have gained few top positions at
leading law firms. Although the student body of most law
schools is "largely" female, the paper said, and females
account for 40% of the associates in the largest firms,
females make up only 10% of the partnerships. The paper
said that twenty of the 100 largest law firms in that state
had no female partners.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

D.C. LAW GROUP RELEASES PUBS

Washington Area Lawyers for the Arts (Washington, D.C.) has
several publications available for artists and attorneys.
"Everything You Wanted to Know About Record Contracts" and
"Legal Aspects of Art in Public Places" are on audio tape,
while the following are in book form: "Copyright Basics for
Musicians"; "Works on Paper: Nonprofit Incorporation and
Organization in the District of Columbia"; "Works on Paper:
Answers to Common Legal Questions of Independent Film and
Video Makers", and "The Paper Chase: Non-Artist's Tax
Workbook (1992)".




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

FIRM PUBLISHES GUIDE TO CLEAN AIR ACT

The law firm of Morgan, Lewis & Bockius (Washington, D.C.)
has published "The New Clean Air Act: A Guide to the Clean
Air Program as Amended in 1990". The 100-page book costs
$29.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

LAW FIRM MANAGEMENT VIDEOS FROM ABA

The American Law Institute (Philadelphia, PA), in
conjunction with the American Bar Association, has released
"Law Firm Development & Management Video Library". Five
videos, each 50 minutes in length, explore ways to achieve
and maintain "productivity and efficiency in today's
competitive legal market". A printed study guide
accompanies each tape. The titles include "From Law School
to Law Practice: What Every Associate Needs to Know" (two
parts), "Law Firm Marketing and Professional
Responsibility", "Avoiding or Surviving Law Firm
Break-Ups", and "Law Firm Policies on Sexual Harassment:
Development and Implementation". Each tape costs $75.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

TOP LITIGATION VERDICTS DOWN IN 1991

"Inside Litigation" journal reports that the size of the
top verdicts in 1991 was substantially lower than in 1990.
Overall, the total amount awarded in the top ten cases in
1991 was $929 million, as compared to $1.37 billion in
1990. The two largest verdicts in 1991 were $238 million
and $127 million, respectively, as compared with $454
million and $185 million in 1990.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

TWO PUBS FROM CCH INTERNATIONAL

Commerce Clearing House (Chicago, IL), through its CCH
International imprint, has released "Guide to Doing
Business in Vietnam" and "Copyright Law in China". The
former provides information for those interested in
becoming involved in the expected improvement of business
opportunities in Vietnam. Topics covered include
infrastructure, natural resources, tourism, foreign
investment policy, land law, banking and exchange control,
import and export control, intellectual property, labor
laws and taxation. "Copyright Law in China" provides an
overview of Chinese notions of copyright, and the nature of
Chinese copyright law.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "36"></A>Copyright
THE LEGAL PUBLISHER via NewsNet
March, 1992

ADDITIONS TO WESTLAW DATABASE

West Publishing Co. (St. Paul, MN) has made a number of
additions to its "Westlaw" database. The company has
expanded its "West's Legal Directory", which identifies
lawyers and law firms by specialty areas, clients and other
criteria, to feature biographical profiles of state and
local government attorneys. West has also added four
international databases to "Westlaw", including "The Laws
and Ordinances of the Republic of Poland", "The BNA
International Environment Daily", "BNA International
Business Daily", and the "BNA International Finance Daily".
The latter three contain reports on activity in federal and
international legislatures and courts, agencies and
organizations that affect those fields.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-6</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B047-92</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/la31.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033405 text/html 49837
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:32:05 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:56 GMT
Content-length: 49650
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/la31.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet <BR>
December 1992<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>U.S. WINS MAJOR COURT VICTORY ON 'WILLFUL BLINDNESS'</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1194 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>JUSTICE ISSUES LAUNDERING GUIDELINES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(660 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>WORLD'S SECURITIES REGULATORS MAP LAUNDERING STRATEGY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(656 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>WHISTLEBLOWER GETS $13 MILLION IN GE LAUNDRING CASE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(577 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>BUSH TAX VETO WEAKENS CID MONEY LAUNDERING EFFORT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(638 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>MISSING CTRS COST BANK $65,000 PENALTY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(343 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>FED IMPOSES $200,000 CIVIL PENALTY ON PAKISTANI BANK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(559 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>CONGRESS INVITES PUBLIC HELP WITH CASH REWARDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(213 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>TREASURY NOW HAS ITS OWN FORFEITURE FUND</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(283 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>U.S. DOLLARS MOTIVATE STATES TO JOIN LAUNDERING EFFORT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(435 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>CARRIBBEAN STATES MEET, ISSUE LAUNDERING DECLARATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(883 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>TREASURY ADMINISTRATIVE RULINGS UNDER BSA IMMINENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(507 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>ADMINISTRATIVE RULINGS BY THE TREASURY DEPARTMENT UNDER THE BANK&nbsp;SECRECY ACT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(218 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

U.S. WINS MAJOR COURT VICTORY ON 'WILLFUL BLINDNESS'

 The seesaw case involving the 1989 sale of a home in Lake Norman,
North Carolina continues its rise through the federal courts.
Possible next stop: the U.S. Supreme Court. The issue: the limits
of money laundering prosecutions based on "willful blindness."

 The U.S. Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals has given a major boost
to federal money laundering prosecutions in a case prosecuted by
Charlotte U.S. Attorney Thomas J. Ashcraft.

 It has fortified the legal notion that willful blindness, under
the right circumstances, can serve as a substitute for provable
actual knowledge on the part of the accused in a money laundering
case.

 According to the court, the case against Ellen Campbell, a young
North Carolina realtor, had the right stuff. In March 1991, she
became the first realtor in the country to be convicted of money
laundering. The jury found her guilty under the two federal money
laundering criminal laws (Title 18, USC Secs. 1956(a)(1)(B)(i) and
1957).

 Later that year, federal district Judge Graham C. Mullen
overturned the jury's guilty verdict and acquitted Campbell based
on a post-trial motion by the defense (Money Laundering Alert,
November 1991).

 The evidence showed that she included unreported cash in the sale
of a home to a drug dealer, Mark Lawing. He drove flashy cars,
lived a carefree life and had expensive tastes. The government
presented no evidence that Campbell knew he was a drug dealer
(Money Laundering Alert, April 1991).

 Lawing bought the home at a price of $182,500. He signed a
contract to purchase, but his poor credit rating prevented him from
obtaining a mortgage. His parents secured a mortgage for $122,500,
and he told Campbell he would pay the sellers the balance "under
the table." She consented.

 That is the way the deal was done. At the closing Lawing arrived
at Campbell's real estate office carrying a paper bag containing
$60,000, which he turned over to the sellers. Campbell did not
include that sum in the closing statement. Afterwards, she accepted
a $200 gratuity from Lawing in addition to her portion of the
commission on the sale.

 Lawing had earlier pleaded guilty to federal money laundering and
drug charges. He helped the government by testifying against
Campbell.

 She took the witness stand at trial and testified that Lawing had
told her he owned a lucrative body shop. The jury concluded that
she knew the cash involved in the closing was "the proceeds of some
form of unlawful activity" and that she was "willfully blind" to
the facts surrounding Lawing and his money.

 In his instructions to the jury, Judge Mullen said:

- "(K)nowledge may be satisfied by inference drawn from proof that
(Campbell) deliberately closed her eyes to what would otherwise
have been obvious to her. A finding beyond a reasonable doubt of a
conscious purpose to avoid enlightenment would permit an inference
of knowledge...."

- "(That) does not authorize you to find that (Campbell) acted
knowingly because she should have known what was occurring ..., or
that (with) hindsight she should have known ... or because she was
negligent in failing to recognize what was occurring or even
because she was reckless or foolish in failing to recognize what
was occurring....(T)he government must prove ... that (Campbell)...
deliberately contrived to avoid learning all of the facts."

 In his post-trial ruling, the trial judge said that "in order for
a party other than the drug dealer to have an intent to conceal the
illegal source of the dealer's money, the party must first know the
dealer's occupation."

 The evidence was not enough for conviction, he added. What it
showed was that Lawing was "a spendthrift playboy" who testified he
never told Campbell his true occupation, the court said. "More than
just image must be shown," he wrote.

 The Fourth Circuit disagreed in an opinion dated September 28,
written by Chief Judge Sam Ervin III, son of his famous late
father, Senator Sam Ervin of North Carolina.

 "The central issue ... is whether there was sufficient evidence
for the jury to find that Campbell possessed the knowledge that (1)
Lawing's funds were the proceeds of illegal activity, and (2) the
transaction was designed to disguise the nature of those proceeds,"
said the court.

 The court honed in on what it found to be the fatal trial court
error. The trial judge had told the jury that the government's
burden was to show "a purpose of concealment" and "knowledge of the
drug dealers activities" on the part of the accused.

 That misstates the government's burden, said the Fourth Circuit
Court of Appeals. "The government must only show that the defendant
possesses the knowledge that the transaction was designed to
conceal illegal proceeds," said the court.

 It is a critical decision where the "defendant is a person other
than the individual who is the source of the tainted money," it
said.

 What really matters in cases like Campbell's is not her
motivation. That is "irrelevant," said the court.

 Her motive "without question," the court said, was to close the
deal and collect her commission "without regard to the source of
the money" or the sale's effect "in concealing a portion of the
purchase price."

 The money laundering law only requires the U.S. to show that
Campbell knew "the property involved in a financial transaction
represents the proceeds of some form of illegal activity," the
court said.

 The money laundering law requires that the transaction to be
"designed in whole or in part ... to conceal or disguise the
nature, the location, the source, the ownership, or the control of
the proceeds of specified unlawful activity" (Title 18, USC Sec.
1956(a)(1)(B)).

 "The omission of $60,000 from all documentation regarding the
sales price ... clearly satisfies this standard -- concealing both
the nature and the location of Lawing's illegally derived funds,"
the court asserted in a footnote.

 The "knowledge component" of the money laundering law boils down
to a single inquiry, said the court: "Did Campbell know that
Lawing's funds were derived from an illegal source?"

 The trial court should have left that question to the jury to
decide, said the appellate panel.

 It was correct for the trial court to exclude evidence that Lawing
was a "known" drug dealer, but it incorrectly underrated the
importance of Campbell's realtor colleague who testified that
Campbell had told her the cash "may have been drug money."

 By discounting that testimony because it conflicted with the
colleague's prior grand jury statements, the trial court improperly
invaded the exclusive province of the jury. "It should have been
left to the jury to decide," said the court. Lawing's lifestyle was
not irrelevant, either, the court pointed out.

 All those factors were "sufficient to create a question for the
deliberately closed her eyes to
what would otherwise have been obvious to her,'" the court
reasoned.

 A "reasonable jury" could have easily found Campbell guilty on
those facts, concluded the court. It reversed the judgment of
acquittal entered by the trial judge. Under the rules by which the
issues were heard, Campbell will now get a new trial (U.S. v.
Campbell, Case No. 91-5695, 4th Cir. Ct. App).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

JUSTICE ISSUES LAUNDERING GUIDELINES

 For the first time in the six-year history of the federal money
laundering law, which carries some of the heaviest penalties in the
U.S. Code, the nation's 94 U.S. Attorneys will have central
guidelines to follow when they seek to prosecute certain defendants
for laundering.

 The Justice Department, saying it wanted "to ensure consistency in
certain type of prosecutions" in an area of the law that "is
developing very fast," issued new rules of the game for money
laundering prosecutions. They cover prosecutions under the
forfeiture laws (Title 18, USC Secs. 1956 and 1957 and Title 18,
USC Secs. 981 and 982).

 "We must use these powerful tools carefully," say the Department's
new guidelines. In addition to receiving central clearance on
certain money laundering prosecutions, the nation's federal
prosecutors will now also be required to report key statistics on
their use of the laundering laws to Justice.

 The guidelines require the prior approval of the Department in
four categories of cases:

- where a case is based "solely" on the extraterritorial reach of
the money laundering laws

- where the sole purpose of the subject financial transaction was
to evade taxes

- where the financial transaction involves attorney's fees and an
attorney is sought to be prosecuted

- where a financial institution, as defined in the BSA regulations,
is to be named as a defendant or as an unindicted co-conspirator
(31 CFR 103.11).

 The money laundering section of the Criminal Division will serve
as the focal point for the approval process. Federal prosecutors
are required to send copies of the proposed indictment along with
a "prosecutive memorandum."

 The definition of "financial institution" used in the guidelines
does not include many businesses defined as such by the BSA, such
car dealers, jewelers, real estate agents, and insurance companies.

 The guidelines explicitly state they do not apply to non-bank
financial institutions, such as check cashers or currency exchange
houses which are not branches of a larger institution.

 The new rules apply only to prosecutions under the money
laundering laws. They do not apply to those for failure to file or
the fraudulent filing of currency transaction reports under the
Bank Secrecy Act.

 And, they have no effect on BSA prosecutions and forfeitures for
structuring (Title 31, USC Secs. 5324) or on civil forfeitures
linked to money laundering cases (Title 18, USC Sec. 981).

 In addition to the cases requiring Washington approval before they
can be filed, the guidelines also require federal prosecutors to
seek "consultation" with the money laundering section in these
cases:

- where they seek forfeiture of a business on the theory that it
facilitated money laundering

- where a civil penalty is sought to be imposed under the money
laundering laws as part of a criminal prosecution for laundering
(Title 18, USC Sec. 1956(b))

- where the "specified unlawful activity" alleged in a laundering
charge is a financial or fraud crime "so closely connected" that
there is "no clear delineation" between that crime and the money
laundering offense.

 The Department warns prosecutors that where the same financial
transaction is the basis for the specified unlawful activity and
the laundering charge, no money laundering charge should be
brought.

 The guidelines were issued by Assistant Attorney for the Criminal
Division Robert S. Mueller. They are called "bluesheets" and will
be contained in the U.S. Attorneys' Manual (USAM 9-105.000).

 Hardly any area of federal jurisprudence is presently as dynamic
and volatile as the money laundering field. The new prosecution
guidelines were long in coming. They are not binding. If a
prosecutor does not comply with them, the defendant cannot
complain.

 The major criticism of the guidelines will focus on the topics
they do not address. But, they are a beginning toward bringing
uniformity to an important area of the law previously molded by 94
distinct points of view.

--Sarah N. Welling is on Money Laundering Alert's Editorial Board
of Advisors and a Professor of Law at the University of Kentucky at
Lexington.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

WORLD'S SECURITIES REGULATORS MAP LAUNDERING STRATEGY

 A sleeping potential giant in the world money laundering effort
has begun to awake. At its annual meeting in London last month, the
International Organization of Securities Commissions revealed the
results of the work of a working committee on money laundering.

 That is a unit formed by IOSCO to analyze the impact of money
laundering on the securities and futures industries and to
recommend ways to deal with it.

 Recognizing that other financial sectors, notably banking, have
increased their defenses against money laundering, IOSCO said it is
important to "ensure that securities and futures markets do not
become a comparatively more attractive alternative for money
launderers."

 The difficulty in dealing with laundering in the securities field
is that, usually, little currency is involved in the transactions
which are commonplace in the industry. It is an industry that runs
by computer blips and paper. Its exposure to money laundering comes
after the launderers have disposed of their cash through other
means.

 The IOSCO report is the first treatment of the money laundering
problem by the world's securities commissioners. IOSCO was formed
in 1986. It is the only global association of governmental bodies
which regulate the securities and futures markets. The Montreal-
based organization has 101 members from 63 countries.

 In its year-long study, the IOSCO committee worked closely with
the Financial Action Task Force, an organization formed in 1989 by
the Group of Seven major industrialized nations which now has 28
member countries.

 In 1990, the FATF issued 40 recommendations representing a global
blueprint for dealing with money laundering. They have become the
guideposts for action by countries and regional bodies around the
world (Money Laundering Alert, May 1990).

 The IOSCO working group said its objectives are to act as a
clearinghouse for information for securities and futures regulators
on money laundering and to reduce unnecessary regulatory burdens on
legitimate businesses while preventing illicit proceeds from
entering the markets.

 The IOSCO report said money laundering can occur in the securities
industry in customer accounts which are used only to hold funds and
not for trading. In those cases, banking channels with more
stringent money laundering controls are skirted.

 Other indications of money laundering are what are known as "wash
trading" transactions. Those involve the entry of matching buys and
sells in particular securities which create the illusion of
trading. Wash trading through multiple accounts generating
offsetting profits and losses and transfers of positions between
accounts that do not appear to be commonly controlled are other
indicators of money laundering.

 The report makes seven recommendations to the securities industry:

- Customer identification procedures should prohibit anonymous
accounts or those in names that clearly appear fictitious and
should require that the identity of new customers be verified.

- Recordkeeping requirements should aim to verify the movement of
funds in securities transactions and document them fully. Records
should be kept for least five years.

- Detection and reporting of suspicious transactions, particularly
where complex and unusual transactions and strange trading patterns
exist, should be an industry standard.

- To prevent control of securities firms by criminal elements, due
diligence procedures should be used to examine the principals of
trading firms. There should be a free exchange of public and non-
public information through international sharing agreements.

- Model compliance and audit programs to guard against money
laundering should be established in all securities and futures
firms.

- The use of cash and its equivalents should be discouraged. That
includes transferrable bearer shares or debt instruments.

- Securities regulators should cooperate with law enforcement
agencies resulting in the free and prompt exchange of information.

 If recognition of a problem is the first step toward its cure,
IOSCO has begun the process of confronting the money laundering
problem that no one denies exists in the gigantic securities and
futures industries. Now begins the task of implemention.

--Richard M. Lucas is a consultant for the Philip Manuel Resource
Group, a CPA and a former Special Agent with the IRS.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

WHISTLEBLOWER GETS $13 MILLION IN GE LAUNDRING CASE

 Crime doesn't pay, the saying goes, but exposing crime in the U.S.
these days can pay handsomely. Ask Chester L. Walsh. He is now
richer by $13.4 million for having blown the whistle on his former
employer, the General Electric Company, which earlier this year was
found guilty of a multi-million dollar corruption scheme.

 Walsh, a GE employee for 25 years, smuggled documents out of
Israel which helped prove that Rami Dotan, an Israeli Air Force
General, received about $11 million in payoffs from GE for his help
in assuring that GE kept lucrative F-16 aircraft sales contracts
with Israel. The contracts were financed largely with U.S. funds
(Money Laundering Alert, August 1992).

 Walsh was manager of the company's Israel aircraft sales
operations for four years. In 1987, certain events made him
suspicious. He began noting and recording conversations with GE
employees who were involved in the corrupt scheme. He also hired a
California lawyer.

 Walsh received the largest sum ever paid to a whistleblower. He
filed what is known as a qui tam proceeding. He, with the aid of a
California group called Taxpayers Against Fraud, sued the
government in November 1990 under the False Claims Act, the so-
called "whistleblower statute."

 That law dates back to 1863 and permits individuals to file suit
in federal court alleging fraud against the government. It also
permits a whistleblower to receive up to 25% of the amount
recovered by the government in civil damages. Walsh received 22.5%
(Title 31, USC Sec. 3730(b)(1)).

 Walsh's attorney, John Phillips, says the case is a "total slap in
the face to GE and the Justice Department." They had argued that
Walsh did not deserve payment because he had purposely delayed
reporting the wrongdoing in order to increase his potential award.

 GE says that if Walsh had "dealt honestly" with the company, the
fraud could have been detected and reported much earlier and could
have saved the government millions of dollars.

 In his ruling, Cincinnati federal Judge Carl B. Rubin said the
opposite was true and that the government would in fact make a
"profit" of at least $4 million.

 Phillips described GE's claims as "absurd." He said his client had
to maintain silence in order to protect himself and that the
treatment of whistleblowers by GE gave Walsh reason to fear for his
job and personal safety.

 "This is not the type of suit you file lightly," Phillips said.
"You must have full evidence."

 While working in Israel, Walsh had gone to another GE employee
with his concerns. When too many questions were raised, that
employee was transferred out of the country.

 Judge Rubin concluded that without Walsh it would have been
"difficult, if not impossible" to sustain a case against GE. He
also said that Walsh's actions as an individual were not important
and that the important issue is the concept of whistleblowers.

 "No one likes snitches, but they can be valuable," Rubin said.
"This is not the first case where this Court has noted the
antagonism of the Justice Department to a whistleblower. The reason
continues to be unknown, but the attitude is clear."

 Walsh recently described the court ruling as "the end of a long
and stressful five years."  Now retired in Florida, he plans to
give half the award to Taxpayers Against Fraud which assists
claimants under the whistleblower statute (Case Nos. CR 1-92-87 and
Civ. C-1-90-792, So. Dis. Oh.).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

BUSH TAX VETO WEAKENS CID MONEY LAUNDERING EFFORT

 The day after the November 3rd election, President Bush vetoed a
$27 billion tax bill partly in deference to his campaign promise of
"no new taxes." While his action spared some U.S. taxpayers of a
larger tax bite, it also grievously hurt the capabilities of the
IRS's Criminal Investigation Division in the money laundering
effort.

 The CID is a key player in that effort. Its ability to develop
cases through artful undercover investigations gains the admiration
of most. Undercover investigations usually require start-up money.
With any luck, profits from doing business with the bad guys,
undercover, pay or defray the government's costs.

 It is a bonanza for the taxpayer: the bad guys supply the cash
which fuels the mechanism designed to cause their demise. They pay
for their own indictment. Sometimes they supply enough cash, in
commissions charged by the federal agents posing as money
launderers, to support the next undercover job.

 All major federal investigative agencies, except the CID, have
standing authority to "churn" those profits. That means they can
plow the profits back into the operation or use them for another
undercover job without having to dip into their agency's budget.

 In the case of the CID, the budget is controlled at the local
level by the IRS District Directors who are not attached to the CID
and who usually have no law enforcement experience.

 If the CID cannot churn the profits, they have to be put into the
general treasury of the U.S., probably never to be seen again for
law enforcement purposes. Instead, the CID must seek funds from the
budget allocated annually to each of the 63 IRS districts.

 Churning undercover profits, federal agents say, is a good
investment because it spares the taxpayer of having to fund much of
the effort against the criminals in society. Moreover, they say,
undercover operations that don't have to beg, borrow, and steal, in
order to function, will reap much greater rewards for the taxpayer.

 Why? Because a more credible undercover facade lands bigger fish
and locates more assets the government can later seize.

 The veto by President Bush terminated the CID's ability to churn
its undercover profits. They are not insignificant, ranging to 2,
4, or 6 percent of the dirty money which the undercover agents
"launder" for the criminals.

 The result of the veto: CID undercover operations will be scaled
back, and the profits which criminals unwittingly pay to government
agents go into the "black hole" of the general treasury.

 The other CID tool which was emasculated by the veto was the IRS
ability to freely disseminate data from IRS Form 8300 to other
federal agencies. That form reports cash receipts of more than
$10,000 received by trades and businesses, such as car and boat
dealers, realtors, lawyers and other businesses. It can provide
missing pieces to a financial jigsaw puzzle agents are grappling
with.

 Because it is authorized by the tax code and thus considered a tax
return, Form 8300 is treated differently than IRS Form 4789, which
is authorized by the Bank Secrecy Act (Title 26, USC Sec. 6050I and
Title 31, USC Sec. 5313).

 The inability to share freely the data from Form 8300 creates an
uneven playing field for the government and strips away the logic
of the federal cash reporting regimen. Ideally, cash paid to a
trade or business is reported on Form 8300 and subsequently
reported on Form 4789 which is filed by the financial institution
where the business banks. That provides a paper trail for cash
which is otherwise untraceable. It helps agencies, such as the FBI,
the Customs Service, and the DEA, follow that cash flow. Presently
they can't.

 Until the new Congress, which convenes next month, acts to remedy
those problems, the CID will operate with one hand tied behind its
back.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

MISSING CTRS COST BANK $65,000 PENALTY

 The Treasury Department announced this month that it imposed a
$65,000 civil penalty under the Bank Secrecy Act against a small
Arizona bank for failure to file IRS Form 4789, the Currency
Transaction Report, on several occasions. It is the fifth, and
possibly final, BSA penalty in 1992.

 Caliber Bank, based in Phoenix, committed the violations during
the period from November 1989 to February 1992. They were
discovered when BankAmerica Corporation, which owns Caliber,
performed an internal compliance audit of the bank.

 Neither Treasury nor Caliber Bank officials responded to questions
about the number of CTR violations that were discovered. Treasury
said it took into account the bank's voluntary disclosure of the
infractions in assessing the penalty.

 Treasury said another factor that mitigated the penalty was the
improvement in the bank's compliance programs instituted by the new
management.

 The BSA requires financial institutions to file Form 4789 when a
cash transaction of more than $10,000 is conducted by a customer.
The forms assist the government in tracking money laundering, tax
evasion and other criminal activities (Title 31, USC Sec. 5313).

 Treasury's Office of Financial Enforcement has been criticized
severely this year by the House Ways and Means Oversight
Subcommittee and the General Accounting Office for its slow penalty
process (Money Laundering Alert, April and July 1992). Of the five
civil penalties this year, two have been levied in the past three
months.

 Founded in April 1985, Caliber Bank has gone through many changes
in its short history. It was created by Valley Capital Corporation,
which is Nevada-based. Last spring, Caliber was acquired by
BankAmerica Corporation. Since then, Caliber has grown from nine
branches to 40.

 BankAmerica has agreed to sell the forty Caliber branches to a
California investment group named Independent Bancorp in which
Peter Ueberroth, the former major league baseball commissioner, and
Anthony M. Frank, former Postmaster General, are principals. The
application for the merger is pending with the Federal Reserve
Board.

 The Caliber BSA violations occurred under prior management. No
criminal charges were brought against the bank or its employees.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

FED IMPOSES $200,000 CIVIL PENALTY ON PAKISTANI BANK

 Last February, large advertisements in several major newspapers,
placed by the State Bank of Pakistan, offered "bearer certificates
in foreign currency" under conditions of total secrecy. The ad said
there would be "no questions asked about source of funds!" and no
identity would be disclosed.

 The Pakistani offering was short-lived. Five days after the ads
appeared, the bank, which is the country's central bank, canceled
the sale of the bonds in the U.S. and postponed sales elsewhere
after several U.S. officials expressed shock at the brazen money
laundering solicitation.

 In March, by letter responding to questions from Senator John
Kerry (D. Mass.), Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan
said the Fed had sent examiners to three Pakistani-owned banks
operating in the U.S., the National Bank of Pakistan, Habib Bank
and United Bank.

 Greenspan said the U.S. had received assurances from the banks
that the bearer certificates would not be issued in the U.S. He
said the Fed had consulted with the Securities and Exchange
Commission to determine compliance with U.S. securities laws. He
said the Fed was continuing to "evaluate the implications of the
advertisement and the information it contains."

 The results of the Federal Reserve's examination of the three
Pakistani banks are now known. On September 28, the Fed announced
a comprehensive cease and desist order directed at the Chicago
branch of the National Bank of Pakistan.

 The Fed also imposed a $200,000 civil penalty against the bank for
its failure to comply with various recordkeeping and reporting
provisions of the Bank Secrecy Act. Details of those violations
were not disclosed.

 The cease and desist order requires the bank to undertake a number
of "affirmative actions" to assure compliance with the BSA. Prior
to the order, the bank was required to submit to the Fed, the FDIC,
and the Illinois banking commissioner a detailed BSA compliance
program designed to ensure that the Chicago branch of the bank
complies with "all the provisions of the BSA."

 The Chicago branch was put on notice that it must exercise special
care to control and monitor "the flow of funds to and from the
(branch) to persons and entities" in and out of the U.S. An
innovative aspect of the order mandates the creation by the branch
of a "know your customer" policy with the ability to:

- identify and confirm the identity of each customer

- "predict with relative certainty the types of transactions that
each of the customers ... is likely to transact"

- monitor customer transactions to see if they are "inconsistent
with the customer's regular and ordinary practices"

- investigate and, where necessary, prohibit transactions where
customer identity cannot be confirmed or where a transaction is
inconsistent with the customer's "normal practices and no
satisfactory explanation exists."

 The Fed's order also prohibits two unnamed employees of the
Chicago branch from any duties involving cash transactions or BSA
compliance and requires the employment of an individual, acceptable
to federal authorities, to supervise BSA compliance.

 The bank will be obligated to furnish quarterly reports to the Fed
and the FDIC detailing compliance with the terms of the cease and
desist order.

 The Pakistani-owned bank may not be finished with all of its
regulatory problems. The Fed's order says other federal or state
agencies are not prevented from taking any other action which they
deem appropriate.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

CONGRESS INVITES PUBLIC HELP WITH CASH REWARDS

 Congress thought of most things that could assist the federal
effort when it passed the comprehensive new money laundering law
which took effect on October 29.

 On the theory that tongues are loosened with incentives of cash
rewards, Congress authorized the Justice Department to pay "awards
for information or assistance directly relating to violation" of
the money laundering, cash reporting, and structuring laws.

 Under the new law, Justice is permitted to pay such awards from
its bulging Asset Forfeiture Fund. Previously, it was permitted to
pay awards from the fund only in matters that pertain to violations
of the "criminal drug laws of the U.S." (Title 28, USC Sec.
524(c)(1)(B)).

 The new award for public assistance is not the first in the money
laundering field. The Bank Secrecy Act contains a provision giving
the Treasury Department authority to "pay a reward to an individual
who provides original information" leading to a criminal fine,
civil penalty, or forfeiture of more than $50,000, connected to a
BSA violation.

 That reward cannot exceed 25 percent of the government's recovery,
or $150,000, "whichever is less."  Since the enactment of that
provision, no reward is believed to have been paid. It is not known
who, if anyone, has applied (Title 31, USC Secs. 5323).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

TREASURY NOW HAS ITS OWN FORFEITURE FUND

 There has always been a rivalry between the law enforcement
agencies of the Treasury Department (IRS, Customs Service and
Secret Service) and those in the Justice Department (FBI and DEA).
The turf and resources battles are often fought behind closed doors
in Washington, but sometimes they spill out and affect the
performance of the agencies in the field.

 Neither side likes to be outgunned by the other. If one gets a new
widget, the other says it cannot function without it. The result,
in some cases, is duplication of resources often running into the
tens of millions of dollars.

 The latest example may be the recent creation by Congress of a
Treasury Department Forfeiture Fund which will mirror the
forfeiture fund already operating in the Justice Department. Each
fund will contain the property, including cash, forfeited by
constituent agencies of each department. The Justice Forfeiture
Fund, now about six years old, administers more than $1 billion in
forfeited property at any given time.

 The Treasury Forfeiture Fund was created as part of the recently
enacted Treasury Department appropriations bill (H.R.5488). The law
permits Treasury to utilize the fund for a variety of purposes
including the hiring of outside contractors to administer forfeited
properties, payment of mortgages and liens on the property,
"equitable sharing" payments to state and local enforcement
agencies and foreign governments which assist in Treasury cases,
payment of awards for assistance in Treasury forfeitures, and
purchase of evidence used in money laundering cases and forfeiture
actions.

 The U.S. now has two principal forfeiture funds containing more
money than the annual budgets of several states. How wisely they
are administered will be on the agenda of the new administration.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

U.S. DOLLARS MOTIVATE STATES TO JOIN LAUNDERING EFFORT

 Recognizing that money laundering can be fought by federal and
state combatants shoulder-to-shoulder compatibly, the federal
government is offering $600,000 in grants to state Attorneys
General and local prosecutors to beef up their effort.

 The available grants were announced on November 9 in the Federal
Register, the official repository of all federal offerings and
notices (57 Fed. Reg. 217, p. 53352).

 A "statewide prosecutorial authority" to deal with money
laundering and other financial crimes is what the grants seek to
foment. There are some strings attached. They will be issued by the
Bureau of Justice Assistance, an element of the Justice Department.

 The announcement says an eligible grantee must be in a state that
has:

- a money laundering statute

- a "financial reporting statute" similar to the Bank Secrecy Act
(Title 31, USC Secs. 5311-5328)

- a reporting statute for "non-bank financial institutions,"
especially where "currency exchange businesses" border on Mexico or
Canada.

 To further cement ties to the federal effort, the grant says the
prevailing parties must be in a state that has signed a "memorandum
of understanding" with the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network.
All but ne of the states have already done so.

 FinCEN, which is housed in the Treasury Department, receives and
analyzes millions of pieces of data contained in the various forms
the public at large is required to file with the government.

 If a state does not quite have the indicated laws and agreements,
the grant announcement says a saving grace will be the present
consideration of such reforms by the state legislature.

 Eligible state legal offices will improve their chances for the
federal grants if they reside in states which:

- have statewide grand jury laws

- use "post-seizure analysis teams" in their offices

- are the "designated FinCEN coordinator for the state."

 A vow to cooperate with the FinCEN coordinator is required of
those who do not hold that title.

 Several states are preparing their constituent agencies to apply
for the grants. Some, such as Texas, are considering legislation
that would meet the grant conditions. Others, such as Illinois,
have recently met the standards in large measure.

 Spawning a flock of states to do effective battle in the money
laundering war may create innovations and will increase the number
of public officials making requests for the books and records of
financial institutions.

 The formal grant announcement of the Bureau of Justice Assistance
will be available, it is expected, in the middle of January. There
will be 120 days to file grant requests. The winners will probably
be selected 30 days later. As many as 20 applications are expected.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

CARRIBBEAN STATES MEET, ISSUE LAUNDERING DECLARATION

 In many nations the pace of legislative and regulatory activity on
money laundering has quickened. One reason: the imminent deadline
within the European Community for implementing the EC's money
laundering directive.

 Legislative bodies throughout the continent are exploring laws to
comply with the terms of the directive (Money Laundering Alert, May
1991). The Cortes in Spain and Germany's Bundestag are two
examples.

 Here are some important developments.

With prodding from big nations, Caribbean nations say they will
step up effort

 No global solution to the world's money laundering problem is
possible without the active participation of the Caribbean nations.
Everyone knows that. Many of them are premier laundering centers.

 Their proximity to the world's largest cocaine producers and
exporters, in South America's Andean region, and the largest
generator of drug dollars, the U.S., makes the region a convenient
bank for many international criminals, including drug dealers.

 That is why five large nations, who are involved in their own
money laundering control efforts, spearheaded a gathering last
month in Jamaica of 17 Caribbean nations. The U.S., U.K., France,
Canada, and the Netherlands were the catalysts.

 The two-day meeting started November 5 in Kingston some 29 months
after an initial Caribbean meeting in Aruba June 1990.

 At the conclusion, the nations issued a "Kingston Declaration on
Money Laundering." The Declaration expressed solidarity with the
1988 United Nations Convention on Illicit Trafficking on Narcotic
Drugs which has money laundering provisions. Not all Caribbean
nations have yet ratified it.

 The declaration also agreed to implement the 40 recommendations
issued by the G-7 FATF in 1990 and the 19 additional ones issued at
the 1990 Aruba meeting (Money Laundering Alert, August 1990).

 The declaration also accepted the offer of Trinidad and Tobago to
host next year's meeting and to provide facilities for a
secretariat of the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force.

 The secretariat will be led by a steering group comprised of CFATF
members and the larger nations. The steering group will have
representatives from each group of Caribbean nations such as the
Dutch and Spanish language member nations.

 The secretariat will coordinate self-assessment procedures, help
evaluate members' progress, act as a clearing house for training
and technical assistance, and serve as liaison with non-member
countries and international organizations. It will report annually.

 The declaration recommended laws:

- defining money laundering based on the model laws issued by the
Organization of American States last May (Money Laundering Alert,
June 1992)

- concerning the seizure and forfeiture of drug proceeds and linked
assets. They should enable the identification, tracing and
evaluation of property subject to seizure, and permit freezing
orders.

- allowing judicial challenges to seizure orders by an
administrative body

- permitting forfeiture in all cases following conviction

- permitting courts to decide that "all property obtained during a
prescribed period of time by a person convicted of drug trafficking
has been derived from such criminal activity."

 The Caribbean nations also agreed to enter into mutual assistance
agreements with each other to assist in money laundering cases.

 They also agreed that money laundering should be an extraditable
offense subject to simplified procedures and that forfeited assets
should be shared among cooperating nations.

 The declaration's terms would:

- permit continuation of numbered accounts at financial
institutions with the understanding that account information would
be made available to "competent authorities" upon request and
insist on strong legal requirements on customer identification

- insist that in large currency transactions, customer
identification procedures and recordkeeping are "mandatory"

- amend bank secrecy laws to allow the reporting of suspicious
transactions by financial institutions, but make it optional
whether a statute is required

 The Caribbean money laundering effort seems to react only to the
prodding of the larger nations. If the gathering in Kingston does
not produce results, the money laundering control efforts of the
larger nations will be for naught.

Bank of England expresses worry of use of wire transfers as
laundering tools

 A very active player in the world money laundering control effort,
the Bank of England last month voiced concern about the
susceptibility of international funds payments systems to money
laundering.

 "The increasing efficiency and integration of the world's
financial system creates an environment that organized criminals
are only too ready to exploit," said the British central bank in
its Quarterly Bulletin.

 U.K. bankers are taking their suspicious transaction reporting
duties seriously. About 12,000 such reports will be filed this year
compared to 4,087 last year. Yet, only two financial institution
employees have been prosecuted under the nation's money laundering
law.

 The Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telcommunications,
a major clearing system known as SWIFT, has told its users to
include the names and addresses of senders and recipients of
electronic funds transfers.

 In London in late October, the government proposed legislation
that would greatly expand the reach of the nation's present money
laundering law. If the proposed law is enacted, money laundering
from all offenses, not just drug trafficking, will be subject to
criminal charges.

 The proposed law will also facilitate forfeiture of a drug
trafficker's assets. A greater danger awaits those in financial
institutions who do not report suspicious transactions. Suspicious
transaction reporting is the heart of the British money laundering
control system. Penalties will be greater and prosecution will be
facilitated against those who do not report those situations.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

TREASURY ADMINISTRATIVE RULINGS UNDER BSA IMMINENT

 Here are some recent developments:

Treasury expected to issue two Administrative Rulings

- Two long-awaited Administrative Rulings from the Treasury
Department on certain fine points of Bank Secrecy Act compliance
are expected before the change of administrations in January.

 One deals with the relaxed identification rules applicable to
elderly customers. The other is expected to deal with the treatment
of multiple transactions on IRS Form 4789, the Currency Transaction
Report. The form asks in Line 3(d) to indicate whether a "multiple
transaction" was the reason the identification details about the
person "who conducted this transaction" are not stated on the form.

 Treasury's Administrative Rulings are a means by which affected
financial institutions are guided on BSA compliance questions. They
have been nonexistent in the last few years. From the date of the
first one on June 22, 1988 to the eighth one on December 21, 1989,
less than 18 months passed. In the intervening 36 months, Treasury
has issued none.

 In addition to Administrative Rulings, Treasury also provides
guidance to inquiring institutions through "private rulings," which
are written responses by the Office of Financial Enforcement.

 The letters explain appropriate conduct under the BSA or construe
its provisions. The private rulings flow from Treasury in a steady,
albeit slow, stream to institutions across the country. Inquiries
can be directed to: Office of Financial Enforcement, U.S. Treasury
Department, 1500 Pennsylvania Ave., N.W., Washington, DC 20202.
(CHECK) Its telephone number is (202) 622-0400.

Santa Claus robber can help himself by proving his money laundering

 The money laundering issue appears to be one for all seasons.
Jeffrey Stenner, a Connecticut restauranteur, dressed up as Santa
Claus on December 20, 1988 and robbed an armored truck of more than
$695,000 while it was making its rounds at a bank. He pleaded
guilty to that charge and the government agreed to drop another
armored truck robbery charge involving the theft of $1.1 million.

 Federal district Judge Alan H. Nevas does not believe Stenner's
story that all the money was spent and that no cash hoard awaits
him after he completes the sentence the judge is about to impose.

 The U.S. Probation Office has suggested to the judge that the
sentence be increased from the term indicated by the federal
sentencing guidelines (78 to 97 months) if Stenner has hidden part
of his loot.

 "I am convinced that there is a cash hoard out there that awaits
Mr. Stenner when he is released from jail....He'd be out in seven
years....That's a nice tidy sum to support him for the rest of his
life," said the judge at the sentencing hearing last month.

 The solution: See if Stenner can prove how he laundered and spent
the $1.7 million he stole. IRS agents working the case cannot
account for nearly a million dollars of the total.

 Judge Nevas rescheduled the sentencing until later this month to
see if Stenner was an artful money launderer. If so, his sentence
may be less than what the judge is inclined to impose.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
MONEY LAUNDERING ALERT via NewsNet
December 1992

ADMINISTRATIVE RULINGS BY THE TREASURY DEPARTMENT UNDER THE BANK
SECRECY ACT


             Administrative Rulings by the Treasury
             Department under the Bank Secrecy Act-

Column 1

Ruling Number
88-1
88-2
88-3
88-4
88-5
89-1
89-2
89-5--

Column 2

Date Issued
June 22, 1988
June 22, 1988
June 22, 1988
August 2, 1988
August 2, 1988
January 12, 1989
June 21, 1989
December 21, 1989


Column 3

Subject
Reporting structured or suspicious transactions

Filing of Customs Service Form 4790 by banks when they know money
was transported into the U.S. by its customer.

Duty to report on IRS Form 4789 "cash-back" transactions of exempt
customers exceeding $10,000.

Bank's duty to note on its exemption list the identities of
multiple establishments which coondust transactions in exempt
account.

Duty of bank to report on Form 4789 cash received indirectly from
a customer through an armored car service hired by the bank.

Exemptions from currency transaction reporting to banks for groups
of existing accounts of the same customer.

Aggregating currency transactions of exempt customers who have
established separate accounts for multiple establishments they own.


Meeting the requirement of Form 4789 that information be furnished
about the person "on whose behalf" a transaction is being
conducted.

-  Source: 31 CFR, Part 103, Appendix
-- Administrative Ruling numbers 89-3 and 89-4 were not used. They
were reserved by the Treasury Department for rulings that were
never issued.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-7</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B047-136</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/la25.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033436 text/html 67655
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:32:30 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:58 GMT
Content-length: 67468
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/la25.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet <BR>
September 1994<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>TX JURY ORDERS HOUSTON LAW FIRM TO PAY $21.7M IN DAMAGES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(425 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>CH. 11 EXAMINER CRITICAL OF LAW FIRM'S LACK OF DISCLOSURE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(746 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>ZALE: AKIN GUMP LIABLE FOR MALPRACTICE FOR LBO-RELATED ACTIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(603 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>AR JUDGE DISMISSES ATTEMPT TO BLOCK SUBPOENA OF FIRM DOCUMENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(513 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>CLIENT: FINANCIAL ADVISOR PROVIDED "ERRONEOUS" ADVICE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(279 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>HHC, OTHERS CLAIM FORMER FINANCIERS BETRAYED THEIR FIDUCIARY&nbsp;OBLIGATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(531 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>RELIANCE-ON-COUNSEL DEFENSE WAIVES PRIVILEGE, JUDGE RULES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(750 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>D MA WILL NOT DISMISS BANK'S NEGLIGENCE CLAIMS AGAINST ACCOUNTANT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(770 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>ND GA ENTERS PARTIAL SUMMARY JUDGMENT FOR LBO ADVISOR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(633 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>2ND CIR. REJECTS CHALLENGE TO MERRILL LYNCH FINANCING OFFER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(979 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>10TH CIR. HOLDS CLAIMS AGAINST CONSULTANT NOT RELATED TO ERISA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(572 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>HOLDERS TELL COURT THAT ANY FISCAL CONFLICT BARS DISINTEREST</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(913 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>11TH CIR.: INTRODUCING BROKER, AGENT CANNOT COMPEL ARBITRATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(554 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>2ND CIR. REVERSES FINDING FOR CARRIER ON PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(512 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>ED MI REJECTS EQUITABLE SUBROGATION IN ATTORNEY MALPRACTICE CASE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(332 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>WD MI: MATERIAL MISREPRESENTATIONS VOID MALPRACTICE POLICY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(438 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
September 1994

TX JURY ORDERS HOUSTON LAW FIRM TO PAY $21.7M IN DAMAGES

     A Harris County, TX, jury on Aug. 15 awarded $21.7 million
in damages to the estate of a Houston oilman against the Houston
law firm of Vinson & Elkins on claims that the firm's gross
negligence generated millions of dollars in unnecessary
attorneys' fees and resulted in a $40 million loss of investment
income to the family (Moran et al. v. Vinson & Elkins, Harris
Cty., TX, Dist. Ct., No. 90-24849).

     The award consisted of $17.7 million in actual damages,
$1 million in punitive damages and $3 million in special damages.
The jury concluded that the firm had engaged in gross negligence;
breach of fiduciary duty for its own gain; civil conspiracy;
"false, misleading or deceptive acts"; and knowingly
"unconscionable action" in handling the estate.

     According to the complaint, William Moran died in November
1983, leaving an estate estimated to be worth $80 million, and
Vinson & Elkins (V&E) undertook representation of the estate
after another firm was forced to withdraw.  In addition to
representing the estate itself, V&E also represented the various
Moran companies, which were primarily in the oil and gas
business.

     The plaintiffs say that, from the beginning of V&E's
representation of the estate, the firm concealed a number of
conflicts of interest, including the fact that its managing
partner was a director and trust committee member of First City
Bancorporation of Texas, and that many V&E attorneys owned stock
in the bank.  In addition, the firm concealed negative financial
information about the bank and conspired to prolong the
administration of the estate so that the bank and V&E could
"continue to exploit the estate for excessive executor's and
attorneys' fees and expenses," said the plaintiffs.

     Other examples of V&E's negligence, the plaintiffs said,
included improper tax advice; business ventures which cost the
estate substantial amounts of money because V&E had "numerous
financial, professional and personal ties" with the companies
involved in the deals; and failure to reveal that First City was
"engaging in self-dealing by manipulating the maintenance of
short-term, low interest investment of estate assets."
               In its answer, V&E responded that (1) the plaintiffs lack
standing to sue because they lacked privity of contract with V&E;
and (2) the causes of action included in the complaint are not
assignable.  The firm counterclaimed that the suit was brought
for the purpose of harassment.

     The plaintiffs were represented by Brodus Spivey and Thomas
Prehoditch of Spivey, Grigg, Kelly & Knisely in Austin.  Counsel
for V&E were Richard Caldwell and Laura Ware of Mayor, Day,
Caldwell & Keeton in Houston.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
September 1994

CH. 11 EXAMINER CRITICAL OF LAW FIRM'S LACK OF DISCLOSURE

     In a report unsealed at the end of August, bankruptcy court-
appointed examiner Charles Stillman criticized Leslie Fay
Companies counsel Weil Gotshal & Manges for not being
disinterested while representing the estate and for not making
proper disclosure of conflicts of interest as mandated by the
Bankruptcy Code (In re: The Leslie Fay Companies, Inc., et al.;
SD NY Bank., No. 93 B 41724 (TLB)).

     Stillman concluded that, because the conflict in this case
arose from the appearance of impropriety rather than from actual
conduct harming the estates, the bankruptcy court should consider
as a sanction a limited disallowance of the legal fees incurred
by the firm, based on the cost of the investigation.

     According to the report, which was originally filed under
seal on May 27, Weil Gotshal was retained by Leslie Fay in
February 1993 to assist with an investigation of certain
accounting irregularities in the company's general ledger.  After
substantial losses in income were revealed as a result of the
investigation, Leslie Fay was no longer able to obtain financing
arrangements to operate its businesses, and filed for Chapter 11
protection in April 1993.  The bankruptcy court authorized Weil
Gotshal's employment as counsel to the Leslie Fay debtors.

     The issue of Weil Gotshal's disinterestedness was first
raised when the firm filed its application for fees.  The
creditors' committee and the trustee objected to the fee request,
saying that there were questions about the firm's disclosure of
its relationships with various parties related to Leslie Fay.
Stillman was appointed in December 1993.

     Stillman said that the pre-petition audit committee-related
relationships of Weil Gotshal included representation of Bear
Stearns and Odyssey Partners, several of whose employees were
members of the Leslie Fay audit committee.  He describes Weil
Gotshal's professional relationships with Bear Stearns and
Odyssey as "significant."  The examiner also stated that, at the
time Weil Gotshal was appointed as bankruptcy counsel, its
regular computerized conflicts-check was not performed, as the
company had already been representing the company for several
months.

     With respect to Weil Gotshal's post-petition
representations, Stillman said that the firm represented a number
of Leslie Fay directors in a securities class-action lawsuit and
government investigations which followed revelation of the
accounting problems at the company.  He investigated assertions
that Weil Gotshal's "insistence" on resolving the securities
fraud claims against officers and directors, which, in turn,
implicated officers' and directors' indemnification claims
against Leslie Fay, inhibited a prompt reorganization plan.  He
concluded that there was no documentary evidence to support
claims that Weil Gotshal's position was designed to further the
individual officers' and directors' interests to the detriment of
the estate.

     In preparing his reports, Stillman relied upon the
bankruptcy code 327 standard for the employment of professionals,
which requires that such professionals hold no interest adverse
to the estate and be disinterested persons, not just at the
beginning of their employ, but throughout the period of
employment.  He noted the difficulty of interpreting what
constitutes "adverse interest," as the code does not define the
phrase.  In considering the code's underlying policies, the
examiner said that counsel for the debtor need not always be
"perfectly disinterested": the test is one of materiality --
whether the firm had a material adverse interest.

     Turning to the judicial definition of "adverse interest" in
the context of multiple representations, Stillman reviewed
rulings of the First, Third and 10th Circuit Courts of Appeal, as
well as a number of bankruptcy courts.  He also considered
attorney codes of ethics with respect to the issues of exercise
of independent professional judgment, impaired judgment or
divided loyalties, and "avoiding even the appearance of
impropriety."

     Stillman concluded that Weil Gotshal's multiple
representations and relationships with respect to the Leslie Fay
debtors and the audit committee members and their related firms
constituted holding and representing materially adverse interests
in violation of Section 327(a).  In addition, he rejected the
firm's argument that it did not have to disclose those
connections because it did not consider them adverse to the
estate.

     Stillman said, "The firm's failure to disclose led to
significant burden and cost to the estates and put a cloud over
its representation....  [Its] failure to disclose frustrated an
important component of the bankruptcy system -- that a
professional's qualifications be evaluated at the outset so that
bankruptcy cases can proceed without any taint of partiality or
the appearance of partiality, of the professionals involved."

               Stillman is a partner in the New York City firm of Stillman,
Friedman & Shaw.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
September 1994

ZALE: AKIN GUMP LIABLE FOR MALPRACTICE FOR LBO-RELATED ACTIONS

     Jewel Recovery, L.P., Zale Corp.'s litigation entity, filed
suit on May 16 against its former law firm, Akin Gump Strauss
Hauer & Feld, and partner Alan Feld, charging the firm and Feld
with professional and gross negligence, aiding and abetting
breaches of fiduciary duty, fraud, fraudulent conveyance and
improper distribution of corporate dividends (In re Zale
Corporation, ND TX Bank., No. 392-30001-SAF-11; Jewel Recovery,
LP v. Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld et al., No. 394-3335).

     According to the complaint, the defendants participated with
Peoples Jewelers Limited's directors Irving Gerstein, Charles
Gill and James Gillies in undertaking a number of post-LBO
transactions which resulted in severely reducing Zale's assets,
paying dividends to a shell entity and denuding a Zale affiliate.
Defendant Feld, who was a Zale Credit Corporation (ZCC) director,
is charged with conflicts of interest in his overlapping roles as
ZCC director and name partner of Akin Gump.

     The plaintiff characterizes Zale's 1989 $438 million LBO of
Gordon Jewelry Corporation as "the beginning of the end for the
Debtors," as the price was two to three times the value of the
company and the debt assumed by Gordon to finance the transaction
left Gordon insolvent.  Because Akin Gump acted as special
counsel to Zale in the acquisition, the firm knew or should have
known that the LBO would ruin Gordon financially, says Jewel.

     After the LBO was consummated, Akin Gump also represented
Gordon in connection with an offering of public debt,
representing that the company's projected earnings would grow
exponentially after the acquisition, says Jewel.  In addition,
although Zale was its client, Akin Gump allowed the company to
release People and Swarovski International Holding from
guarantees on notes which had been secured prior to the Gordon
LBO.  Toronto-based Peoples and Swarovski of Switzerland bought
Zale in 1986 for $640 million.

     With respect to the "denuding" of ZCC, Jewel claims that a
series of transactions at a time when Feld had the "ultimate
authority" to approve or disapprove ZCC's investments led, among
other blunders, to a disastrous investment in Gordon's
Receivables Trust, which was represented by Akin Gump, and ZCC's
payment in early 1991 of a $50 million "alleged dividend" to its
sole shareholder, Zale.

     Jewel claims that the defendants engaged in fraud in a stock
transaction in connection with the Gordon LBO, arguing that the
series of transactions which constituted the LBO involved stock
in a corporation, and, therefore, was a stock transaction as the
term is used in the Texas Business and Commerce Code.  "The
prospectus governing the issuance of the Gordon Senior Notes
presented unrealistic and fraudulent projections as truthful and
realistic...," and Akin failed to disclose the falsity of the
representations, says Jewel.

     The complaint also states that the legal fees paid to Akin
Gump for its representation of Gordon in the LBO were made
pursuant to and were an integral part of the LBO.  Jewel is
seeking recovery of the fees as fraudulent conveyances under the
Texas Business and Commerce Code because Gordon allegedly did not
receive reasonable equivalent value for Akin Gump's services, and
was insolvent at the time the fees were paid.

     Feld's breach of fiduciary duty as director of ZCC allegedly
resulted in $150 million in damages to Zale, says the complaint,
and his role in the improper distribution resulted in $50 million
in damages.  The damages proximately caused by the gross
negligence of the ZCC directors, including Feld's gross
negligence, is not less than $150 million, says Jewel.

     The complaint was filed by James McCarthy, David Kent and
David Roberts of Hughes & Luce in Dallas.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
September 1994

AR JUDGE DISMISSES ATTEMPT TO BLOCK SUBPOENA OF FIRM DOCUMENTS

     A federal judge in Little Rock, AR, on Aug. 10 dismissed as
premature a suit filed by the Rose Law Firm against the
Resolution Trust Corp. seeking to block a subpoena for documents
concerning all the firm's clients going back to 1985 (Rose Law
Firm v. Resolution Trust Corp. et al., ED AR, Western Div., Civ.
No. LR-C-94-21; see Andrews' Professional Liability LR, July
1994, P. 17).

     In making the decision, U.S. District Judge Henry Woods
"confess[ed] serious misgivings about the scope of this
subpoena...[which] demands the production of a broad range of
documents covering more than ten years."  He also said that the
Rose firm "was understandably disturbed by the scope of the
subpoena," with which it was expected to comply within 10 days.

     Nevertheless, the judge said that he was persuaded by the
position advanced by RTC and its Office of Inspector General
(OIG).

     The judge cited the following excerpt from OIG's brief:
"One of the most firmly established principles of administrative
law is that courts cannot exercise jurisdiction over attempts by
subpoena recipients to secure judicial review of administrative
agency subpoenas....  [T]he courts uniformly hold that such
challenges are not ripe for judicial review.  Since
administrative subpoenas are not self-executing, recipients of
such subpoenas can raise their procedural and substantive
objections, including objections to the validity of the
underlying investigation, only if and when the government seeks
to enforce its subpoena in court."

     Rose's managing partner, Ronald Clark, said the firm "will
not comply with the subpoena absent a court order."  He said that
the firm had not decided whether to appeal Judge Woods' ruling.

     RTC/OIG issued the subpoena in connection with an
investigation into possible "conflicts of interest" at the Rose
firm, where First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton was once a partner.
The probe resulted from controversy over investments made by
President and Mrs. Clinton in the "Whitewater" planned resort
development when the president was governor of Arkansas.  The
Clintons' co-investor was the owner of the now-defunct Madison
Guaranty Savings & Loan Association of Little Rock.  The
development never got off the ground, and the Clintons
purportedly lost money on the deal.  Rose has acknowledged that
it represented the thrift in a few isolated matters but insisted
it was never the thrift's primary counsel.

     On April 26 of this year, Rose sued for a declaratory
judgment that the subpoena is void because it seeks information
protected by the attorney-client privilege, work product
doctrine, and the Arkansas Rules of Professional Responsibility.
RTC argued that the Rose action was premature because the court
has not been asked by either RTC or OIG to enforce the subpoena.

     RTC is represented by Robert E. Craddock Jr. and Leslie
Gattas Coleman of Dyer, James and Taylor in Memphis, TN, and by
RTC staff counsel Jonathan B. Taylor in Washington, DC.  In
addition to Clark, Rose is represented by staff attorneys Jerry
C. Jones and David L. Williams, and by Walter B. Stuart and
Andrew J. Logan of Vinson & Elkins in Houston, TX.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
September 1994

CLIENT: FINANCIAL ADVISOR PROVIDED "ERRONEOUS" ADVICE

     Cleveland-based Figgie International filed suit on Aug. 26
against Boston Consulting Group, Inc., alleging that between 1991
and 1994 the management consultant breached its contract with
Figgie by providing "erroneous market studies and business
reports and by designing and implementing TBC programs which were
flawed" (Figgie International, Inc. v. Boston Consulting Group,
Inc., ND OH, No. 1:94 CV 1763).

     Figgie said, in addition, that Boston Consulting (BCG)
engaged in negligence, negligent misrepresentation and breach of
fiduciary duty.  Figgie is seeking "no less than" $2 million in
damages.

     According to the complaint, Figgie engaged BCG to develop a
series of management projects to generate business and market
information and time-based capability (TBC) programs for Figgie.
BCG allegedly promised that Figgie would realize "above-average
growth and maximum profitability within a three-year period of
time."  Under the engagement letter between the two parties, BCG
was supposed to establish a budget for each project and promised
that fees charged would not exceed the budget amount.  In spite
of BCG's assertions, says Figgie, there were no fixed fee billing
arrangements with BCG.

     The company says BCG breached its contract with Figgie by
(1) failing to deliver the accurate market studies and business
reports and the TBC programs and TBC results; and (2) by
consistently overbilling Figgie for services and expenses.  BCG's
negligence is evidenced by its (1) failure to use qualified and
appropriately supervised personnel; (2) failure to properly plan
and schedule the various consulting projects; and (3) failure to
execute the projects in a timely manner, the complaint contends.

     The complaint was filed by Richard Cusick, William Coughlin
and Anthony LaCerva of Calfee, Halter & Griswold in Cleveland.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
September 1994

HHC, OTHERS CLAIM FORMER FINANCIERS BETRAYED THEIR FIDUCIARY
OBLIGATIONS

     Hillsborough Holdings Corp., Walter Industries Inc.,
Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. (KKR) and others on Sept. 8 filed
suit against financiers Leon Black and Marc J. Rowan, claiming
the two betrayed their fiduciary obligations by profiting from
information about Walter Industries gathered while representing
KKR (In re Hillsborough Holdings Corp., MD FL Bankr., Nos. 89-
9715-8P1 through 89-9746-8P1 and 90-11997-8P1; Hillsborough
Holdings Corp. et al. v. Black et al., Adv. No. 94-562).

     In their suit, the plaintiffs allege that Black and Rowan,
who served as investment bankers for KKR while at Drexel Burnham
Lambert, Inc., gleaned information collected during KKR's
acquisition of Jim Walter Corp., the predecessor to Walter
Industries.  The complaint further alleges that the two used that
information to gain a competitive advantage in bids on debt
securities issued by their former clients.

     "As a result," the complaint alleges, "defendants were able
to purchase at a steep discount more than $160 million face
amount of debt securities of the Debtors.  Consistent with
Black's pattern of behavior, defendants have now attempted to use
the position they have acquired in Walter Industries to take
control of the organization, by stepping in as controlling
shareholders."

     Black and Rowan acted as fiduciaries of Walters until it
filed for Chapter 11 in December 1989, and as fiduciaries of KKR
interests until Drexel collapsed in February 1990.  According to
the complaint, during that time, the two allegedly had access to
information not available to the public, such as hidden values in
Walter's $1.1 billion mortgage portfolio and projections about
Walter's future performance.  The complaint further alleges that
Black used this information when making his purchase of Walter
bonds under the guise of his new firm, Apollo Advisors.

     One of those acquisitions, completed in March 1992, was a
major portion of Walter's outstanding debt, $120,445,719 in face
amount of senior subordinated extendible reset notes, $25 million
in face amount of subordinated notes due 1996, $12.375 million in
face amount of pre-leveraged buyout debt of Walter and
$2.25 million in face amount of series B & C senior extendible
reset notes.

     Black has filed one of two plans of reorganization for
Walter, his competing with one filed by the debtor.  Both plans
provide for payment in full of all secured claims and allowed
amounts of unsecured claims, including unsecured debt and trade
creditor claims.  Both are pending approval by the bankruptcy
court.

     "The Apollo Plan constitutes the final step in enabling the
Apollo Fiduciaries to consummate Black's original strategy to
utilize the confidential and proprietary valuable information
obtained from Walter Industries and the KKR Interests to obtain
control of Walter Industries and squeeze out the equity interests
of the KKR Interests and management," the complaint alleges.

     In this adversary proceeding, the plaintiffs are seeking
affirmative relief for breach of fiduciary duty, misappropriation
of confidential business information and conversion.

     The complaint was filed by Michael Armstrong of Kirkpatrick
& Lockhart in New York City; by Don Stichter of Stichter, Riedel,
Blain & Prosser in Tampa; by Leonard Gilbert of Carlton, Fields,
Ward, Emmanuel, Smith & Cutler in Tampa; and by Philip Howard of
Howard, Darby, & Levin in New York City.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
September 1994

RELIANCE-ON-COUNSEL DEFENSE WAIVES PRIVILEGE, JUDGE RULES

     Even if defendant officers and directors do not always waive
an attorney-client privilege by generally asserting reliance on
counsel's advice as a general defense against reckless conduct
charges, they must produce communications relating to narrow
areas where the substance of the documents was injected into the
case through their specific statements of reliance, said a
federal judge in Wilmington Aug. 5  (In re ML-Lee Acquisition
Fund II, L.P. et al., D DE, No. 92-60).

     The suit claimed that ML-Lee Acquisition Fund II L.P. and
ML-Lee Acquisition Fund (Retirement Accounts) used false and
misleading claims to deceive those who bought limited partnership
interests in the funds between Nov. 10, 1989, and Jan. 5, 1990.
In addition to the federal securities law claims, the suit
asserted three causes of action that arise under Delaware law --
breach of contract, negligent misrepresentation and fraud and
deceit.

     In an April 1 opinion, U.S. District Judge Joseph F. Farnan
allowed plaintiffs to proceed with a private right of action
under the Investment Company Act but barred them from bringing
aider and abettor charges against the advisors and allies of the
corporate and individual defendants under that statute.

     At the same time, the judge denied plaintiffs' motion to
compel the production of certain evidence withheld on the basis
of attorney-client privilege.  The court declined to decide that
defendants waived the privilege simply by stating during
depositions that they failed to take certain actions based on
advice of counsel, but it cautioned that if it found that
defendants were using the privilege as a shield to liability or
subsequently raised a reliance-on-counsel defense, the motion to
compel would be granted.

     Subsequently, plaintiffs contended that in answering an
amended complaint, defendants specifically relied on advice of
counsel in claiming that they believed in good faith that certain
transactions were well founded.

     "A client may waive the privilege by disclosure of some
privileged communication...or by asserting reliance upon the
advice of counsel as an essential element of his defense," the
court wrote.  Even if defendants are correct that simply denying
allegations of reckless conduct or generally asserting reliance
on counsel is not sufficient to waive the attorney-client
privilege, the court said, "In order for plaintiffs to have a
fair and adequate opportunity to test and rebut defendants'
allegations that they sought advice from counsel, plaintiffs are
entitled to know, for example whether the Lee defendants
disclosed all material facts to counsel, whether counsel gave an
otherwise well-informed opinion, [and whether] the Lee defendants
follow[ed] the advice from counsel."

     "Even if the Lee defendants intended only to rely on the act
of seeking advice from counsel to show they behaved in good
faith, plaintiffs are entitled to test the validity and sincerity
of that action," the court concluded.

     The court noted that the officers and directors specifically
stated that they relied on the advice of counsel as to certain
legal definitions, compliance with laws and fulfillment of
fiduciary duties -- responses which reach beyond simply denying
reckless conduct.

     As to the scope of the waiver, Judge Farnan noted that
defendants' assertions as to their reliance on counsel were very
specific and very narrow:  "Therefore, the defendants are
compelled to produce only those communications relating to the
specific areas in which defendants have asserted reliance on the
advice of counsel."

     Plaintiffs are represented by Pamela Tikellis, Carolyn D.
Mack and Cynthia Calder of Chimicles, Burt, Jacobsen & McNew in
Wilmington; Michael Freed and Carol Gilden of Much, Shelist,
Freed, Denenberg & Ament in Chicago; and William French, Robert
Gegios and Glen Lavy of Gibbs, Roper, Loots & Williams in
Milwaukee.

     The Merrill defendants are represented by Kenneth Nachbar of
Morris, Nichols, Arsht & Tunnell in Wilmington; and James
Benedict, Mark Holland, David Lewittes, Martin Seidel, Laura
Icken, James Moyle and Jeffrey Nanes of Rogers & Wells in New
York City.

     Certain ML-Lee defendants are represented by Stephen
Herrmann of Richards Layton & Finger in Wilmington and by Sanford
Remz and Richard Nicholson of Hutchins, Wheeler & Dittmar in
Boston.

     Other ML-Lee defendants are represented by Michael Goldman
and Stephen Norman of Potter, Anderson & Corroon in Wilmington
and John Donovan Jr. and Michael Fee of Ropes & Gray in Boston.

     Hutchins, Wheeler & Dittmar is represented by David McBride
and Bruce Stargatt of Young, Conaway, Stargatt & Taylor in
Wilmington; and Brackett Denniston III, Anthony Downs and Todd
Hahn of Goodwin, Procter & Hoar in Boston.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
September 1994

D MA WILL NOT DISMISS BANK'S NEGLIGENCE CLAIMS AGAINST ACCOUNTANT

     Two banks which lost "several million dollars" on a loan
default can sue the borrower's accountant for negligent and
intentional misrepresentation, ruled the U.S. District Court for
the District of Massachusetts on Aug. 8, denying summary judgment
to the public accounting firm (Fleet National Bank et al. v. The
Gloucester Corporation, et al., D MA, No. 92-11812-REK).

     Based on its reading of the Restatement of Torts, the court
concluded that a jury could find that the accounting firm, "in
the course of its profession, supplied information in the form of
audit reports to [the borrower], with substantial certainty that
those reports would be supplied by [the borrower] to and relied
upon by the banks in deciding whether to extend credit to [the
borrower]."

     Plaintiff banks, Fleet National Bank and Cooperatieve
Centrale Raiffeisen-Boerenleenbank (collectively, banks) filed
suit against Tonneson & Co. (Tonneson) to recover loan balances
outstanding when The Gloucester Corporation (TGC) defaulted on
multi-million dollar loans made in reliance on the "faulty"
audits and misstatements made by Tonneson.  Prior to the filing
of the suit, Tonneson had audited the financial statements of the
now-defunct TGC in 1989 and 1990.

     Tonneson argues that it is entitled to judgment as a matter
of law because under the tests most frequently applied by courts
both in and out of Massachusetts for determining whether
accounting firms owe a duty of care to persons with whom they are
not in privity, Tonneson owed no such duty to the banks.
Tonneson contends that the firm itself did not send the audited
financial statements to the banks; that the banks never
questioned Tonneson about the audited statements; and no one even
actually confirmed to Tonneson that the audited financial
statements had in fact been furnished to the banks.

     The court first noted that, although neither the
Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court (SJC) nor the Massachusetts
Appeals Court has decided the question of whether a CPA owes a
duty of care to persons with whom the CPA is not in privity, the
SJC had issued a series of opinions involving liability of other
professionals to persons with whom they were not in privity.  The
court distinguished the roles of professionals such as lawyers
and doctors who are retained to provide services solely to the
persons who retained them, and CPAs who are "often engaged to
conduct an audit for the purpose of providing information --
indeed assurances -- to third parties."

     After a review of appropriate Massachusetts cases, the court
outlined four "guiding principles" for dealing with the issue of
potential unlimited liability under that state's law:  (1) the
defendant must have been hired to perform a particular task;
(2) performance of the task must have been for the benefit of a
particular person known to the defendant; (3) the plaintiff must
have had a reasonable expectation that the defendant would
perform the task in a manner such that the plaintiff should have
escaped the harm that befell him or her; and (4) the defendants
should have foreseen that the plaintiff or someone in his or her
position would be harmed in a manner and to the extent that the
plaintiff was harmed as a result of the defendant's negligence.

     Turning to non-Massachusetts precedent, the court determined
that three tests were applicable to the instant case:  the
foreseeability test, the near-privity test and the Restatement
test.  The court concluded that the SJS would probably not adopt
the foreseeability test, because so few other jurisdictions have
adopted it.   The court reached the same conclusion with respect
to the privity or near-privity test, on grounds of policy and
uncertainty of application, although the parties informed the
court that 14 jurisdictions have adopted that test.

     Finally, the court observed that the Restatement (Second) of
Torts test, which holds accountants and other professionals
liable for providing false information, justifiably relied upon
by others, when substantial harmful consequences are likely to
result, has been accepted by "at least" 19 jurisdictions, and
"seems to comport best with the Massachusetts cases that have
addressed the subject of professional liability in the absence of
privity."  That is, the Restatement test "limits the ambit of
accountant liability to an individual or a narrow class and
includes in the definition of 'intent' any consequence that the
accountant is 'substantially certain' will result from his or her
negligent misrepresentation," and thus "approaches the actual
knowledge standard of several Massachusetts cases, without adding
a linkage requirement that appears wholly foreign to
Massachusetts case law," it said.

     From a policy perspective, the Restatement test also
provides for proportionality, predictability, uniformity and
flexibility, said the court.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
September 1994

ND GA ENTERS PARTIAL SUMMARY JUDGMENT FOR LBO ADVISOR

     U.S. District Court Judge G. Ernest Tidwell has entered
partial summary judgment orders on some of the claims brought by
Munford, Inc. against its LBO financial advisor in a 1991
$68 million adversary proceeding filed by the company to recover
corporate assets allegedly lost as a result of the 1988 leveraged
buyout of the company (In re Munford, Inc., ND GA Bankr., No. 90-
00078SWC; Munford v. Munford, No. 91-6417).

     Judge Tidwell adopted the bankruptcy court's findings and
dismissed breach of contract/negligence, fraudulent conveyance
and aiding and abetting claims against Shearson Lehman Brothers.

     The dispute arose from the Chapter 11 bankruptcy of Munford,
Inc, and the 1989 LBO which preceded it.  The 1991 adversary
complaint includes claims against a variety of participants in
the LBO, including Shearson, who was retained by Munford, Inc. in
1987 to evaluate the company's future.  Shearson concluded that a
sale of 100% of Munford's common stock would maximize shareholder
value, and that a leveraged buyout or leveraged recap would not
successfully maximize shareholder value.  Shearson also prepared
an offering memorandum to solicit potential purchasers for the
company and, later, an opinion indicating that the price offered
for Munford stock in the LBO was fair to the company's
shareholders.

     Shearson was charged with malpractice, negligence, breach of
contract and breach of fiduciary duty because the "firm failed to
counsel Munford carefully and completely concerning the financial
condition" of pre-LBO Munford, the value of its assets, the
financial effects of the LBO on Munford and the anticipated
insolvency of the company as a consequence of the LBO, the
company said.

     Munford also claimed that the $250,000 in fees paid to
Shearson were fraudulent conveyances and should be set
aside, and that the firm is also guilty of aiding and abetting a
breach of fiduciary duty by the company's board of directors.
The complaint alleges that Shearson learned of the "continuing
decline of Munford's operations" and that the company would be
rendered insolvent as a result of the LBO, but assisted the
directors in consummating the LBO anyway.

     In two April 4 opinions, U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Stacey Cotton
recommended that the separate motions for summary judgment filed
by the DFA Entities and certain former Munford officer/directors
be denied, and that Shearson's motion be granted as to three
counts in the complaint.  Judge Tidwell modified in an Aug. 4
order.

     First, Judge Tidwell agreed with Judge Cotton that Munford's
claims of professional negligence, breach of contract, fraudulent
conveyance and aiding and abetting against Shearson should be
dismissed.  He said that Munford's failure to come forward with
expert testimony on the issue of the standard of care to be
exercised by a professional warranted dismissal of the negligence
allegation.  He noted that, while simple negligence claims do not
require expert testimony, assertions of professional negligence
can be established "only by professional or expert testimony."

     The court rejected Munford's contention that it was entitled
to rely on testimony by Shearson representatives to establish the
relevant standard of care, concluding that the testimony at issue
related to Shearson's contractual duty to Munford, and did not
establish an opinion about a general standard of care.

     With respect to Munford's claim that Shearson aided and
abetted the officer/director defendants' alleged breach of duty
to Munford, Judge Tidwell concluded that the bankruptcy court
correctly determined that Georgia law does not recognize that
tort, and that a Georgia court faced with the issue would not be
likely to create such a cause of action.  He observed that, in
view of the fact that fiduciary duties "are based on the special
relationship existing between two or more parties," the
imposition of aider and abettor liability for breaches of
fiduciary duty essentially extends fiduciary obligations beyond
the scope of the confidential or special relationship.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
September 1994

2ND CIR. REJECTS CHALLENGE TO MERRILL LYNCH FINANCING OFFER

     A suit claiming that Merrill Lynch, in connection with its
orchestration of the 1988 LBO of Texas-based Insilco Corporation,
participated in the distribution of securities through a
materially misleading prospectus and registration statement is
barred by the statute of limitations, said the Second Circuit
U.S. Court of Appeals on Aug. 12 (Jackson National Life Insurance
Company v. Merrill Lynch & Co. Ins. et al., 2nd Cir., No. 93-
9287).

     The panel concluded that, even if the initial prospectus was
misleading, the warnings in the prospectus and the subsequent
offering memorandum put the plaintiff on inquiry notice of the
fraud more than one year before the tolling date.

     Insilco Corporation underwent an LBO in August 1988 and, as
a result, took on debt that included approximately $405 million
in "bridge financing" provided by Merrill Lynch to ensure the
deal's success.  The terms of the bridge loan required Insilco to
engage in a public offering of high-yield "junk" bonds and
warrants and to use the proceeds to repay the bridge financing
provided by Merrill Lynch.  Plaintiff Jackson National Life
Insurance Company (Jackson) responded to Merrill Lynch's
solicitation by purchasing nearly $8 million in principal amount
of Insilco securities in January 1989.

     In May 1990, Insilco embarked upon a recapitalization and
filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission an offering
memorandum which updated the company's financial condition.  The
recap plan failed and Insilco filed for Chapter 11 protection in
January 1991.

     Jackson filed suit against Merrill Lynch under 11 and 12(2)
of the Securities Act of 1933 and 20A of the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934, alleging three material misstatements or omissions:
(1) the prospectus falsely indicated that the January 1989
offering was being conducted on an "all or none" basis when
Merrill Lynch knew all the securities could not be sold to the
public; (2) the prospectus failed to disclose that the "qualified
independent underwriter" was not informed that the offering would
not be conducted on an "all or none" basis because there was no
public market for the entire offering; and (3) the prospectus
failed to warn that the LBO had rendered Insilco insolvent before
the offering took place.

     In addition to declaring the suit barred by the statute of
limitations, the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of
New York also held that Jackson did not state a claim under 20A
of the 1934 Act because it did not plead a predicate violation of
the 1934 Act as that section requires.

     The Second Circuit panel affirmed in an opinion by Judge
John Walker.

     First, said Judge Walker, the statute of limitations
applicable to Jackson's 1933 Act claims is one year "after the
discovery of the untrue statement of omission, or after such
discovery should have been made by the exercise of reasonable
diligence.... [emphasis in the original]."  He concluded that
Jackson had at its disposal the facts from which it could have
discovered the misstatement it alleges more than one year before
the tolling date.

     Beginning with Jackson's "all or none" claims, Judge Walker
said that, among the "early storm warnings" available to alert
Jackson that the Merrill Lynch offering was not an "all or none"
offering was the fact that (1) the prospectus contained no
provisions for escrow accounts and refund arrangements; (2) the
1989 Insilco offering was conducted by Merrill Lynch on a "firm
commitment" basis; and (3) the May 1990 offering memorandum
circulated in connection with the recap revealed that Merrill
Lynch "currently" owned about 50% of the securities offered in
1989 and that only a "limited" market for the securities had
developed.

     The court said that, even if it assumed that the ambiguous
language in the prospectus "unmistakably gave the misleading
impression that the offering was being conducted on an all or
none basis, the aggregate of circumstances in the case was
sufficient to put a reasonable investor on notice that the
underwriting was not to be conducted on an all or none basis."

     Turning to Jackson's insolvency claim, Judge Walker observed
that the reasonableness of Jackson's reliance on statements of
Insilco's solvency in the prospectus to support its claim that it
could not have known of an imminent bankruptcy "must be assessed
against the actual language of the prospectus."  The solvency
opinion in the prospectus was contingent on future events,
primarily the ability to generate increased operating income,
over which Insilco had only limited control, said the court, and
was followed by the statement "no assurance could be given that a
court would confirm the company's position with respect to the
solvency issues."

     Judge Walker said additional evidence of potential
insolvency can be found in the prospectus' financial information,
which showed the impact of the LBO on the company's finances and
disclosed that the company's high debt-to-equity ratio resulting
from the LBO might adversely affect the company's ability to meet
principal and interest payments as they came due.  In addition,
the offering memorandum 16 months later revealed that Insilco was
experiencing severe cash flow problems which might render it
unable to meet its current liabilities, the court said.

     Finally, Judge Walker addressed Jackson's claim under 20A,
which has a five-year statute of limitations, and rejected
Jackson's contention that it should be allowed to proceed under
20A for violations of 11 and 12(2) of the 1933 Act because
remedies of the 1933 and 1934 Acts were "meant to be cumulative,
not exclusive."  The court said that the language of Section 20A
makes it clear that "Congress sought to alter the remedies
available in insider trading cases and only in insider trading
cases [emphasis in the original]."

     Jackson was represented by Raymond Levites, Richard Cashman
and Diane Britton of Pavelic & Levites.  Counsel for Merrill
Lynch were Jack Auspitz, Debra Freeman and Claire Silberman of
Morrison & Foerster.  Both firms are located in New York City.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
September 1994

10TH CIR. HOLDS CLAIMS AGAINST CONSULTANT NOT RELATED TO ERISA

     A panel of the 10th Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals held
June 30 that the state law claims of trustees of an ERISA-
governed plan against a negligent outside consultant were not
preempted because none of the claims related closely enough to
the plan  (Airparts Company, Inc. et al. v. Custom Benefit
Services of Austin, Inc., 10th Cir., No. 93-3268).

     The decision reversed and remanded a ruling by the U.S.
District Court for the District of Kansas which dismissed the
complaint brought by Airparts Company, Inc. against defendant
Custom Benefit Services of Austin, Inc., d/b/a First Actuarial
Corp. (FAC), on the grounds that their state law claims were
preempted by ERISA.

     The plaintiffs, co-trustees of an ERISA-governed plan,
brought state law claims of negligence, implied indemnity and
common law fraud against FAC, a firm hired by the plaintiffs to
provide expert benefit plan consultation.  Specifically, the
plaintiffs alleged that FAC failed to give timely advice to
Airparts on the effects of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act
of 1987, improperly calculated pension benefits, proposed and
drafted a useless plan amendment and deliberately concealed the
cost of the amendment and its eventual uselessness from the
plaintiffs.

     In an opinion delivered by Judge Oliver Seth, the panel held
that the state law claims put forth by Airparts did not relate to
an ERISA plan and therefore were not preempted.  The state laws
involved in the case, the panel said, did not regulate the type
of benefits or terms of the plan; they did not create reporting,
disclosure, funding or vesting requirements for the plan; they
did not affect the calculation of benefits; and they were not
common law rules designed to rectify faulty plan administration.

     "Plaintiffs' state law claims against FAC do not have and
will not have any effect whatsoever on the relations among the
traditional plan entities," the panel said.  "Those principals,
the employer, the plan, the plan fiduciaries, and the
beneficiaries, are united in their efforts to secure redress from
defendants.  A recovery from defendants will increase the coffers
of the plan; a defeat will mean that the plan has expended money
in fruitless litigation.  Such a tangential effect, however, is
not enough to relate these state law claims to the plan itself."

     Continuing, the panel held that Airparts' claims would not
affect the structure, administration or the type of benefits
provided by the ERISA-governed plan.  In addition, the panel
noted that the plaintiffs made no claim based on any rights under
the plan and there was no allegation that any of the plan's terms
had been breached.  Also, there was no effort to enforce or
modify the terms of the plan and there was no threat that, by
allowing the suit to go forward, conflicting regulations would
emerge which would destroy the structural unity of the ERISA
scheme.

     Moreover, the panel said that the plan administrator in this
case was Airparts, not FAC.  FAC was simply an outside consultant
which did not directly perform any administrative act vis-a-vis
the plan, it said.  Addressing congressional purpose in enacting
ERISA, the panel said that it saw "no congressional purpose to be
furthered by denying an ERISA plan a state cause of action
against allegedly negligent third-party service providers."

 Carparts Co. is represented by Paul Arabia in Wichita, KS.
Counsel for Custom Benefit Services is Joseph H. Bocock and
Michael F. Lauderdale in Oklahoma City, OK.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
September 1994

HOLDERS TELL COURT THAT ANY FISCAL CONFLICT BARS DISINTEREST

     Contrary to the position taken by the Delaware Chancery
Court and defendant directors of Western Airlines Inc., the
Western board could not rely on the recommendations of its
financial advisor for a merger decision because, in this context,
any fiscal conflict of interest, no matter what the source,
removes independence and disinterest, plaintiff shareholders
argued to the Delaware Supreme Court in a brief filed July 26
(Rand et al. v. Western Airlines Inc., DE Sup. Ct., No. 94-94).

     Frederick Rand, seeking to represent other shareholders of
Western Airlines, challenged the price at which the airline was
acquired by Delta.  The suit alleged that due to their corporate
positions, the individual defendants had information -- which
they allegedly withheld from the class -- that would indicate
that Western was worth substantially more than the preshare price
offered, especially considering its synergy value.

     Rand charged that the Western board breached its duty of
care by allegedly agreeing to a stock option pact with Delta as
well as a no-shop and no-talk pact as part of the merger
agreement.  He claimed that in return for lucrative golden
parachutes, Western's board violated its Revlon duty to seek the
best value for shareholders once it became apparent that the
company would change hands.  The suit alleged that the board did
not even seek an opinion from an independent adviser on the
fairness of the Delta offer.

     In a Sept. 11, 1989, opinion, Vice Chancellor Carolyn Berger
dismissed Delta but found that two claims against Western's
directors and officers could not be resolved on a motion to
dismiss:  (1) the Revlon claim that the board failed to auction
the company; and (2) a disclosure claim that the directors
violated their duty of complete candor by withholding information
on the true value of the company.

               On defendants' motion for summary judgment, the vice
chancellor, in a Feb. 25 opinion, found reason to dismiss those
claims.  Although an "enhanced scrutiny" standard must be applied
here, "the essential question remains whether a disinterested
board has satisfied its duty to act on a fully informed basis,"
the court stated.  Nor was the existence of golden parachute
provisions for three of Western's chief negotiators enough to
question their independence, the court said.

     In their opening brief, Rand said that, contrary to the law,
the lower court had, on a motion for summary judgment, "refused
to draw a single inference in plaintiffs' favor."  For instance,
as to duty of loyalty, appellants argued:  "A director is not
independent if he can reasonably anticipate special benefits
flowing from the transaction submitted to the board for its
approval,...[but the chancery court] improperly overlaid an
additional element in determining the existence of divided
loyalty."

     In reply, Western contended that the chancery court had
properly held that the Western board satisfied its Revlon duties
in approving the merger agreement by (1) canvassing the market
and contacting virtually every airline about the possibility of a
merger, acquisition, or joint marketing agreement;
(2) considering the severe disadvantages it faced in a newly regulated
market; and (3) considering the extensive work performed by fincancial
advisor Dillon Reed.
    Since Delta was the only offer to come forward after a 15-month
search, Western contended, the court properly concluded that the price
Western's board obtained was only not fair but the highest price
possible.
    In their reply brief, plaintiffs argued that at the very least,
they have shown that there is a question of material fact that would
preclude summary judgment as to both duty of care and loyalty charges.
Both the chancery court and defendants miss the point
point in pointing to the fact that Dillon Reed did not have to
back the disputed merger to get its bonus, they said.  "Dillon
was highly motivated to recommend a transaction rather than
suggest that Western continue as an ongoing enterprise,"
plaintiffs said, and, since time was running out, the contested
deal was the only practical way to get that money.

     Defendants' contention that a previous higher offer was
subject to conditions and thus not material is unsupported by
authority and flies in the face of common knowledge that most
such offers are at the outset subject to numerous conditions,
appellants argued in support of their assertion that the board
did not pursue alternatives.  Nor can it be concluded summarily
that Western gained a substantial benefit that justified the
lock-up and no-shop provisions, appellants said.

     "Defendants do not deny the financial interest of Western's
negotiators," appellants asserted.  "Rather they seem to say that
such a conflict is permissible so long as the financially
conflicted party did not initiate the set of circumstances
leading to the conflict.  To the contrary, it is cut and dried
that a director who receives a substantial benefit from
supporting a transaction cannot be objectively viewed as
disinterested or independent.  The Chancery Court recognized that
conflict but disregarded its importance."

     Even if none of these elements are a litmus test for breach
of duty, they create, at the very least, a question that can only
be decided at trial, appellants said.

     Plaintiffs are represented by Joseph Rosenthal and Kevin
Gross of Rosenthal, Monhait, Gross & Goddess in Wilmington, DE;
and by Roger Kirby of Kaufman, Malchman, Kirby & Squire in New
York City.  Defendants are represented by Charles Richards Jr.
and Allen Terrell of Richards, Layton & Finger in Wilmington; and
by Dennis Glazer, Grace Rodriguez and David Finn of Davis, Polk &
Wardwell in New York City.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
September 1994

11TH CIR.: INTRODUCING BROKER, AGENT CANNOT COMPEL ARBITRATION

     An introducing broker/dealer and its agent were not third-
party beneficiaries of an arbitration agreement between the
plaintiff and a clearing broker and, therefore, cannot compel
arbitration of the plaintiff's securities, common law fraud,
breach of fiduciary obligation and, under the Texas Deceptive
Trade Practices-Consumer Act, negligence and conspiracy claims
against them, said the 11th Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on
Aug. 19 (Taylor v. Investors Associates, Inc., et al., 11th Cir.,
No. 93-5049).

     The panel said that the defendants did not qualify as third-
party beneficiaries because an intent to benefit them was not
apparent from the construction of the arbitration agreement "in
light of all surrounding circumstances."

     According to court documents, co-defendant Mitchell
Goldberg, as agent for co-defendant Investors Associates, Inc.
(IAI), solicited plaintiff Don Taylor to buy and sell stock from
IAI.  On Jan. 6, 1992, Taylor purchased stock through IAI and,
the next day, signed a client's agreement with Prudential-Bache
Securities, which was to serve as clearing broker in the trading
arrangement.

     Taylor subsequently filed suit against IAI and Goldberg,
alleging violations of Section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934; Rule 10(b)(5); Section 12(2) of the Securities Act
of 1933; Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act
(RICO); Texas Blue Sky Law; Texas Business and Commerce Code and
the Texas Deceptive Trade Practices-Consumer Act.  The defendants
moved to stay proceedings and compel arbitration or dismiss the
action.

     The U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Texas
concluded that the defendants could not compel arbitration, and
the appeals court panel affirmed in a per curiam opinion, which
adopted the trial court's decision.

     In his opinion below, U.S. District Judge William Justice
first noted that the arbitration clause did not mention IAI or
Goldberg by name or function, nor did those parties sign the
document.  Judge Justice rejected the defendants' contention that
they were included as parties to the pact through the use of
"you" (referring to Prudential) in the client's agreement,
because IAI allegedly supplied Taylor with the agreement.

     Second, Judge Justice said that the intent of the parties to
the arbitration agreement was manifest -- to arbitrate claims by
or against the clearing house concerning its handling of Taylor's
account.  In addition, a letter from Prudential, explaining that
it was not Taylor's broker, but his broker's clearing firm, makes
it clear that the defendants were independent from Prudential,
said the judge.

     Third, the defendants cannot rely on agency principles to
support their argument that they are entitled to enforce the
arbitration agreement, said the court.  Unlike the fact
situations in the cases cited by the defendants, here, the
disputed transaction did not involve the liquidation of stock
whereby the clearing house's services were employed, which might
make the clearing house a party to the suit, Judge Justice noted.
No claims in the suit pertain to Prudential's or Taylor's
accounts there, he said, and, hence, there was no contingent
right for the introducing broker to invoke the arbitration
agreement.

     Finally, with respect to the defendants' third-party
beneficiary argument, the defendants are not mentioned in the
arbitration agreement, and no consent to arbitration with
Goldberg or IAI may be implied based solely on the relationship
between the introducing broker and the clearing house, said the
court.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
September 1994

2ND CIR. REVERSES FINDING FOR CARRIER ON PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY

     The Second Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on Aug. 8 by a 2-1
margin overturned a summary judgment for an insurer on the
coverage demands of a lawyer policyholder, finding that the
policy language of the professional liability policy in issue
that disclaims coverage "for the return of or restitution of
legal fees, costs and expenses" is ambiguous with respect to
claims involving fees paid to third parties (McCostis v. Home
Insurance Co. of Indiana, 2nd Cir., No. 93-9283).

               The insured, Richard M. McCostis, was a partner in the firm
of McCostis & Lind and also served as director, secretary and
outside general counsel of Barr Laboratories.  In September 1990,
Barr became a client of the law firm of Winston & Strawn.

     Winston & Strawn subsequently named McCostis and ex-W&S
partner Lawrence Fox to a lawsuit that alleged that the two
attorneys conspired to overbill Barr for upwards of $756,000.  Of
this amount, McCostis allegedly pocketed $335,000 and Fox
received the balance.  W&S' suit against the lawyers was grounded
in RICO, common law fraud and breach of fiduciary duty.  W&S
reimbursed Barr for its loss and received an assignment of rights
as against McCostis and Fox.

     McCostis tendered the claim to his professional liability
carrier, Home Insurance Co. of Indiana.  Home initially assumed
the defense, but disclaimed coverage based on the policy
definition of damages which specifically excluded claims "for the
return of or restitution of legal fees, costs and expenses."

     McCostis lodged a declaratory judgment suit in the Southern
District of New York.  The trial court granted summary judgment
to the carrier, determining that the suit against McCostis was
essentially for the return of legal fees and expenses.

     McCostis argued on appeal that since the complaint alleged
that he only received $335,000, but seeks to recover the full
amount embezzled, Winston & Strawn are seeking some element of
damages as well as the return of the funds.  The insured also
argued that the policy also specifically covers claims for
negligent breach of fiduciary duty.

     In reversing, the Second Circuit found that the policy
language did "not provide a clear answer to the question of
whether the return or restitution of legal fees exclusion would
be applicable for disputes concerning fees paid to third
parties."  The panel wrote that "the use of the words 'return'
and 'restitution' seems to indicate that the exclusion would
pertain only to situations where the insured received the
disputed funds and is forced to repay the monies to the client."

     The panel vacated and remanded with instructions to the
Southern District to consider extrinsic evidence (if any) that
would demonstrate the actual intent of the parties.

     U.S. Circuit Judge George C. Pratt authored the majority
opinion, in which U.S. Circuit Judge John M. Walker Jr. joined.
Senior U.S. District Judge Constance Baker Motley of the Southern
District of New York, sitting by designation, issued a one-line
dissent.

     Michael F. Fitzgerald, New York, argued for the insured.
Evan H. Krinick of Rivkin, Radler & Kremer, Uniondale, NY, argued
for the carrier.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
September 1994

ED MI REJECTS EQUITABLE SUBROGATION IN ATTORNEY MALPRACTICE CASE

     A federal judge in Detroit on July 11 rejected an insurer's
effort to use equitable subrogation to justify a malpractice suit
against attorneys whom the insurer had selected to defend its
policyholder, finding that the insurer had lost all subrogation
rights when its policyholder dismissed the malpractice claim with
prejudice (Preferred Risk Mutual Insurance Company v. Hoiby et
al., No. 93-CV-71397-DT).

     Allstate Car Leasing Corporation was sued in state court
automobile negligence litigation after a 1979 accident.  Allstate
was insured under a $250,000 liability policy issued by plaintiff
Preferred.  Preferred retained the defendant lawyers, Eugene
Hoiby and Robert Kanter, to represent the Allstate.  After two
trials, the case was settled when Preferred paid $1.3 million.

     Before the settlement, Allstate had sued Preferred and the
lawyers, alleging bad faith by the insurer and professional
negligence by the lawyers, including failure of the lawyers to
keep it fully informed, failure to solicit a settlement and
negligently directing the defense of the underlying tort
litigation.  After the $1.3 million settlement was reached, the
owner stipulated to dismissal of its malpractice and bad faith
complaint with prejudice.

     However, Preferred then filed a diversity-based legal
malpractice complaint in the Eastern District of Michigan.  The
lawyers moved for summary judgment.

     Judge George E. Woods granted the defense motion.

     In general, an insurer may use the doctrine of equitable
subrogation -- rather than rely on a direct attorney-client
relationship -- to pursue a malpractice claim against lawyers it
retained for its policyholder, he said.  Because subrogation
gives the insurer only rights owed to the policyholder, defense
counsel's loyalties are not compromised by the equitable
subrogation approach, he said.

     In this case, however, the policyholder already had agreed
to dismiss its own malpractice claim with prejudice, and
Preferred had consented to that dismissal with a purported
reservation of its own rights.  Woods found that purported
reservation of rights to be ineffective, though; Preferred, as a
subrogee, cannot maintain the malpractice claim that its
policyholder already had relinquished.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
September 1994

WD MI: MATERIAL MISREPRESENTATIONS VOID MALPRACTICE POLICY

     Whether a psychologist's purportedly material
misrepresentations in an application and renewal application for
a professional liability policy void the policies ab initio can
be resolved in a federal declaratory judgment action, a judge in
Grand Rapids, MI, has ruled.  A single decision on whether there
is an insurance contract under which the psychologist can demand
defense and indemnification for sexual assault and related claims
will resolve the issue for a number of active and prospective
state tort suits, according to the July 15 decision  (Chicago
Insurance Co. v. Regt et al., WD MI, No. :93-CV-764).

     Chicago Insurance Co. issued malpractice policies to John M.
Regt, Ph.D., for 1991 and 1992.  In 1993, the intervening
codefendants filed state court complaints alleging sexual abuse,
negligence and breach of the policyholder's professional standard
of care.  The policyholder filed for bankruptcy.

     The insurer then filed a diversity-based declaratory
judgment complaint in the Western District of Michigan, alleging
that the misrepresentations made the policies invalid and
unenforceable.  The intervening codefendants in turn filed state
court declaratory judgment complaints against the plaintiff and
another insurer that is not a party to the federal action.

     The intervening codefendants moved for summary judgment or
dismissal of the federal action on the pleadings, citing the
pending state court litigation.

     U.S. Judge Robert Holmes Bell denied the motion, ruling that
a federal judgment would clarify and settle the legal relations
between the insurer and its policyholder and would afford relief
from the uncertainty, insecurity and controversy giving rise to
the proceeding.

     A declaratory judgment would settle the controversy without
requiring any evidence about the policyholder's alleged
professional misconduct and negligence that are at the core of
the state litigation, Bell ruled.  It would apply both to the
pending suits and any future tort actions against the
policyholder, he said.  The judgment also would clarify the
insurer's obligations, the court wrote.

     Judge Bell found no evidence that the insurer had initiated
the declaratory judgment action for procedural fencing or to
provide an arena for res judicata.  Nor would a declaratory
judgment increase friction between state and federal courts
because a decision on coverage would not depend on a factual
record in the underlying tort litigation, he said.

     Although the state court could decide the issue, the issues
in the tort actions are different, he said, and a resolution of
insurance coverage does not depend on or have any legal affect on
a state court declaratory action against another insurer.
Because there is no duplication of factual or legal issues, a
state court would not necessarily present a better or more
effective remedy, he said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-8</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B047-160</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mt23.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033449 text/html 13374
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:32:57 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:36 GMT
Content-length: 13187
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mt23.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
ADA UPDATE via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>HEALTH INSURANCE - AIDS COVERAGE&nbsp;EEOC Settlement: Mason Tenders District Council Welfare Fund</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(265 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>APPLYING FOR EMPLOYMENT&nbsp;Kemer v Johnson, USDC SDNY, 93-Civ, 6965</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(245 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>PARKING FOR DISABLED WORKERS&nbsp;Lyons v Legal Aid Society, CA2, 95-7030</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(294 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>HEALTH INSURANCE GUIDELINES&nbsp;Federal Register, 60 FR 60720</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(66 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>ADA IN DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS&nbsp;Mohamed v Marriott International, DC SDNY, 94 Civ 2336</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(588 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>MODIFYING JOB DUTIES&nbsp;Kuehl v Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., DC Colo 95-S-393</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(237 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ADA UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

HEALTH INSURANCE - AIDS COVERAGE
EEOC Settlement: Mason Tenders District Council Welfare Fund

EEOC has announced that it has negotiated a $1 million settlement
of its complaint against the Mason Tenders District Council
Welfare Fund, a union-administered health insurance plan.

The Fund's plan, which covered more than 10,000 workers and their
families, specifically excluded health insurance coverage for
illnesses related to AIDS and HIV infections.

EEOC had filed claims contending that the exclusion violated the
Americans With Disabilities Act on behalf of a number of union
members who were denied health insurance coverage for AIDS and
HIV-related medical problems.

Mason Tenders had argued that as a self-administered, self-funded
health insurance plan, it was not subject to ADA. Its claims were
rejected by a federal district court, which held that ADA
applied. Rather than litigate the issue further, Mason Tenders
elected to settle the case with EEOC.

In response to Mason Tenders claim that "it had to limit AIDS
benefits because of losses from huge health care bills," EEOC
said that limitations on benefits are permitted where the
employer demonstrates that there were actuarial reasons for
treating classes of employees differently. Here, however, EEOC
attorney James Lee said that Mason Tenders was "paying for every
other high-priced condition" but was excluding AIDS and HIV-
related medical expenses.

EDITOR'S NOTE: In McGann v H&H Music Company, 946 F2d 401, the
U.S. Supreme Court ruled that an employer's self-insured health
plan that limited benefits paid for AIDS and HIV-related medical
expenses did not violate the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. The
application of ADA to  self-insured health plans has yet to be
considered by the high court.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ADA UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

APPLYING FOR EMPLOYMENT
Kemer v Johnson, USDC SDNY, 93-Civ, 6965

Must an employer assist a mentally ill job applicant in filling
out a job application or be in violation of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973? Not if the applicant fails to inform the employer of
his or her disability, according to the federal district court
decision in Kemer v Johnson.

The Court decided that Eric N. Kemer, an applicant for
employment with the General Services Administration (GSA), did
not make a prima facie case that he was "otherwise qualified" for
the position because he failed to complete his application form.
The Court held that "filing an application is an essential
prerequisite for any position [with GSA]."

GSA had told Kemer that his application was incomplete. It had
sent him another employment application form, inviting him to
properly complete it and resubmit it to the agency. The Court
said this constituted a reasonable accommodation.

Kemer represented himself as having a "depressive neurosis and a
schizotypical personality disorder." He contended that GSA should
have accommodated his disability by providing him with assistance
in completing the application form.

The Court noted that people with such mental conditions are
entitled to protection under the Rehabilitation Act. But, the
Court said, "employers are only required to make reasonable
accommodation to the known mental and physical limitations of a
qualified applicant." Kemer never notified GSA of his disability.
Also, Kemer offered no evidence that his disability interfered
with his ability to successfully complete the employment
application form.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ADA UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

PARKING FOR DISABLED WORKERS
Lyons v Legal Aid Society, CA2, 95-7030

An employer may be required to provide a disabled employee with a
parking space as a reasonable accommodation or be in violation of
the Americans With Disabilities Act, according to a ruling by the
U.S. Circuit Court of Appeal, Second Circuit [NY].

Legal Aid Society attorney Beth Lyons charged the Society with
violating ADA when it rejected her request for a paid parking
space. Lyons said that she needed a parking space near her office
because her ability to walk had been seriously impaired by a car
accident. Paying for parking, according to Lyons, cost her about
20% of her salary - approximately $400 a month.

Although a federal district court judge dismissed her claim as
being outside the scope of ADA, the Second Circuit Court of
Appeals reinstated it.

The Court said that "an essential aspect of many jobs is the
ability to appear at work regularly and on time." Accordingly,
providing a parking space may constitute a "reasonable
accommodation" required by ADA under certain circumstances.

In the Circuit Court's view, "there is nothing unreasonable [in
terms of legislative intent] in requiring an employer to furnish
an otherwise qualified disabled employee with assistance related
to her ability to get to work."

In response to the Society's argument that parking and other
forms of "commuting assistance" were not provided to other
employees, the Circuit said that "Congress envisioned that
employer assistance with transportation to get the employee to
and from the job might be covered" and EEOC guidelines
specifically mention "reserved parking spaces" as a reasonable
accommodation.

The Circuit Court remanded the matter to the district court with
the observation that "Legal Aid may be able to develop evidence
prior to trial showing that [Lyons'] request is unreasonable."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ADA UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

HEALTH INSURANCE GUIDELINES
Federal Register, 60 FR 60720

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has announced that it
will publish proposed guidelines concerning the Americans With
Disabilities Act's impact on health insurance. The proposed
guidelines are expected to be issued in September 1996.

EEOC said that the guidelines will "reduce confusion and
uncertainty on the part of insurers, employers and individuals
with disabilities regarding the applicability of the Act to
various health insurance provisions."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
ADA UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

ADA IN DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS
Mohamed v Marriott International, DC SDNY, 94 Civ 2336

The Mohamed decision suggests that a deaf person must be provided
with a sign interpreter at all stages of a disciplinary
investigation or proceeding. In addition,  the decision strongly
implies that ADA's reasonable accommodation mandates requires the
employer to provide a sign interpreter at other meetings that a
deaf worker attends, including meetings involving an evaluation
of his or her work performance.

Ahmed Mohamed, a deaf person, performed maintenance work for
Marriott Marquis Hotel's engineering department. A native of
Egypt, Mohamed  communicated in American Sign Language although
he had a limited ability to read and write English.

Mohamed found a coworkers handbag containing $480. Although
Marriott policy required employees who found money to turn it
over to a guard, Mohamed put the money in his locker.

The loss was discovered and Mohamed was immediately interviewed
by three members of Marriott management concerning the money. One
manager had some minimal training in sign language, but it proved
insufficient for the occasion. After more than an hour the
meeting was terminated. Mohamed was advised that a second meeting
at which an sign interpreter would be present would be scheduled.

At the second meeting, at which the interpreter was present,
Mohamed related the same story that he had earlier attempted to
communicate -- he could not find his supervisor and therefore he
placed the money in his locker. Marriott terminated Mohamed
because he failed to follow Marriott's policy of turning money
found in the hotel to a guard.

Mohamed sued, claiming (1) the absence of an interpreter at the
first meeting violated ADA's requirement that employer's provide
disabled workers with a reasonable accommodation and (2)
disparate treatment in that he was terminated because of his
deafness.

Marriott, on the other hand, argued that regardless of any
disability, Mohamed would have been dismissed because he violated
hotel policy.

The Court rejected Marriott's claim that providing an interpreter
at the second meeting met ADA's reasonable accommodation
requirement on the grounds that the lack of an interpreter at the
first meeting "set a tone of mistrust of Mohamed that inalterably
led to his discharge." This, said the Court, warranted a trial to
determine whether providing an interpreter at the second meeting
was sufficient to satisfy ADA's reasonable accommodation
requirements.

According to the ruling, the need for the accommodation arose not
in the course of the termination per se, but "in the course of a
meeting with an employee to review the disappearance of something
of value."

As to ADA's requirement that employer provide workers with a
reasonable accommodation, the Court said that "the fact that the
meeting eventually led to termination makes it no less an element
of Mohamed's job performance than a staff meeting, a performance
evaluation or a salary review," indicating that a sign
interpreter would be required at those meetings as well.

Nevertheless, the Court, dismissed Mohamed's claim based on
disparate treatment, finding that Marriott's decision to fire him
"did not result from his deafness." On this point the decision
states:

Although Mohamed's discharge may have ... resulted from his
deafness, Marriott's decision to discharge him was not motivated
by his deafness. It is true that a hearing person would not have
found himself in the same predicament as Mohamed. It is not true,
however, that Marriott's decision to fire Mohamed was based on
his deafness. In other words, Marriott's firing Mohamed based on
his actions [handling the money] were not a pretext for
discharging him because he was deaf.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
ADA UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

MODIFYING JOB DUTIES
Kuehl v Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., DC Colo 95-S-393

Vicke Kuehl was employed as a "greeter" by Sam's Wholesale Club,
a Wal-Mart store. According to Wal-Mart, standing was critical to
serving as a greeter.

Kuehl was diagnosed as having chronic tibula tendinitis. While
she was being treated for the condition Wal-Mart reduced her work
hours and allowed her breaks every two hours. When she returned
to work, Kuehl asked to be allowed to sit on a stool while on
duty as a greeter. Wal-Mart refused to allow Kuehl to use a
stool, but offered her the opportunity to work a split-shift or
working as a cashier.

Kuehl sued, contending that Wal-Mart violated ADA by refusing to
accommodate her request to use a stool while working as a
greeter.

A federal district court judge granted Wal-Mart's motion for
summary judgment. The Court ruled that Kuehl's impairment was not
severe enough to constitute a disability since it limited only
her ability to perform one particular job -- door greeter.

However, even if Kuehl was disabled within the meaning of ADA she
would have lost. The Court said that Wal-Mart had shown that
standing was an essential part of a greeter's job and that it had
reasonably accommodated Kuehl by offering her alternative
employment. Further, the Court said that employers are not
required to modify the actual duties of the job in order to make
an accommodation, citing Daugherty v El Paso, 5 EDR 86.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-9</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B047-177</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mt24.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033524 text/html 14034
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:33:26 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:31 GMT
Content-length: 13847
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mt24.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION/EEO PERSONNEL UPDATE via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>RETROACTIVE SENIORITY AS REDRESS&nbsp;Beame v DeLeon, _ NY2d _</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(412 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>SEXUAL ORIENTATION&nbsp;Proposed Employment Non-discrimination Act, S-932; HR-1863</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(302 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>PREGNANCY DISCRIMINATION&nbsp;Quarantino v Tiffany & Company, CA2, 94-9268</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(293 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>HAIR LENGTH POLICY DISCRIMINATORY&nbsp;Rourke v NYS Dept. of Correctional Serv., USDC NDNY 94-CV-0735</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(333 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>FORMER EMPLOYEES AND TITLE VII&nbsp;Robinson v Shell Oil Co., CA4, 93-1562</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(257 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>AGE DISCRIMINATION&nbsp;Fitzpatrick v Town of Huntington, USDC, EDNY, Civ 93-2670</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(128 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION/EEO PERSONNEL UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

RETROACTIVE SENIORITY AS REDRESS
Beame v DeLeon, _ NY2d _

State and municipal human rights agencies have "broad remedial
powers" according to the ruling by New York State's Court of
Appeals in Beame v DeLeon. These powers allow the agency to award
retroactive seniority to persons found to have been victims of
unlawful discrimination, notwithstanding provisions in the
State's Civil Service Law to the contrary.

The case involved the treatment of women in the New York City
Police Department. The New York City Human Rights Commission had
found that the Department had "engaged in a pattern of unlawful
discrimination against women."

Unlawful acts by the Department included (1) establishing
employment quotas that limited the number of women who could be
appointed to less than 2 percent of the police force; (2)
discriminatory layoff policies that resulted in more than half
the women being laid off during a financial crisis in 1976 while
only 10 percent of the male police officers were laid off; (3)
mandatory assignment of women police officers as matrons; and (4)
restricting the number of precincts to which women could be
assigned.
The Human Rights Commission awarded 43 complainants retroactive
seniority for pension and other purposes, together with $533,000
collectively in compensatory damages for mental anguish.
Complaints filed by an additional 38 active and former
policewomen are pending before the Commission.

The Court said that the Legislature had granted broad remedial
powers to state and municipal human rights agencies to counteract
the impact of past discrimination in employment. According, the
Court ruled that "under these circumstances [there is] no doubt
that a resolution which may somewhat subordinate the discretion
of the appointing authority to the complainants' rights to
remediation for the discriminatory practices of that authority is
more consistent with legislative intent."

Upholding the authority of the Division to award retroactive
seniority as redress for unlawful discrimination, the Court
distinguished this remedy from the limitations place on the
Division's directing the appointment of an individual.  The Court
of Appeals referred to its decision in City of Schenectady v
State Div. of Human Rights, 37 NY2d 42l.

In the Schenectady case the Court ruled that allowing the
Division to order the appointment of an otherwise qualified
individual would impinge on the discretion of the statutory
authority appointing authority to make an appointment, citing Section 61
of the Civil Service Law. It found no similar prohibition in the
granting of retroactive seniority equal to the seniority the
individual would have enjoyed but for the discriminatory act.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION/EEO PERSONNEL UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

SEXUAL ORIENTATION
Proposed Employment Non-discrimination Act, S-932; HR-1863

Pending before the 104th  Congress is the Employment Non-
Discrimination Act [Senate 932; House of Representatives 1863].
The bill would prohibit discrimination in the workplace on the
basis of sexual orientation. According to sponsors, The
Employment Non-Discrimination Act of 1995 (ENDA)  is intended to
ensure fair employment practices -- not special rights -- for
lesbians, gay men and bisexuals. According to Sen. Ted Kennedy
(D-Mass.), one of 150 co-sponsors, it is now legal in 42 states
to fire someone based on sexual orientation.

Under ENDA, covered entities cannot subject an individual to
different standards or treatment based on that individual's
sexual orientation, or discriminate against an individual based
on the sexual orientation of those with whom the individual
associates.

EDITOR'S NOTE: The `disparate impact' claim available under Title
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII) is not available
under ENDA. Therefore, an employer is not required to justify a
neutral practice that may have a statistically disparate impact
based on sexual orientation.

ENDA does not apply to employers with fewer than fifteen
employees. It also exempts religious organizations, educational
institutions substantially controlled or supported by religious
organizations, and the military.

ENDA prohibits preferential treatment, including quotas, based on
sexual orientation. It does not require an employer to provide
benefits for the same-sex partner of an employee.

EDITOR'S NOTE: ENDA provides for the same remedies (injunctive
relief and damages) as are permitted under Title
VII and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).

The act applies to Congress, with the same remedies as provided
by the Congressional Accountability Act of 1995. ENDA would not
be retroactive.

For full text of the bill and comments that have appeared in the
Congressional Record, see the affirmative action page on NYPER's
home page. The address is:
http://www.webcom.com/garnet/labor/aa_eeo.html



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION/EEO PERSONNEL UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

PREGNANCY DISCRIMINATION
Quarantino v Tiffany & Company, CA2, 94-9268

Tiffany & Company abolished the position held by Mary C.
Quarantino while she was on maternity leave "as part of a
corporate reorganization." Tiffany offered Quarantino a lower
level position, which she accepted. By accepting the lower level
position, however, Quarantino lost salary, stock options and
retirement credits.

After filing a complaint with EEOC, Quarantino learned that
Tiffany had hired a "non-pregnant, unmarried woman" to perform
what she claims were essentially the same duties that she had
performed in her former position. She sued, claiming that
Tiffany's action constituted unlawful pregnancy discrimination
under Title VII.

Quarantino also alleged that although a superior, Michael Eiring,
advised that "her job would be waiting for her" when she was
ready to return to work, he also told her that "a mother should
stay home with her child." In addition, Quarantino said that she
learned that Tiffany commenced recruiting for the new position
before she left on maternity leave. She also contended that two
other women had experience work problems when they returned from
their maternity leaves.

A District Court judge ruled that Quarantino had not established
a prima facie case of unlawful discrimination and dismissed her
claim. The Circuit Court of Appeals [Second Circuit] reverse. In
reinstating her complaint, the Circuit Court said that a trial
was required because Quarantino raised a number of disputed
issues, such as the question of the "new position" created being
the equivalent of her former position and the selection of a
single woman to fill it.

The Court suggested that if Quarantino could prove such to be the
case, it might constitute evidence of Tiffany's alleged
"discriminatory animus" towards pregnant employees. Presumably
the matter will now be schedule for jury trial before a district
court judge.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION/EEO PERSONNEL UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

HAIR LENGTH POLICY DISCRIMINATORY
Rourke v NYS Dept. of Correctional Serv., USDC NDNY 94-CV-0735

A federal district court judge ruled that the New York State
Department of Correctional Services' refusal to grant a Mohawk
Indian an exemption from its uniform hair length policy
constituted unlawful religious discrimination.

Raymond T. Rourke, a Mohawk Indian, was fired from his position
as a correction officer because he refused to cut his hair to
conform to department rules concerning hair length which required
hair to be not more than one-half inch below the top of their
shirt collar.

Rourke, who was initially appointed as a prison guard in 1989,
stopped cutting his hair in 1991 when he joined the Mohawk's
traditional Longhouse faith. He said that he discontinued the
practice of haircuts as a sign of his spirituality and religious
commitment.

Initially allowed to wear his uncut hair in a ponytail, a new
superior officer directed Rourke to confirm to the Department's
hair length policy. Although women corrections personnel may have
hair of any length and are allowed to "pin it up" during working
hours, Rourke's offer to do this was rejected. Ultimately he was
dismissed for refusing to obey an order to comply with the hair
length policy.

Rourke sued in State Court and won reinstatement. Unemployed for
two years before being reinstated, Rourke sued in federal court
to obtain punitive or compensatory damages for emotional trauma,
a remedy not available in his State action. The federal district
Court, noting that New York State's Appellate Division had
earlier decided that the State failed to demonstrate any
"legitimate state interest that would be advanced" by
accommodating Rourke's request to be exempted from the
Department's hair length policy, found the Department's action
violated Title VII and the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of
1993.

The district court's ruling specifically notes that the Appellate
Division already concluded that "the State had no legitimate
interest ... since the very language of the [policy] provides for
an alternative to wearing hair beyond one-half inch below the
collar for female correction officers...."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION/EEO PERSONNEL UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

FORMER EMPLOYEES AND TITLE VII
Robinson v Shell Oil Co., CA4, 93-1562

The term "employee" in Section 704(a) of Title VII has been held to
include a former employee who files Title VII allegations that he
or she was subjected to unlawful discrimination while an
employee. Section 704(a) also makes it unlawful for an employer to
retaliate against an employee because he or she filed charges
alleging unlawful discrimination or assisted others in filing a
complaint claiming Title VII violations. A former employee,
however, may not be able to bring a Title VII action based on
allegations of retaliatory actions by his or her former employer
in some circumstances.

In Robinson v Shell Oil Co., a U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals
affirmed a district court's dismissal of a Title VII action
charging that Shell Oil had given a former employee a "bad
reference" in retaliation for his filing a Title VII complaint
against Shell. Robinson, claiming that Shell had fired him
because of his race, filed a Title VII complaint. Robinson then
applied for a job with another company while his charges against
Shell were still pending.

Robinson's prospective employer contacted Shell for a reference.
When Robinson didn't get the job he applied for, he filed a
complaint contending that Shell had given him a negative
reference in retaliation for his having filed Title VII charges
against the company.

The Court decided that Title VII's definition of "employee"  does
not include former employees where the charges of alleged
discriminatory actions, including alleged retaliation, involved
events that occurred after the individual stopped working for the
former employer.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION/EEO PERSONNEL UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

AGE DISCRIMINATION
Fitzpatrick v Town of Huntington, USDC, EDNY, Civ 93-2670

Joseph Fitzpatrick sued the Town of Huntington, N.Y. contending
that it had unlawfully discriminated against him because of his
age. Fitzpatrick was initially appointed as a temporary employee
in 1986 at the age of 51. Six years later he was terminated.

Fitzpatrick claimed that 61 temporary workers were permanently
appointed to positions with the Town during the six period during
which he was an employee. Of the 61, 60 were younger than
Fitzpatrick. Fitzpatrick argued that he was denied permanent
appointment simply because of his age.

A jury found the Town had unlawfully discriminated against
Fitzpatrick because of his age. It awarded him $187,500. Because
the jury found that Huntington's violation was willful, the
federal district court judge is permitted to double the award for
damages.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-10</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B047-205</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mt14.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033542 text/html 40662
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:33:47 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:46 GMT
Content-length: 40475
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mt14.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
CORPORATE SECURITY via NewsNet <BR>
April 15, 1994<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>MANAGING THE THREAT&nbsp;OF WORKPLACE VIOLENCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1270 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>THREAT-MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(87 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>WORKPLACE HOMICIDES IN 1992</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(270 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>RISK FACTORS AND WARNING SIGNS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(158 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>INFORMATION NETWORKS FACE MOUNTING HACKER&nbsp;INTRUSION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(644 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>TACO BELL IN HOT SALSA OVER HOLD-UP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(137 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>BODYGUARDS: PERSONAL PROTECTION ON THE RISE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(545 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>CHECKLIST FOR EXECUTIVE TRAVELERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(241 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>CS READERSHIP PROFILE:&nbsp;PROFESSIONAL, INVOLVED, SAVVY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(423 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>QUESTIONS ABOUT EVERYDAY SECURITY PROBLEMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(823 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>CLIPPER CHIP BATTLES STORMY SEAS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(219 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>VOICE AND DATA RECOVERY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(206 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>PERSONAL SECURITY ALERT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(141 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>PROTECT YOUR FAXES, ETC.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(133 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>NEW LOCK DESIGN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(84 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
CORPORATE SECURITY via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

MANAGING THE THREAT
OF WORKPLACE VIOLENCE

Preventing workplace violence is a critical security function, but
all too often management finds itself scrambling to contain the
damage from workplace incidents, rather than preventing them
before they start.

Workplace violence rarely springs out of nowhere. Nearly all
employer-directed cases of violence begin with a verbal or
physical threat--threats that a well-structured "threat-
management" policy should be able to avert.

Start by putting together a multidisciplinary threat-management
team, says Dennis Johnson, president of Behavior Analysts &
Consultants, Inc., of Stuart, Fla., which conducts corporate
training on managing workplace violence. "Include people who
are trained in workplace violence issues and know the dynamics
of threat management and intervention." A representative team
could include professionals from the security, safety, human
resources, legal, labor relations and medical functions.

The team may also include outside psychologists, consultants,
facilities specialists, or public relations and employee assistance
professionals. This group is responsible for assessing and
managing workplace threats and developing general policy and
procedures.

Most threat-management teams will want to appoint a group
leader, preferably someone with a history of dealing with threats
and security vulnerability. Often the group leader is the security
manager or a human resource expert, says Johnson, coauthor of
Breaking Point: The Workplace Violence Epidemic and What to
Do About It (National Safe Workplace Institute).

Threat management involves two types of assessments--a needs
assessment and a behavioral assessment. The team must be
prepared to evaluate and manage security threats for both. The
needs assessment includes a survey of all physical facilities,
security systems, access authorization programs and any existing
policies relating to security issues.

"You want to assess security vulnerability in terms of the
corporate assets you're looking to protect, past security incidents
and the prevailing environment and social conditions in your
particular industry and community," says Johnson.

For example, "an industry in a high-crime area with lots of
neighborhood violence will affect the attitudes of your workers,"
Johnson says. "Given your labor pool, some employees may
believe that violence is a legitimate form of expressing workplace
frustration."

Significant downsizing also increases your vulnerability. In a
study of 125 workplace homicides, Johnson's firm found that half
of the perpetrators had recently been laid off or terminated in a
downsizing effort.

"Because the lives of so many people--especially men--are
grounded in their jobs, the possibility of losing that anchor in an
economy in which replacement jobs are scarce creates
unbearable stress. That stress may manifest itself in violent
behavior," Johnson says.

Once the critical risk factors are identified, the team should
establish links with outside support functions, such as hospitals,
law enforcement and EAP counselors.

Basically, the needs assessment helps you determine the
readiness of key players to react effectively to specific situations.
For example, asks Johnson "If your beeper goes off, and you
learn that there's a single male perpetrator with multiple
handguns holding your office manager hostage, are you prepared
to handle it? Do you have a plan in place?"

BEHAVIORAL ASSESSMENT

The behavioral assessment looks at actual incidents or scenarios
of threatening behavior and at the perpetrators themselves. It
evaluates the potential "triggers" that could turn a manageable
threat into violent aggression.

At this stage, the threat-management team  should determine
the circumstances of an incident; whether previous incidents
have occurred; whether the action reflects a pattern; and
whether the person has incurred particular stresses recently
(such as a divorce, a layoff, a death in the family).

"Whenever a person engages in violent behavior, he or she has
chosen aggression over other alternatives," Johnson notes. To
understand what led to that choice, the violence should be
considered in terms of the contributing factors.

In framing the specific threat-management policy, the group
must determine the extent to which supervisors and employees
will receive training in such areas as conflict resolution, stress
management, employee counseling, dealing with difficult people,
etc.

"Many companies believe that controlling workplace violence is
everyone's responsibility and thus choose to extend awareness
training to all employees," Johnson says.

Johnson suggests combining threat management with other
policies, such as Fitness for Duty or Drug-Free Workplace
statements. Johnson favors a catchall "Fair Treatment for
Others" policy, because it can address the importance of
respecting differences in religious, philosophical or personal
beliefs--any of which may trigger aggression.

Without exception, every policy must clearly establish a zero
tolerance for threatening behaviors, and Johnson emphasizes
that it be conveyed in both writing and in practice. "It doesn't
matter if it's a verbalized threat, an emotional outburst,
unwanted romantic overtures or physical intimidation. Any
conduct that has the potential to harm or interfere with the
actions of others should be investigated."

Why? Because beyond an actual threat is the perception of what
the company considers threatening. If employees witness and
report threatening behavior, but management takes no action to
stop it, "people may start to think that grabbing or harassing is a
legitimate form of conflict resolution."

Many times there is no real danger--men often slap each other
on the back, for example, but if a male employee who's had a
hard day shoves a female co-worker, or blows up at her in the
parking lot, it may be another story. Perhaps the two know each
other and the particular situation is harmless.

Still, Johnson encourages talking to all individuals involved in a
reported incident, including any third-party witnesses, "so that
employees realize what is and is not appropriate workplace
behavior."

The threat-management plan should spell out who  receives
reports of threatening behavior (often this is the direct
supervisor or the security manager) and how those reports are
delivered--in person, in writing, via a phone call to a outside
hotline, etc. "The method for handling complaints varies among
companies, depending on the corporate culture," says Johnson.

The plan should also outline procedures for recognizing
potentially threatening behavior. Red flags include chronic
absenteeism, erratic work patterns, difficulty meeting deadlines,
notable changes in personal appearance or conduct, unwarranted
anger or irritability and difficulty accepting criticism. The
frequency, duration and effect of the behavioral change may all
affect the perception of its seriousness. Nonetheless, all
questionable behaviors warrant close monitoring.

If, upon evaluation, you decide that action is required, many
companies will bring in an independent, unbiased consultant to
conduct a "dangerousness assessment," says Johnson. That
process monitors warning signs and can pinpoint whether there
is a clear and immediate threat to identifiable targets.

ATTITUDE SURVEYS

Attitude surveys are a relatively benign way to gauge employees'
perceptions of the organization. "They're a kind of 'early-warning
system' that reveals trends and changes in the mood and
behavior of employees," Johnson says. Surveys involve one-on-
one, confidential interviews ("usually 20- to 40-minutes") with
randomly selected employees. Some employees are also asked to
fill out confidential questionnaires.

"Attitude surveys help us tap into attitudes and show what
barriers or constraints exist in the workplace. They help identify
strengths and weaknesses, and we often can find out if there are
any illegal or unprofessional practices, as well as general security
vulnerabilities."

Johnson claims that in more than a decade of working with
threat-management programs, his firm has never yet conducted
an attitude survey that did not lead to substantive change. He
encourages companies to share feedback from the surveys with
employees, who often can help solve internal problems and
analyze what might be done to achieve a safer work
environment.

 The goal, Johnson says, is to generate two-way communication
and to help people learn to recognize and deal with signs of
trouble before they escalate out of control.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
CORPORATE SECURITY via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

THREAT-MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES

Behavior Analysts & Consultants, Inc., lists the following key
responsibilities for a threat-management team:
  *  Assessing security vulnerability of past incidents and the
particular industry and community;
  *  Assessing the company's readiness to deal with workplace
violence;
  *  Familiarizing the team on threat management dynamics;
  *  Developing liaisons with outside resources (e.g., law
enforcement and hospitals);
  *  Educating supervisors and employees on workplace violence;
  *  Developing a system to assess and manage threats;
  *  Investigating reported threats;
  *  Communicating and intervening with reporting individuals.
  *  Determining preventative responses;
  *  Documenting decisions and rationale for actions.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
CORPORATE SECURITY via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

WORKPLACE HOMICIDES IN 1992

A new analysis of deaths in the workplace finds homicide
accounts for close to one in five of all on-the-job fatalities.
Based on the 1992 nationwide Census of Fatal Occupational
Injuries, the analysis by Janice Windau and Guy Toscano of the
Office of Safety, Health and Working Conditions at the Bureau
of Labor Statistics found:
  *  Homicide accounted for 17
percent of the 6,083 fatal work injuries in 1992. More than half
the victims were 25 to 34 years old.
  *  Male workers comprised 83 percent of the 1,004 victims of
homicide. For men, homicide ranked just behind motor vehicle
accidents in the number of work-related fatalities. For women,
homicide was the leading cause of death.
  *  Most homicides resulted from gunshot wounds during a
robbery attempt between 7 p.m. and 2 a.m. Robberies often
occurred while  employees were locking up at night or making
money drops or pickups.
  *  Business disputes accounted for 261 deaths, 45 of which
involved a current or former co-worker, and 35 of which
involved a customer or client.
  *  Workplace homicide is primarily an urban problem, with
nearly half of the incidents occurring in the retail trade.
Convenience stores, restaurants, bars and gas stations were
hardest hit. One-sixth of the homicides occurred in service
industries, including guard and armored-car services, hotels and
motels, and health and educational services. Taxicab companies
and police protection also were  affected.
  *  Occupations incurring 50 or more homicides in 1992
included supervisors and sales proprietors, taxicab drivers and
chauffeurs, cashiers, managers of food and lodging
establishments, food preparation and service occupations, police
and detectives, and private guards.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
CORPORATE SECURITY via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

RISK FACTORS AND WARNING SIGNS

A person who is at risk for workplace violence will often display
some of these characteristic behaviors:
  *  Accepts authority and criticism with difficulty;
  *  Holds grudges, especially against supervisors;
  *  Sabotages company property and/or equipment;
  *  States desire to harm co-workers or managers;
  *  Makes unwanted romantic/sexual overtures;
  *  Engages in physical/verbal intimidation (e.g.,
stalking, anonymous phone calls);
  *  Displays progressively worsening conduct;
  *  Is argumentative or uncooperative;
  *  Has a history of interpersonal conflict;
  *  Has been fired or laid off--or expects to be soon;
  *  Comes from an unstable or dysfunctional family;
  *  Displays decreased social connectedness;
  *  Expresses extremist opinions or attitudes (e.g.,
     religious or political);
  *  Seems intrigued by previous acts of workplace violence;
  *  Asked for help in past but did not receive it;
  *  Exhibits paranoid behavior;
  *  Has difficulty controlling temper;
  *  Bears a sense of entitlement;
  *  Seems emotionally injured;
  *  Has a preoccupation with weapons;
  *  Brings weapon(s) to work and may display  for effect.
Source: Behavior Analysts & Consultants, Inc.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
CORPORATE SECURITY via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

INFORMATION NETWORKS FACE MOUNTING HACKER
INTRUSION

Few corporate communications networks are safe from
electronic intrusion. Hackers who once engaged in mere high-
tech mischief are now probing new digital communications
technologies for flaws that may yield big financial gains.

However, private network operators and telecommunications
companies can take steps to close security loopholes, according
to network security experts speaking  at the International Virus
Prevention and Information Security Conference, sponsored by
the National Computer Security Association in Arlington, Va.,
March 31.

Ted S. Phillips, a telecommunications security associate at Booz,
Allen & Hamilton Inc., believes domestic and international
telecommunications companies and long-distance carrier
networks are increasingly at risk for computer crimes. Open-
systems architecture such as Signalling System 7 and advanced
intelligent network technology are also vulnerable. In the new
systems, carriers and users share responsibility for
administration, network elements interconnect, and customer-
premises equipment ties more closely to the public switched
network, all of which heighten network vulnerability.

To an intruder, multiple points of entry into telecommunications
networks "raises the number of attack vectors," Phillips says.
"Hackers can easily enter a company's system via an X.25
network or a dial-in modem."

Once inside the system, hackers can disrupt network service and
obtain or modify data. In extreme cases, they have been known
to steal communications equipment and software manuals from
company premises and use confidential data for extortion or
fraud. However they compromise a system, hackers cause
companies to lose revenue and investor confidence, and may
even threaten public security by tampering with emergency
services communications. Yet hackers rarely destroy the systems
they have entered. They "want to keep systems up and running,"
Phillips says, so they can continue to grab information and
remain inconspicuous.

SMOOTH OPERATORS GLEAN VALUABLE PASSWORDS

Phillips notes that hackers often obtain their best information by
"social engineering"--basically, smooth talking office personnel
into releasing passwords and access codes. "This is a real threat"
to security systems, he says, but there are ways of protecting
systems.

"Keep control of internal 'phone books' that list passwords,"
Phillips advises. "Shred documents that contain access codes.
Train secretaries to question people who walk in the door asking
for information. And put locks on your dumpsters." Believe it or
not, trash bins are prime targets for hackers seeking manuals
and documents that contain sensitive information.

Also speaking at the conference, Hank M. Kluepfel, managing
director for government accounts at Bellcore, encouraged system
users to discard easily discernible passwords based on common
names and to use combinations of alpha and numeric characters
instead.

For example, a user named Mary Elizabeth could use the
corresponding numbers on touch-tone telephone keys for the
name "Beth," plus the letter J for the month of her birthdate-
-2384J--or the corresponding letters for her house address, plus
the number 2 for her two children, for example.

Companies can further minimize the risk of intrusion by creating
security guidelines and responsible safeguards for staff. "Let your
employees know what is expected of them and how the system
works," Kluepfel says. He adds that many companies keep their
employees in the dark about security for fear that a disgruntled
but knowledgeable employee will wreak havoc on the system. Or,
they fail to penalize employees who ignore simple guidelines.
Kluepfel also urged companies and telecommunications
providers to exchange information on hackers and their tactics.

Companies should also demand better security from equipment
vendors. "Let vendors know what you expect," Kluepfel says.
Customer input will force equipment vendors to put security
concerns into the product development stage, and will help
companies avoid the time and often damaging expense of
implementing such mechanisms retroactively.

When operating a network, Kluepfel advises companies to "think
like a hacker" by noting the most secure and the most vulnerable
locations in a system, as well as the most valuable information,
which is most likely to be stolen if not protected.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
CORPORATE SECURITY via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

TACO BELL IN HOT SALSA OVER HOLD-UP

After Claudia Piagentini was fired for refusing to report for her
night shift after a robber held a gun to her head at a Northern
California franchise, she sued Taco Bell for failing to provide a
safe workplace.

The woman's suit contends that her boss agreed she could come
off the night shift and work days for one month after the
midnight robbery in March of 1993. But management changed
its mind  later and told her to report as usual.

Piagentini said she couldn't comply, as she was still too shaken
up from the trauma of looking down a gun barrel. She was fired
for her willful misconduct. The suit asks that the franchise
owner, Dolan Foster Enterprise, Inc., be ordered to pay
Piagentini's lost wages and an unspecified amount for failing to
provide a safe workplace.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
CORPORATE SECURITY via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

BODYGUARDS: PERSONAL PROTECTION ON THE RISE

Being a bodyguard means expecting the unexpected, whether it's
protecting business executives and political figures, or ushering
movie stars and sports heros through swarming paparazzi. Job
duties may include hovering nearby through interminable
meetings, elbowing paths through bustling airports, attending
high-profile parties, stoically keeping watch through long nights
without sleeping, chauffering protectees around town, even
running errands that ought to fall under someone else's job
description, but don't. It's a job that offers some excitement--and
a lot of boredom.

Large cities naturally have the greatest call for bodyguards--New
York City, Los Angeles and Washington, followed by Chicago,
tend to require the most, says Richard Ward, a former New
York City detective, now a chancellor at the University of
Illinois at Chicago. "You've got sports figures, entertainment
people, organized crime figures who require [protection], and
business people with money who feel they need someone around
them."

Ed Scheu of Thompson Professional Services in Chicago,
recently guarded an executive whose company had laid off
several hundred employees. "He was the No. 2 man with the
company. He had gotten multiple threats, letters, phone calls to
his house," recalls Scheu. "One of them said to his wife, 'We're
going to get that [expletive] you're married to.'"

With workplace violence rising, so will the perceived need for
bodyguards, predicts Scheu. Where does one go to find a
bodyguard? Word of mouth, the Yellow Pages and newspapers
are good places to start. Many companies that sell or
manufacture security alarms, such as ADT or Honeywell, can
also recommend protection services. However, "most CEOs and
corporate presidents have a known network they can call on for
protection," says Scheu. "A lot of paranoia prevails in these
upper echelons; once one has been threatened, he lets the others
know and it heightens the paranoia."

Bodyguards come from all walks of life: former FBI or Secret
Service agents, ex-Marines, retired or moonlighting police
officers, private investigators, corporate security guards, etc.
Most are men, but increasing numbers of women are getting into
the field.

Fortunately, you need not look like Shawn Eckardt to be a
bodyguard. In fact, brains are far more desirable than brawn
(testimony to Eckardt's flub-up in "protecting" Tonya Harding).
"The most effective bodyguard is someone who's low-key,
unobstrusive and meshes with the environment," says Branch
Walton, a 21-year veteran of the Secret Service in Springfield,
Ill.

And pay? "A mug off the street will probably make from $20,000
to $30,000 a year," says Ward. "Generally, a professional is going
to make between $50,000 and $100,000."

Becoming a bodyguard requires no formal training, but would-be
protectors can pick up training tips--such as how to placate
aggressive autograph seekers or fend off would-be knee
knockers--at police departments or schools like the Executive
Protection Institute, headquartered in Berryville, Va. EPI has
branches nationwide and offers a variety of classes, including
criminal education and law enforcement litigation.

Some universities, such as the University of Illinois at Chicago,
are starting to offer short courses on personal protection and
physical security. Ward recently asked Scheu to conduct a two-
day course on security issues for Chicago-area law enforcement
personnel.

"Basically," however, Ward notes, "anyone can hang out their
shingle and say they're a bodyguard."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
CORPORATE SECURITY via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

CHECKLIST FOR EXECUTIVE TRAVELERS

For executives working or traveling abroad, heeding practical
safety hints could help you avoid injury, or even save your life.
Kimberly Heine, security officer for York College of
Pennsylvania and a certified protection officer, offers these tips.

CAR TRAVEL

  *  Avoid dangerous areas of the city.
  *  Never travel on abandoned roads.
  *  Keep the gas level above half a tank.
  *  Check the back seat and floor of the car for anything
suspicious before getting into it.
  *  Lock car doors and keep windows rolled up at all times.
  *  Familiarize yourself with routes to and from work.
  * Trade vehicles with friends or associates occasionally.
  *  Equip a car with a cellular phone or other form of
communications system.
  *  Don't drive  flashy cars that may attract attention.
  *  Try not to park on the street overnight.
  *  Be aware of anyone driving closely behind you or following the
same route.

PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION

  *  Travel in pairs when taking taxis.
  *  Vary your method of transportation.
  *  Always have correct change with you; don't carry big bills or
credit cards.
  *  Avoid wearing expensive-looking clothes or jewelry.
  * Observe the goings on around you, yet keep a low profile.

HOTELS

  *  Lock and chain the door at all times.
  *  Use  the "Do Not Disturb" sign while you're in the room.
  *  Tell the hotel management not to release any information
about you.
  *  Be suspicious of unusual calls.
  *  Leave the radio or TV on when you're out in the evenings.
  *  Never leave valuable  information in the room.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
CORPORATE SECURITY via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

CS READERSHIP PROFILE:
PROFESSIONAL, INVOLVED, SAVVY

Responses to our recent survey of Corporate Security subscribers
confirmed our longstanding impressions: Our readers are highly
motivated professionals with a strong interest both in staying
abreast of the latest developments affecting the security function,
as well learning how their colleagues are meeting the challenge
of delivering security services in a time of tight budgets and
heavy workloads. Here are some highlights of your responses:

  *  The top areas of interest are protecting staff from violence
(either from other employees or outside persons), controlling
access to facilities, electronic monitoring issues, security/guard
personnel concerns, and protecting
computer/data/telecommunications. Conversely, "soft" security
subjects such as drug and psychological testing evoke less
interest.

  *  CS readers are well-wired. The large majority have
telecommunications modems, and most use computers with Intel
chips (DOS and Windows). Nearly two in five are interested in
accessing Corporate Security information electronically, either
online or by diskette.

  *  CS readers work at firms ranging from amusement theme
parks to vehicle manufacturing. Common job titles include
Director of Security (or Security Director), Crime Prevention
Officer, Vice President-Loss Prevention, and Corporate Security
Manager--plus a sprinkling of CEOs and Executive Vice
Presidents. Virtually all our readers are members of one or more
professional security trade associations.

Finally, please note that as of this issue our editorial offices have
moved from New York to Washington, and CS has a new editor,
Susan Sonnesyn Brooks. If we're on your mailing list, please
note our new address on page 1, and remember that Corporate
Security is your publication--we're anxious to receive your input
on how well we're meeting your needs, as well as issues you'd
like to read more about, new products and services from your
firm, and anything else you think your colleagues might like to
know about.

INSURANCE FRAUD CONFERENCE

The American Services Group will present its annual conference
looking at the latest developments in fraud control and
prosecution, sharing expertise in planning and establishing fraud
control programs, and expanding resources for investigations.
May 8-11, Baltimore, Md., $495. Call Susan Black, Property
Claims Services, 212/669-0406.

TECHNIQUES OF RISK CONTROL COURSE

This timely course surveys risk and loss-control techniques and
their relationship to today's business environment. Important
discussion topics include the relationship of risk management to
loss control; safety motivation strategies; methods for evaluating
loss-control programs; cost allocations;
employment/management communication; and returns on
investment. The course also discusses current federal
government regulations. June 6-8, Atlanta, Ga., $800. Contact
Fran Jordan, Risk and Insurance Management Society Inc.,
212/286-9292.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
CORPORATE SECURITY via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

QUESTIONS ABOUT EVERYDAY SECURITY PROBLEMS

Q:  Can old electronic communications can be used against us?
My bank terminated an employee for stealing money, but she
claims she found a year-old e-mail message that defames her
character and reads "Get rid of her." Are we required to let
investigators search our computer disks and backup tapes?
A:  Yes, if you are sued or formally charged with criminal
violations, a court order can force you to open your electronic
files. Your former employee has a tough case to prove, but
"attorneys are starting to aggressively target electronic data," says
John Jessen, of Electronic Evidence Discovery, a Seattle
investigation firm.

Electronic mail should not be considered a secure medium for
sharing sensitive data about company plans and actions. Jessen
has worked on cases in which investigators recovered supposedly
deleted e-mail messages that used descriptive expletives to attack
employees' personalities instead of their work performance. In
one instance, the plaintiff settled out of court for $250,000.

In 1993, a San Francisco federal district court ruled that
companies under criminal investigation should readily provide all
company-related electronic files to prosecutors. Not turning over
files at once could be an offense itself.

Advice:  Tell employees what communications can be used
against them in court. Back up and label data carefully. And,
don't send anything via e-mail that you wouldn't broadcast over
a loudspeaker.

Q:  One of our employees has received anonymous e-mail
messages that are racist and hostile. His boss also has received
messages that criticize his managerial skills and question his
competency. Trouble is, we don't know who's sending the
messages. What can we do?

A:  Most electronic messaging software requires sender
identification, but a few products do allow anonymity. One
rationale for the new software is that unidentified messages may
promote interoffice discussion of formerly taboo topics. An
aerospace manufacturer claims it's done wonders for getting his
employees to brainstorm ideas. But the flip side is the problem
you describe.

One solution is to pull the plug on your global e-mail system and
rewrite your network software to enable tracking of all
communications. Further, at least one Fortune 1,000 company
now has a policy forbidding unidentified harassment and hostile
criticism.

Another solution is to follow the lead of Internet, the world's
most popular network for sharing electronic intimacies and
whistle-blower communiques. Internet requires a "return
address" on all messages. However, it also allows users to send
messages to a "remailer"-- a message "launderer" that strips out
the original headers and inserts its own. Perhaps an electronic
middleman is the answer.

Q:  Must offensive conduct seriously affect an employee's
psychological well-being or cause actual injury in order to be
unlawfully discriminatory? And, if so, how do we measure such
injuries?

A:  A unanimous U.S. Supreme Court ruled late last year in
Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc. that Title VII provisions come
into play long before offensive conduct leads a person to a
nervous breakdown or other serious malady. But determining the
scope of injury is less than clear. An obnoxious or insensitive
comment may give one person an annoying headache, while
sending another running to a psychiatrist for Valium. Which
victim has the stronger case?

The Court ruled that if a "reasonable person" could perceive a
work environment to be hostile or abusive, that person does not
also have to prove the conduct was psychologically harmful.
"Injurious" conduct may include attacks based on gender, race,
color, religion or national origin and, most likely, disability and
age.

Other factors that may be considered are the frequency of the
conduct, its severity, whether it is physically threatening or
humiliating, whether it unreasonably interferes with the victim's
work, and whether it affects the victim's psychological well-being.

In light of the ruling, employers should investigate all complaints
of inappropriate conduct and may want to broaden their
harassment policies.

Q:  Our top car salesman sexually assaulted a customer while on
a test drive. He was recently convicted on criminal charges, but
the company has now been sued for negligence in hiring. The
customer claims we failed to do a pre-employment criminal
investigation, which would have shown the salesman was an
offender. Are we liable?

A:  Some courts have ruled that employers can be held liable for
an employee's actions if the company had any indication "by
reason of past conduct, bad temper or otherwise" that the person
was potentially dangerous.

However, while "a presumption exists that an employer has used
due care in hiring," most courts say that unless compelling
evidence indicates a criminal investigation is appropriate,
employers have no legal obligation to conduct such background
checks.

A North Carolina Court of Appeals dismissed a similar case,
ruling that companies cannot be held responsible for an
employee's actions that occur beyond the scope of employment
or are "designed to carry out an independent purpose." In your
case, the salesman's conducted clearly violated the bounds of his
duties and the company's expectations.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
CORPORATE SECURITY via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

CLIPPER CHIP BATTLES STORMY SEAS

The Clinton administration's decision to approve the
controversial Clipper encryption device continues to make waves.
Clipper is a computer chip that makes telephone traffic
indecipherable to eavesdroppers, but allows the government a
"trap door" so that investigators can access decrypted Clipper
calls.

During a public comment period, the administration received
331 letters and comments; all but two criticized the technology.
Last month a poll conducted for Time Inc. and CNN found that
80 percent of the 1,000 respondents oppose Clipper and would
rather protect the privacy of phone calls than allow police to tap
wires.

The FBI insists that the optional system grants authorities access
"only when there's probable cause that there's criminal activity"
taking place on scrambled lines.

Yet at least 45,000 opponents have signed an electronic petition
against the new policy, saying they worry more about
unscrupulous public servants than they do about "bad guys"
trying to eavesdrop and/or steal data.

At one point during the recent Computers, Freedom and Privacy
Conference in Chicago, keynote speaker David A. Lytel, a White
House technology expert, looked around in exasperation and
asked, "How many people here fear they are at greater risk from
government abuses of power than criminal activity?" Most in
attendance raised their hands.

A  House-Senate panel plans hearings on the technology later
this month.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
CORPORATE SECURITY via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

VOICE AND DATA RECOVERY

IBM Corp. and AT&T's Global Information Solutions recently
agreed to market a joint disaster recovery service for voice and
data communications. In the event of a power outage, bomb
threat, fire, severed cables or other disaster, the companies will
support each other's disaster recovery customers.

"This agreement allows us to combine AT&T's expertise in data
and voice communications with IBM's disaster recovery expertise
in the computer environment," says Bob Richards, general
manager of AT&T's business recovery group. The joint venture
will provide an "efficient and economical way to offer complete
disaster recovery services."

Both companies will have 24-hour access to the other's business
recovery centers. IBM has 17 U.S. recovery sites offering
equipment, advanced telecommunications support and specialists
in networking, systems management and programming.

AT&T currently has a single crisis center in Rochelle Park, N.J.,
the first of several sites planned. In the event of disaster,
metropolitan New York City customers can relocate their
employees and critical business functions to the facility within
two to four hours, where they're provided 200 computer-ready
workstations, desks and phones.

The service allows for fully restored voice and data
communications, round-the-clock access to stored records, plus
vault storage for secure, off-site data storage.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
CORPORATE SECURITY via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

PERSONAL SECURITY ALERT

Safe & Sound Homecare Inc. of  Lincoln, Neb. has developed a
wireless, portable security sensor that can quietly warn a security
manager of a remote perimeter violation. The system consists of
a cordless motion detector that fits any door jam, a plug-in
transmitter /recharger and a small personal pager that beeps or
vibrates when activated and conveniently clips to a belt or fits in
a pocket.

The sensor trips a remote alarm, so the security violator is not
alerted, and the appearance of security personnel seems
coincidental. The portable system can be moved within a facility
as needed. The base unit plugs into any standard electrical outlet
and installs in  minutes. Originally designed for keeping track of
small children or the elderly, the system has practical business
purposes as well. $1,995 per unit. For more information, call
800/328-0526.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
CORPORATE SECURITY via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

PROTECT YOUR FAXES, ETC.

As the need to scramble and encrypt phone and fax messages
increases, so does the security risk  of computer modems. Given
the ease with which a line's integrity can be compromised, all
data transmitting over that line represents a possible loss.

Discreet Electronics and Security Inc. of Chicago has developed
an encryption device that involves installing a small box on the
sender's and  the receiver's line ( phone, fax or modem).

The user "signs in" to establish a link with the receiver. When
activated, the device randomly generates encryption codes that
change every 1/10th of a second. Vault security is also available
to ensure specific parties receive private messages. Depending
on the level of security and the type of communication system,
prices range from $2,000-$4,000 per package. Contact Michael
Pinsker, 312/664-7797.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
CORPORATE SECURITY via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

NEW LOCK DESIGN

Schlage Lock Co. has introduced an interchangeable core option
to its S-Series Jupiter and Neptune keyed lever designs. The
addition allows lock cylinders to be replaced without having to
remove the entire lever from the door, thereby increasing the
speed and ease of changing a keying system.

The new designs comply with the Americans with Disabilities
Act and come in bright brass, satin brass/blackened, satin
bronze, oil-rubbed bronze and bright or satin chromium plated.
For more information, call 415/391-4744.q




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-11</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B047-226</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mt03.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033604 text/html 38824
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:34:03 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:46 GMT
Content-length: 38637
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mt03.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
May 20, 1992<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>ONDCP PRESSURES HHS&nbsp;FOR INTERPRETATION OF LAB RULE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1051 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>TWO GROUPS REACH PACT FOR&nbsp;STANDARD MRO CERTIFICATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(451 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>DOT WEIGHS ZERO TOLERANCE&nbsp;POLICY ON ALCOHOL TESTING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(690 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>ROADSIDE TESTING PROJECT&nbsp;COULD BE AHEAD OF SCHEDULE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(357 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>OMB APPROVES STANDARD&nbsp;CHAIN-OF-CUSTODY FORM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(379 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>NIDA ALLOWS MRO'S TO REQUEST&nbsp;CODEINE LEVEL BELOW CUTOFF</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(648 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>ONE IN FOUR LAW AGENCIES&nbsp;TESTED APPLICANTS IN 1990</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(399 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Congressional conferees approved legislation May 12 that</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(131 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>Workplace drug testing is an important tool in drug</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(96 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>The American Association for Clinical Chemistry will hold</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(118 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>The Drug Enforcement Administration has placed</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(59 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>*COURT DECISIONS*</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>LAST-CHANCE AGREEMENT CITED&nbsp;IN DENIAL OF WORKER'S BENEFITS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(431 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>COURT UPHOLDS DRUG TEST&nbsp;OF GUARD WITHOUT POLICY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(445 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

ONDCP PRESSURES HHS
FOR INTERPRETATION OF LAB RULE

The Office of National Drug Control Policy has called on
the Department of Health and Human Services for a quick
resolution to the controversy over the potential
regulation of private sector drug testing in the
department's new clinical laboratory rule, DRUG DETECTION
REPORT has learned.

The request came outside of the formal comment process on
HHS's final rule implementing the Clinical Laboratory
Improvement Amendments of 1988 (CLIA) and was meant to
draw HHS Secretary Louis Sullivan into the dispute over
CLIA's application to drug testing, according to a
federal official familiar with the letter.

The letter made no demands on HHS about how to apply the
CLIA rule but asked for "an expedited legal
interpretation" of its application to drug testing, said
the official, who asked not to be identified. ONDCP
Director Bob Martinez is not involved in the CLIA issue
at this point but could enter the fray once ONDCP
receives an answer from HHS, the official said.

Mr. Martinez' involvement would not be necessary if HHS
decides not to apply CLIA to private sector drug testing,
but HHS officials maintain that, as of now, such testing
is covered by the rule. CLIA requires that all labs
conducting clinical tests "for the assessment of health"
be certified by HHS. Based on a number of comments so far
made public, there is a widespread belief that
application of CLIA to private sector drug testing could
inhibit on-site testing and result in higher costs to
employers.

The ONDCP letter was written by Bruce M. Carnes, ONDCP's
director of planning, budget, and administration, to Mark
Barnes, Sullivan's special counsel on drug abuse policy.
Through a spokesman, Mr. Carnes declined to release the
text of the letter or to comment on its contents. Mr.
Barnes also declined to comment directly on the letter,
but acknowledged that ONDCP had "communicated to us
within the normal process of interagency communications"
about CLIA.

However, Barnes indicated that HHS is unlikely to
expedite a resolution of the drug testing question,
saying that the department will publish a "final final
rule" by Sept. 1, the date CLIA is to take effect.
Another HHS official confirmed the Sept. 1 target date
for resolution of the drug testing issue and indicated
that officials and agencies within HHS are not in
agreement on whether and to what extent CLIA should
regulate drug testing.

One potential resolution under consideration, according
to officials within HHS, would be to redefine private
sector drug testing as "forensic" in nature. As published
Feb. 28, the CLIA rule exempts from coverage forensic
testing, defined as tests conducted to determine the
subject's legal status rather than health condition.
However, drug testing advocates and regulators, including
the National Institute on Drug Abuse, routinely refer to
all drug testing as forensic. Adopting the broader
definition could be a relatively easy way to settle the
question.

Any change in the department's current interpretation of
CLIA will most likely be published in the Federal
Register, HHS officials said. However, one official
refused to rule out the possibility that the rule could
be reinterpreted without a formal published notice.

In addition to the letter from Carnes, ONDCP submitted
formal comments on CLIA to the Health Care Financing
Administration (HCFA), the HHS agency implementing the
rule. In the comments, Frank M. Kalder, director of the
budget and legislative review staff, chided HHS for not
consulting ONDCP about CLIA's potential application to
drug testing and warned that the rule could adversely
affect drug treatment programs and small employers.

"It appears that under the CLIA interpretation of
permissible drug testing, alcohol and drug treatment
facilities would be prohibited from conducting routine
on-site drug testing to monitor patient drug use," Mr.
Kalder wrote. "In addition, we also are concerned that
these rules will make the process very complex and
expensive, and thus, may cause many employers to
discontinue their drug testing programs."

Kalder asked HCFA to explain why an exemption of
employment and insurance screening contained in a
November 1991 draft of the rule was dropped in the
published document, and said "ONDCP believes the
exemptions should be reinstated."

He also asked for a "legal interpretation" of CLIA's
applicability to drug testing and its definition of
"forensic testing," and asked for an assessment of the
cost to businesses that would need certification should
HHS continue to apply CLIA to drug testing.

In other comments, Byron Lee Jr., president and chief
executive officer of the Nuclear Management and Resources
Council (NUMARC), a group of nuclear power companies,
expressed concern that CLIA might cover on-site testing
under the Nuclear Regulatory Commission's
fitness-for-duty program. He said the tests should fall
under CLIA's definition of forensic because they are
conducted to detect violations of law.

"During the past two years, over one-half million urine
samples have been collected by the nation's nuclear
utilities for these testing purposes only, not for
clinical treatment, medical diagnosis, health assessment,
or disease prevention," Lee wrote. "Nuclear power
industry drug testing should be considered forensic
testing since it is performed to determine if a federal
regulation has been violated."

Dr. Brock Wisenberger, director of corporate employee
health for Abbott Laboratories in Abbott Park, Ill.,
agreed. "The assessment of abused and/or illegal
substances as part of a Corporate Drug-Free Workplace
program is identical in purpose to drug testing performed
by law enforcement agencies to determine whether there
has been a violation of the law," he said.

Rep. Bill Lowery (R-Calif.) requested that all private
sector drug testing be exempted from CLIA. "It is my
belief that the purpose of drug testing for employment
purposes is not to provide results for diagnosis or
treatment of an individual, but to comply with corporate
drug abuse policies," he wrote. Regulating drug testing
through CLIA would "seriously impede" the Bush
Administration's drug control strategy, he said.

Not every comment on drug testing was opposed to its
regulation by CLIA. The American Hospital Association's
senior vice president for policy, Dr. James D. Bentley,
said employment and insurance screening should be covered
by CLIA because they are for "assessment of health."

And the American Clinical Laboratory Association
recommended that enzyme immunoassays (EIA) be
reclassified from moderately complex to highly complex.
Such a change would impose more stringent standards and
personnel requirements on EIA tests.

-- Dave McIntyre



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

TWO GROUPS REACH PACT FOR
STANDARD MRO CERTIFICATIONS

Two medical professional organizations have reached a
tentative agreement to create a standardized
accreditation process for medical review officers,
according to officials of both organizations.

Once carried out, the agreement would avoid a potentially
confusing situation in which competing organizations
would be promoting their own ethical standards and
certifying processes for MROs, who review test results in
federally mandated drug testing programs.

The agreement was reached May 4 by representatives of the
American College of Occupational and Environmental
Medicine, a physicians' group established in 1916, and
the American Association of Medical Review Officers,
established last year to promote MRO standards. AAMRO
began conducting certifying examinations for MROs in
March, and ACOEM was scheduled to begin its own testing
program this fall.

Under the agreement, a new organization (yet to be named)
will be formed to administer the MRO certifying process.
The two organizations still need to negotiate a "common
document" of MRO standards, but have agreed to pool
questions from their own certifying exams to create a new
test, according to Dr. Kent Peterson, treasurer of ACOEM
and chairman of its MRO training course. "It's going to
be a tough exam," he said.

Initially, the organization will be governed by
representatives of both ACOEM and AAMRO, but other
medical groups will be invited to participate, Dr.
Peterson said. The new organization will be located at
ACOEM's headquarters in Arlington Heights, Ill., and
should begin operating by July 1, he added.

The agreement firmly establishes the fledgling AAMRO in
the ranks of professional medical organizations. Dr.
Peterson said AAMRO "showed leadership" on the issue of
establishing MRO standards and certification procedures.
He denied reports that ACOEM had been reluctant to work
with AAMRO, saying only that "ACOEM's position has always
been that the credentialing of physicians should be in
the hands of a professional organization."

Dr. Steven St. Clair, AAMRO's executive director, said
the negotiations "were not tense, though there was a lot
of misunderstanding about what each other was doing"
about MRO certification. "Once we sat down at the table,
the misconceptions were dealt with pretty easily," he
said.

Dr. St. Clair said federal drug testing officials, many
of whom sit on AAMRO's federal advisory board, "have
expressed uniform enthusiasm" about the agreement. "This
effort was largely created because of concerns expressed
by federal regulators and individual MROs about the
possibility of having more than one standard that might
have developed had the two organizations continued
separately."

Dr. Peterson echoed that point. "We felt the benefits of
a common procedure far outweighed the tendency of both
groups to pursue their own programs," he said.

Dr. St. Clair said MROs already certified by AAMRO will
automatically receive certification by the new
organization.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

DOT WEIGHS ZERO TOLERANCE
POLICY ON ALCOHOL TESTING

Federal officials are debating what cutoff levels the
Department of Transportation should use for its alcohol
testing regulation, with some pushing for "zero
tolerance" and others arguing that a hard-line approach
could be perceived as a "witch hunt," according to a
senior DOT official.

Some officials favor penalizing transportation workers
who are found to have any traces of alcohol in their
systems, while others propose pegging the department's
regulation with standard drunk driving cutoffs, which are
usually 0.08 percent or 0.1 percent blood-alcohol
content, according to Dr. Donna R. Smith, senior program
analyst in DOT's drug enforcement and program compliance
office.

The department is developing the alcohol testing rule to
implement the Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act
of 1991, signed by President Bush last October.

Dr. Smith discussed DOT's rulemaking deliberations at a
May 16 meeting of the Substance Abuse Program
Administrators Association in Crystal City, Va., and in
an interview with DRUG DETECTION REPORT.

She said some DOT officials--supported by the National
Transportation Safety Board, an agency independent of
DOT, and the National Institute on Alcoholism, part of
the Department of Health and Human Services--favor a
"zero tolerance" approach. Other officials fear the
American public might see such a tough line as a "witch
hunt" or "a new Prohibition" and advocate adopting the
more tolerant drunk driving standard to minimize the risk
of legal challenges, she said.

The department is sensitive to the political issues
because "alcohol is America's favorite legal drug," and
believes that because alcohol consumption is legal, the
cutoff levels should be tied as closely as possible to
impairment, Dr. Smith said. "We can't necessarily prove
that mere presence of alcohol causes risks," she said,
explaining potential drawbacks to a zero cutoff.

"We cannot say that a person who consumes alcohol by that
very consumption is a risk in a safety-sensitive
position," Dr. Smith said. "We can say a person who
drinks while or just before performing safety-sensitive
duties is a risk. We need to establish a nexus of
impairment."

Because of the perceived need to link alcohol testing to
impairment, cutoff levels of 0.04 percent or 0.02 percent
are also under consideration because of research
indicating measurable impairment at those levels, she
said.

The Bush Administration has not taken a position in the
debate, and the Office of National Drug Control Policy is
not advocating a particular cutoff level, she said.

The decision on which cutoff level to use will affect
more than the public's perception of the alcohol testing
program--it will also influence the department's choice
of testing methodology, Dr. Smith said. That choice has
been a tough one for department officials because each
potential method--saliva, blood, breath, and urine--has
its own advantages and drawbacks, she said.

For example, a zero cutoff would effectively rule out
saliva testing, which is potentially effective at 0.04
percent but not sensitive enough at zero, she said. At
the higher cutoff, saliva tests could be an easy and
cost-efficient screening device, but they have no
forensic track record, have not withstood court
challenges, and the connection between alcohol content in
a person's saliva and a person's blood remains
"theoretical," she said.

Blood is "the gold standard" in forensic testing, able to
detect trace amounts of alcohol, "but in workplace random
testing, blood is unattractive" because it is invasive
and expensive, Dr. Smith said. Breath testing meets
forensic standards but "is by no means cheap," she said.

In addition, breath testing combines in one device and
one operator the specimen collection, laboratory
analysis, and medical review functions the department
purposely separates in its drug testing program to
maintain objectivity.

Finally, urine testing for alcohol has the same potential
drawback as the zero cutoff level--it cannot demonstrate
that the person is impaired at the time of the test.

The decisions on cutoff levels and testing methods must
be made soon, for Transportation Secretary Andrew Card
plans to have a final rule in effect before the Oct. 28
deadline, Dr. Smith said. The department still hopes to
publish its proposed rule before the end of June, she
added.

-- Dave McIntyre



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

ROADSIDE TESTING PROJECT
COULD BE AHEAD OF SCHEDULE

The Department of Transportation's pilot project on
roadside drug and alcohol testing could begin as early as
late August, more than three months ahead of schedule,
according to Dr. Donna R. Smith, senior analyst with
DOT's drug enforcement and program compliance office.

The department recently chose four states--Utah,
Minnesota, Nebraska, and New Jersey--to implement the
program, which is meant to discover if random testing
that is not employer-based can be conducted in an
effective and cost-efficient manner, Dr. Smith told DRUG
DETECTION REPORT. Congress mandated the one-year, $5
million project as part of the Omnibus Transportation
Employee Testing Act of 1991, but the project is
proceeding independently of the department's rulemaking
on that legislation.

According to the legislation, implementation of the pilot
programs is to begin no later than January 1993. However,
Dr. Smith said, some of the states have indicated they
could begin testing as early as August.

Dr. Smith said each of the four states will develop its
own testing plan, including locations and methodology of
testing, so the department will have four separate
experiences to evaluate. She said the programs could
include on-site drug and alcohol screening or traditional
specimen collection, depending on what the states
propose. DOT is considering whether to have the states
contract individually with laboratories to perform the
tests or to have all four programs use one laboratory
selected by the department, she said.

Employers could save a lot of money if the responsibility
for drug testing is taken over by states, and Dr. Smith
indicated that one important objective of the pilot
program is to calculate the expense of roadside testing.
However, interest in roadside testing is not great among
state governments--only six submitted applications for
the pilot program, Dr. Smith said.

The department is particularly concerned that truckers
might easily be able to avoid the tests, she said. State
implementation plans will have to address means of
preventing truckers from informing each other about test
times and locations, taking alternate routes to avoid
testing sites, or "congregating at previous truck stops"
to avoid areas where tests are being conducted, she said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

OMB APPROVES STANDARD
CHAIN-OF-CUSTODY FORM

Federal agencies conducting urine drug testing programs
will soon be required to use a standardized
chain-of-custody form, according to Dr. Joseph H. Autry
III, director of applied research at the National
Institute on Drug Abuse.

NIDA and the Department of Transportation developed the
standardized form to simplify the specimen collection
process and reduce the number of errors that cause tests
to be canceled. Currently, the government specifies what
information is to be contained on chain-of-custody forms
but allows labs and agencies to develop their own
documents. That has led to confusion among
collection-site personnel, who frequently must use
several different forms depending on which agency or lab
was doing the testing.

The standard form received approval from the Office of
Management and Budget early this month, Dr. Autry told
DRUG DETECTION REPORT. Agencies will be notified of the
new requirement in a Federal Register notice, and any
agency wishing to use a different form will need OMB
approval, he said.

The form will also be required in all DOT-regulated drug
testing, according to Dr. Donna R. Smith, senior analyst
with the department's drug enforcement and program
compliance office. The form includes a notice that the
test is conducted according to federal guidelines and
regulations, as well as a Privacy Act statement for
federal employees, she said. The Privacy Act statement
will not apply to DOT testing.

Dr. Smith said OMB so far has approved the form only for
federal employee testing, but that the department will
submit the requirement as part of its proposed rule on
the Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act of 1991.
Since OMB has already approved the form once, the
department expects no problems getting it through OMB
again, she said.

Companies will not be authorized to use the form for
testing not conducted under DOT regulations because the
form certifies that the test was conducted "in accordance
with applicable Federal regulations." However, companies
could adapt the form as a model for their own programs,
Dr. Autry said.

"I'd like to see the private sector take that form and
strip off the Privacy Act part and the federal identifier
and use that as a uniform document for all drug testing.
That would make life a lot easier for the labs."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

NIDA ALLOWS MRO'S TO REQUEST
CODEINE LEVEL BELOW CUTOFF

Medical review officers may request from labs the
quantitative levels for codeine on specimens reported
positive for morphine only, the National Institute on
Drug Abuse informed laboratories in April. The additional
information could help MROs determine whether positive
morphine tests received from labs should be reported to
employers as positives.

NIDA's instructions on MRO's receiving the codeine
information were contained in an April 9 advisory sent to
directors of NIDA-certified laboratories and all
inspectors within the National Laboratory Certification
Program.

MROs are normally not allowed to request quantitative
data below the cutoffs, but information on the presence
of codeine could help the MRO determine whether the test
subject was perhaps using codeine legitimately, according
to Dr. Donna Bush, chief of NIDA's drug testing section.
This is because codeine metabolizes to morphine in the
body, but some codeine is often found in the urine as
well, she said.

"What the MRO is looking for is any evidence of codeine
to try to support use of codeine as opposed to morphine
by itself," she explained.

Laboratories are authorized to release quantitative
codeine levels below cutoffs only in writing after
receiving a written request from the MRO, and only when
the codeine level is above the lab's limit of detection
and limit of quantification criteria, the advisory said.

In the advisory, NIDA also urged inspectors to "avoid
confrontation" and "maintain objectivity" in their
dealings with laboratory officials.

This was at least the second attempt by NIDA to defuse
tensions within its certification program. An Oct. 18,
1991, advisory referred to "an occasional emotional
moment" caused by "over-aggressive inspector behavior"
and reminded inspectors to "practice the highest
standards of professionalism and objectivity."

Tensions arise because inspectors--many of whom are
themselves laboratory officials--often have very definite
views about how best to fulfill NIDA's mandatory
laboratory guidelines, Dr. Bush said. These views will
differ, she said, because the guidelines establish
minimum standards without specifying how they are to be
met.

The latest advisory reminds inspectors that they are
"fact finders" who should "focus on adequacy, not
excellence; maintain objectivity; gather information;
inspect, do not suggest; ask questions when clarification
is needed; respect proprietary rights; handle conflicts;
[and] avoid confrontation."

One contentious issue during inspections has been which
lab personnel should have access to the area where the
lab receives and processes urine specimens, the advisory
indicated. NIDA said there is "no definitive answer" to
that question because laboratory size, staffing, and
workloads differ.

"It appears that this will be a dynamic and arguable
area," the advisory said. "Inspectors must continue to
make objective observations and assessments...and clearly
express their evaluation in the report. This is one area
where preconceived opinions are not desirable. This is
also an area where [inspection] team discussion and
explanation by the laboratory staff is usually
beneficial."

The advisory also contained several points regarding
chain-of-custody documentation for NIDA-regulated drug
testing. Improperly completed forms are the leading cause
of drug tests being canceled, according to federal
officials.

* Copy 3 of the chain-of-custody form, which goes from
the collection site to the MRO, must not pass through the
laboratory, even in sealed envelopes.

* Laboratories must document the condition of specimen
bottle seals on Copy 2 of the chain-of-custody document
(from lab to the MRO). If the lab reports to the MRO
electronically via computer, it may not use default
settings indicating the seal was intact, since an
oversight could improperly inform the MRO that the seal
was acceptable. A separate entry must be made for each
seal.

* Although "brevity and simplicity are desirable" in
chain-of-custody documentation, the record must "present
a clear picture of the location of the specimen/aliquot
at all times to third parties. Only then does a
[chain-of-custody] document fulfill the definition and
serve its purpose for review, scrutiny, or challenge."

-- Dave McIntyre



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

ONE IN FOUR LAW AGENCIES
TESTED APPLICANTS IN 1990

One-quarter of the nation's police and sheriffs'
departments required drug tests of all applicants for
sworn officer positions in 1990, but only 2 percent
required tests of all regular field officers, according
to a new report from the Bureau of Justice Statistics.

The report, which included 1990 data from 11,800 local
law enforcement agencies, found that drug testing was
more common in police departments than sheriffs'
departments, and in departments serving large populations
than smaller ones. For example, 79 percent of police
departments serving populations of 1 million or more
people required drug tests of all applicants, while only
14 percent of police departments serving 2,500 or fewer
did so.

Random testing of regular field officers was required by
4 percent of all local agencies, but by 21 percent of
police departments serving 1 million or more people. The
survey said 17 percent of all sworn police officers and
12 percent of sworn sheriffs' officers were subject to
random testing. Random testing was most common for
officers in drug-related positions employed by police
departments serving a population of 1 million or more (36
percent).

Reasonable suspicion tests were more common. One in every
10 agencies conducted such tests, covering 50 percent of
sworn police officers and 31 percent of sheriffs'
officers. Of civilian personnel, 45 percent in police
departments and 30 percent in sheriffs' departments were
subject to reasonable suspicion testing.

Sixty-three percent of the local agencies listed
dismissal as the most serious discipline for a first
positive drug test, with 14 percent listing suspension.
After two positives, 94 percent listed dismissal as their
most serious sanction, and only 2 percent said they stop
at suspension.

Nearly half (47 percent) of the agencies said they offer
nonprobationary officers treatment after a positive drug
test. However, the larger police departments (1 million
or more population) were least likely to offer treatment
(20 percent).

Nearly 40 percent of the local police and sheriffs'
departments reported that at least some of their
arrestees were tested for illegal drugs. Such testing was
most common in police departments serving populations of
500,000 or more (56 percent) and in sheriffs' departments
serving 1 million or more (60 percent).

"Drug Enforcement by Police and Sheriffs' Departments,
1990," (NCJ-134505), a 10-page report, is available
through the National Criminal Justice Reference Service,
Box 6000, Rockville MD 20850. (800) 732-3277; (301)
251-5500.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

Congressional conferees approved legislation May 12 that

Congressional conferees approved legislation May 12 that
would dissolve the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health
Administration. Under the bill (S. 1306), ADAMHA's
research institutes, including the National Institute on
Drug Abuse, would become part of the National Institutes
of Health.

ADAMHA's service functions, including administration of
block grant programs, would continue under a new
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMSA), comprised of the Center for Substance Abuse
Prevention, Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, and a
Center for Mental Health Services.

NIDA officials said the reorganization should have little
or no impact on the federal drug testing and laboratory
certification programs. The legislation would also
authorize new grant programs to encourage drug treatment
in the criminal justice system, treatment training,
capacity expansion, and the development of employee
assistance programs.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

Workplace drug testing is an important tool in drug

Workplace drug testing is an important tool in drug
prevention and user accountability, according to two new
documents from the Office of National Drug Control
Policy.

In a "white paper" entitled "Understanding Drug
Prevention" and a bulletin on "User Accountability,"
ONDCP hailed the drug testing programs of Texas
Instruments and Motorola for including all employees,
from the chief executive officer on down. It did not
mention the National Labor Relations Board's ruling last
year that Motorola had illegally prohibited employees
from distributing literature criticizing the drug testing
policy. For copies, contact ONDCP at (202) 467-9890.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

The American Association for Clinical Chemistry will hold

The American Association for Clinical Chemistry will hold
its 44th national meeting in Chicago, July 19-23.
Half-day sessions include one on substance abuse testing
for laboratories thinking about entering the drug testing
business or with limited drug testing experience, and one
on emergency and workplace drug testing.

In addition, breakfast and lunch roundtable discussions
will address workplace alcohol testing, drug testing
regulation and accreditation, serum and urine testing for
benzodiazepines, drug testing regulations of the College
of American Pathologists, emergency room drug testing,
processing and analyzing urine specimens, and screening
for perinatal drug exposure.

For more information, contact AACC, 2029 K Street NW, 7th
Floor, Washington DC 20006; telephone (202) 857-0717 or
(800) 892-1400.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

The Drug Enforcement Administration has placed

The Drug Enforcement Administration has placed
methcathinone, an amphetamine analog, on Schedule I under
the Controlled Substances Act. DEA has found five
clandestine laboratories producing methcathinone, a
stimulant that produces amphetamine-like symptoms.
Methcathinone is distributed under the street name "cat"
in powder form, and it is inhaled. The DEA action was
announced May 1 in the Federal Register.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

LAST-CHANCE AGREEMENT CITED
IN DENIAL OF WORKER'S BENEFITS

A worker fired for a positive drug test has lost his bid
for unemployment benefits because his drug use violated
a last-chance agreement with his employer and therefore
was "misconduct" under state unemployment law, a
Washington appeals court has ruled. (Crain v. Employment
Security Department, Washington Court of Appeals,
Division One, No. 27826-6-I, April 13, 1992.)

Although the drug test alone was insufficient evidence to
prove misconduct, it could be considered along with the
worker's job performance and his agreement with the
employer, the court said.

Larry B. Crain tested positive for cocaine and marijuana
in April 1987 and was suspended from his job as a
production worker. The company agreed to reinstate him
provided he complete a drug treatment program and agree
to follow-up drug tests. Under the agreement, a second
positive test would result in Crain's firing.

Soon after returning to work, Crain received verbal
warnings from his supervisors for following improper
procedures. In October 1987, Crain's failure to properly
clamp part of a 200-ton machine caused "considerable
damage" to the equipment. Crain denied he was again using
drugs, but the company ordered him to submit to a test
because of the series of warnings he had been issued
since returning to work. He tested positive for marijuana
and was discharged.

The state Employment Security Department denied Crain's
application for unemployment benefits, but an
administrative law judge overturned that decision, ruling
that the department's policy prohibited using drug test
results to show that an employee was "under the
influence."

According to the department's Unemployment Procedures &
Methods Handbook, revised Oct. 30, 1986, "The results of
drug testing may not establish impairment or indicate
(with precision) when an illegal drug was used; such
results can only demonstrate the likelihood of prior drug
use. Therefore, discharging an employee based solely on
the employee's refusing to take or failing a drug test,
absent adverse job performance, is not misconduct."

The department commissioner, however, reversed the ALJ's
decision, finding instead that Crain's violation of the
last-chance agreement qualified as misconduct.

The appeals court agreed. Although drug test results are
"hearsay" evidence, and Washington employment law does
not allow misconduct to be proved exclusively by hearsay,
the court said the company relied on other evidence in
discharging Crain. Specifically, the court cited the
series of incidents involving Crain's work.

"Because this other evidence of drug impairment supported
the Commissioner's finding that Crain had violated his
re-entry agreement to remain drug-free, the Commissioner
did not err by also considering the test results to find
disqualifying misconduct," the court ruled.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
DRUG DETECTION REPORT via NewsNet
May 20, 1992

COURT UPHOLDS DRUG TEST
OF GUARD WITHOUT POLICY

Louisiana corrections officials properly ordered a guard
to take a drug test based on allegations that the guard
had used drugs at a crack house, even though the
Corrections Department had no drug testing policy in
place at the time, a state court has ruled. (Banks v.
Department of Public Safety and Corrections, Louisiana
Court of Appeals, First Circuit, No. CA 91 0136, April
10, 1992.)

Department officials received a tip from the Baton Rouge
sheriff's department that one of their corrections
officers, Simmie Banks, had allegedly been observed
smoking crack in a crack house that was under
surveillance. Department officials contacted the juvenile
detention facility where Banks worked and ordered the
supervisor to send Banks to a laboratory for a drug test.
Banks refused to take the test without first consulting
an attorney, and was fired.

At the time (September 1989), the department did not have
a drug testing policy in place. The court ruled, however,
that the department was within its rights to order a drug
test because it had reasonable suspicion to believe Banks
had used drugs and because corrections officers are
subject to bodily searches as conditions of employment.
Banks was therefore properly disciplined for refusing a
legitimate order, the court ruled.

The court relied on the U.S. Supreme Court's rulings in
Skinner v. Railway Labor Executives' Association and
National Treasury Employees Union v. Von Raab, which it
said implied that "a governmental employer's order to an
employee to submit to a drug test on the basis of
individualized suspicion of drug use is constitutionally
valid in certain circumstances." The circumstances in
this case included the government's interest in
maintaining order at detention centers and in keeping
drugs away from prisoners. Guards who use drugs "may be
much more likely to be involved in the introduction of
contraband into a correctional facility," the court said.

The lack of a written, announced drug testing policy did
not invalidate the order to Banks, the court said.
"Although Mr. Banks stated that at no time during his
employment at the [facility] was he informed that he
would be subject to drug testing, he did admit that he
knew as a condition of his employment he was subject to:
a bodily search or `shake-down' on a random basis,
vehicle shake-down, and possibly a strip search. Mr.
Banks admitted that he knew the Corrections Services
Rulebook prohibited employees from violating state or
federal law and that to do so could result in
termination."

In addition, "an employee's refusal to obey a direct
order is conduct which, by its very nature, impairs the
efficient operation of the public service for which he
was employed."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-12</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B047-254</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mt15.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033620 text/html 34241
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:34:25 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:45 GMT
Content-length: 34054
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mt15.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet <BR>
May 1, 1994<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>LABS AND TESTING: MANDATED EMPLOYERS HAVE&nbsp;RULES, NON-MANDATED EMPLOYERS DON'T</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1199 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>DRUG TESTING OF NON-SAFETY-&nbsp;SENSITIVE WORKERS UPHELD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(416 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>SURVEY: OVER ONE THIRD OF&nbsp;EMPLOYERS FIRE AT FIRST POSITIVE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(337 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>EAPS NEED TQM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(803 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>COMING UP--</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(109 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>HOW TESTING CAN REDUCE WORKERS' COMPENSATION&nbsp;COSTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(738 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>PRESIDENT'S COMMISSION OFFERS&nbsp;MODEL DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE LAWS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(258 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>BORG-WARNER GUARDS TESTED AS APPLICANTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(135 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>LAB CERTIFICATION: HEADED FOR FDA?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(349 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>CHANGES IN SAMHSA LAB LIST</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(118 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>CAN A WORKER BE FIRED FOR A SECOND POSITIVE&nbsp;TEST&nbsp;IF HE ISN'T FIRED FOR THE FIRST?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(480 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

LABS AND TESTING: MANDATED EMPLOYERS HAVE
RULES, NON-MANDATED EMPLOYERS DON'T

Even if you have absolutely nothing to do with
transportation, weapons, or any other
safety-sensitive business, chances are you have
heard that if you do drug testing, you should
use a lab certified by the federal Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration.

Actually, it's even more likely you are still
hearing about "NIDA labs," since the agency
which formally ran the National Laboratory
Certification Program has stuck to the labs.
You are probably also told to use Medical
Review Officers (doctors who interpret test
results), gas chromatography coupled with mass
spectrometry (a confirmation test), and
possibly even told to limit the drugs you are
testing for to the "NIDA five" (amphetamines,
cocaine, marijuana, opiates, and
phencyclidine). You may even be told expressly
not to fire someone who tests positive, but to
send him to treatment or an EAP first.

But unless you are mandated by the government
to conduct testing this way, you don't have to
do any of these things. So, why do lawyers,
consultants, and other purveyors of advice to
employers insist on using the guidelines that
are mandatory mainly for federal employees and
safety-sensitive employees in DOT-licensed
companies?

'NOT A LEGAL REQUIREMENT'

"The HHS guidelines are not a legal
requirement," explains David Evans, a lawyer in
Lawrenceville, New Jersey who is an expert on
drug testing. "But the reason lawyers like to
use them is because they're written down."
Lawyers, says Evans, "love it when somebody
gives them some complex regulation and they can
hit somebody over the head with it." Evans says
employers who follow HHS/SAMHSA/DOT protocols
unnecessarily are "putting on too much gold
plate."

Not everyone agrees. "It's worth going through
what compliance programs go through," says Mac
Allen, executive director of the Substance
Abuse Program Administrators Association
(SAPAA), a Nashville-based group of corporate
and third-party drug-testing programs. "I don't
think the lab is the key as much as the MRO is
the key," says Allen. "If an employee tests
positive for opiates, for example, and he's
using a bona-fide prescription drug, he would
be protected."

But most SAPAA members are DOT-mandated
employers, or third-party administrators who
want work from DOT-mandated employers. For a
small business, on-site hand-held tests might
be the way to go.

"Some of the on-site tests are pretty good,"
says J. Michael Walsh, who wrote the federal
guidelines before he left government last year
to run a private consulting business. As long
as the test is an FDA-approved immunoassay, the
employer should feel confident using it, he
says. If the employer plans to take action
against an employee, however, Walsh recommends
that any on-site test which is positive be
confirmed by sending the sample to a lab.

One reason it is important to confirm an
on-site test in a lab, especially in the case
of opiates or amphetamines, is a phenomenon
known as cross-reactivity, says Walsh. But if
you use the on-site tests just for marijuana
and cocaine, there is nothing that
cross-reacts, he adds.

The HHS system was set up because of search and
seizure concerns. The first people to be tested
under it were federal employees, and the system
had to pass constitutional muster because it
was government action. "There's a two-pronged
test for search and seizure," explains Evans.
"The search must be justified in its inception,
which means there must be proper reason for the
search. And it must be justified in its scope,
which means you shouldn't search for anything
except what you're searching for." This means
that a drug test shouldn't look for
prescription medication, for example, or poppy
seeds on a bagel. The federal government tried
to deal with both prongs of the
search-and-seizure issue in developing the HHS
guidelines.

Private employers don't need to worry about
search and seizure at all, however.

The federal guidelines initially avoided
on-site testing "because we knew we'd have
court challenges," says Walsh, and officials
wanted the system to withstand legal scrutiny.
But technology has changed, and so has the
sophistication level of people involved in
on-site testing. "Now people know how to use
hand-held systems," says Walsh. In 1985, when
the certification system was set up, there were
only two on-site systems, and they were
tabletop, not hand-held. They required
technicians who were skilled and sophisticated.
"We were concerned about some construction
supervisor running around with one of these in
the back of a pickup truck testing people," he
says.

Interestingly, it is the unions who really like
the federal guidelines, Walsh notes. "The
unions feel very comfortable with my
standards," he says with a wry laugh.

But Evans notes that many employers can't
comply with the HHS guidelines. "They're too
expensive and complicated," he says. "On-site
is cheaper, it's more convenient, it's easier."

If the employer is planning to take action, the
test should be confirmed in a licensed lab,
says Evans. "Most states have got some law
regulating labs."

COSTS OF TESTING

Walsh says the per-test cost from
SAMHSA-certified labs has come down
drastically. "Most of the labs now charge in
the neighborhood of $15 to $20 a specimen,"
says Walsh. What about the cost of collection
and MRO services? Allen says SAPAA can
recommend a third-party administrator who can
do collection, testing, and MRO work for under
$50 a test. (Initial setup costs would probably
be about $500 in addition, depending on the
complexity of the policy, he says.)

THE LIABILITY MYTH

Pressed to explain why they recommend following
the federal testing guidelines even when it's
not required, many people ultimately admit it
is fear of lawsuits.

"The DOT along with GC/MS has been through the
court system," says Allen. If an employer fires
a worker for a positive test and hasn't
followed this system, the employer might be
opening himself up to liability, these people
say. "If you get rid of someone, he might sue
you for hundreds of thousands of dollars," says
SAPAA's Allen.

"There's not a lot of liability in drug
testing," counters Evans. "There's this myth
that employers will be liable." In the one case
in which an employer did lose hundreds of
thousands of dollars, Southern Pacific had been
"beastly" to the employee, says Evans, clearly
going out of its way to defy the San Francisco
anti-testing ordinance.

TECHNO-PHOBIA AT WORK

Another problem for employers, says Evans, is
the fact that drug testing involves scientific
technology, which is unusual in the workplace.
This techno-phobia is "like math phobia," he
says. "So instead, they seize on the idea that
there are too many legal problems."

Finally, Evans says even the gold standard,
GC/MS, won't solve all your problems. "GC/MS
isn't perfect," he says. "It's very complex. I
think the only reason it hasn't been attacked
is because attorneys don't understand it."

One last note: Whether you use a
SAMHSA-certified lab, a state-certified lab, or
an on-site test, don't expect technology to
remain static. The federal government moves
slowly, but even the sacred guidelines are
changing. Stay tuned!



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

DRUG TESTING OF NON-SAFETY-
SENSITIVE WORKERS UPHELD

In one of the most recent of California's
seminal drug-testing rulings, an appeals court
has ruled that an employee who refused to take
a drug test was guilty of misconduct and
therefore did not qualify for unemployment
compensation. In handing down its ruling March
9 in AFL-CIO v. the California Unemployment
Insurance Appeals Board (93 Daily Journal
D.A.R. 3164), the California Court of Appeal
has taken the rights of employers to test
beyond the zone of the safety-sensitive job
position.

The case involved David Hayes, who worked on a
Chevron oil-drilling rig, but not as an oil
worker and not employed by Chevron. Hayes was
employed as a housekeeper by a company which
was under contract with Chevron to maintain the
living quarters for oil workers. The company
required all of its employees to have an annual
physical, which included a drug test. When the
physical was scheduled, however, he told his
supervisor that he could not take the drug test
because he knew he would test positive. He had
been smoking marijuana while on shore leave.

Hayes was fired for refusing to take the test.
But he could not receive unemployment because
the California Unemployment Insurance Appeals
Board said he was discharged for job-related
misconduct.

The AFL-CIO took the case to court on behalf of
Hayes, arguing that what Hayes did off the rig
had nothing to do with his job, and therefore
was not job-related misconduct. Furthermore,
Hayes' job wasn't even safety-sensitive, the
AFL-CIO said. The unemployment board was acting
counter to its earlier decisions, in denying
compensation to someone who did not have a
dangerous job and who was not suspected of
using drugs on the job.

The court disagreed, saying that work on an oil
rig is dangerous, regardless of the job.
"Although a slip and fall in the kitchen of a
restaurant or in a hotel room might not
endanger anyone other than the person who fell,
on an oil platform a slip and fall could be on
outside stairways or areas where the impaired
employee might not only injure himself, but
cause others to leave their posts to rescue
him," the ruling states. "Similarly, spilling
grease which could cause a fire might not be so
much of a concern where all other employees can
leave the threatened area. In a self-contained
area out in the ocean on an oil derrick, the
threat of fire becomes much more significant."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

SURVEY: OVER ONE THIRD OF
EMPLOYERS FIRE AT FIRST POSITIVE

Although most employers refer workers who test
positive for drugs to an EAP or a treatment
program, over one third fire employees for the
first positive test, a recent survey has found.
The positive rate is about 5 percent, according
to the survey of 183 employers conducted by
William M. Mercer.

Most of the companies tested for amphetamines,
barbiturates, cocaine, hallucinogens, and
opiates, according to the survey. Only half
test for alcohol, "even though its prevalence
of abuse far exceeds that of illicit and
prescription drugs," says Mercer consultant
Shael Barger, who is based in San Francisco.

Barger strongly believes that testing can be
used to identify troubled employees and refer
them to treatment. "Drug testing does work, but
there needs to be confidentiality protections
and access to treatment," she tells DIW.

Employees should be encouraged to come forward
if they need help, and returned to their
position once treated, she says. After a
certain point, if an employee is unable to
maintain abstinence, then he may be let go.

"My concern is to protect the employer from
litigation," says Barger. But she also is
concerned that substance abuse problems not be
driven underground by punitive methods.

Noting that the Americans with Disabilities Act
prohibits discrimination against an alcoholic,
Barger says it's unfortunate that the statute
doesn't apply to illicit drugs as well. "It is
a disease," she says of drug addiction. "I wish
the ADA was as emphatic on illicit drugs as
alcohol."

If employers send the workers who test positive
for treatment -- as most of surveyed employers
did -- they will benefit, says Barger.
"Substance abuse can result in work site
accidents, increased absenteeism and lowered
productivity, all of which carry high price
tags," she says. "Even though a drug screening
program detects relatively few substance
abusers, it can still save significant sums by
identifying chemically dependent workers and
motivating them to seek treatment."

Of the employers surveyed, 30 percent do no
drug testing at all, citing concerns about
legal liability, employee privacy, and test
accuracy.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

EAPS NEED TQM

Total quality management, or TQM, a buzz-phrase
of the 1980s, is still trying to find its way
into EAPs. While incorporating the principles
of TQM -- encouraging employee participation
and self-esteem, eliminating fear, constantly
improving service, and providing leadership
instead of demanding production quotas -- seem
beyond the scope of EAP activities, they are
important to the survival of the EAP, according
to an article in the March issue of EAPA
Exchange, the monthly house organ of the
Employee Assistance Professionals Association.

Of course, TQM may be too much for external
EAPs -- those which operate on a contract basis
for many different companies, and which often
aren't enough of a participant themselves in
their client companies to play a role in
setting the broad policies that make up TQM.
But for internal EAPs, which operate as part of
a company, TQM is necessary, according to the
article, which is based on a survey of both
internal and external programs.

If EAPs don't get involved in TQM, they may be
seen by management -- which pays the bill -- as
nothing but a dumping ground for troubled
workers. The next step is for the employer to
question the value of having an internal EAP at
all -- and suddenly, the EAP finds itself out
of business in favor of a contract with an
external vendor. Doing TQM is really a matter
of survival, internal EAPs say.

CHANGE AT MOTOROLA

"If we choose not to integrate with other
areas, we run the risk of being relegated to a
corner of the building where we see downtrodden
employees and, eventually, are dropped in favor
of an external vendor," says Sheila Monaghan,
corporate director of the EAP at Motorola. "For
a time, EAPs operated in a nonintegrated way in
order to have sufficient numbers of employees
using their services." The nonintegrated system
allowed supervisors to refer -- or send --
employees to the EAP whenever they thought it
was a good idea.

Under the integrated system, a supervisor
referral is not made until the supervisor has
first consulted with the EAP. Perhaps there are
"alternative strategies" which could be
followed. The purpose is not to enhance the
power of the EAP, but to create a general
problem-solving environment involving
management, HR, and the EAP.

"This means that HR teams need to develop their
own process to interface efficiently in the
referral process," says Monaghan. "When each
team understands and coordinates the process,
together we can further increase our total
efficiency."

No stranger to TQM in its non-EAP world,
Motorola won the Malcolm Baldrige national
quality award in 1988.

BEYOND COUNSELING

In general, EAPs are good at more than
counseling: their skills make them experts at
interviewing a supervisor, for example, to find
out what the problem is. In this way, internal
EAPs are poised to become part of HR. This
means letting go of the old way of doing
things, in which the EAP advocated for the
employee, protecting him from HR and
management.

The advantage of this method is that employees
saw the EAP as a safe haven, and were more
likely to confide in it. The disadvantage was
that the EAP's hands would be tied when it came
to working with HR or management. Ultimately,
management found that subsidizing counseling
for its problem workers was not a
cost-effective goal for its EAP.

Even EAPs which are more focused on counseling
employees than on management and HR can play an
important role in TQM, says Dan Conti, Ph.D.,
EAP director at the First National Bank of
Chicago. Outcome measurements for behavioral
health care -- psychotherapy and substance
abuse treatment -- are especially important to
Conti, whose EAP does managed care as well.
Determining whether treatment works is one way
to incorporate the "spirit" of TQM into the
EAP-managed care combination, an increasingly
popular mix. "We're interested in much more
than a satisfaction survey that asks, `Are you
happy with your provider?,'" he says.
"Sophisticated outcome measurement can drive
real quality improvement -- that is, treatment
effectiveness -- for an EAP-managed care
system.

Another key to EAP TQM is understanding the
customer. The customer is the company --
management and HR -- who is buying the EAP. The
employee is not the customer, he is the user.

Is TQM out of the question altogether for
external EAPs? It better not be, according to
Terry Cowan, executive director of Workers
Assistance Program, based in Austin, Texas.
External EAPs like his shouldn't expect to
simply get referrals, says Cowan, who has seen
the many external EAPs swallowed up by
insurance companies to perform managed care.
"We see ourselves in survival mode right now,"
he says. His advice to internal EAPs who don't
want to be replaced by externals: sit in at
every upper-level management meeting and be a
part of all management decisions.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

COMING UP--

--Alcohol Testing Conferences: The Drug and
Alcohol Testing Training Institute is holding a
three-location series of conferences--same
agenda, different sites--this spring and
summer. The program includes discussions of
cost, liabilities, Department of Transportation
regulations, and return-to-duty issues. The
program also includes presentations by a
Medical Review Officer, a lawyer, and Donna
Smith, who heads up the DOT drug-testing
effort. Dates and locations are May 20-21 in
San Diego, June 24-25 in Charlotte, and July
22-23 in Boston. For more information, contact
DATTI, University Research Park, 8701 Mallard
Creek Road, Charlotte, NC 28262; (600) 767-5399
voice, (704)594-9588 (fax).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

HOW TESTING CAN REDUCE WORKERS' COMPENSATION
COSTS

Drug testing is a useful tool for controlling
workers' compensation costs -- at least if you
can convince the insurance company that your
program will reduce claims. Gregory and Howe, a
law firm specializing in management consulting,
has arranged for a drug-testing program for its
clients which improves their chances of
lowering their workers' compensation rates.

"It's been proven that when companies put a
comprehensive drug-testing program in place,
their claims are reduced dramatically," says
George Howe, a principal at the Shelton,
Connecticut-based firm.

It does require an "enlightened" insurance
company to give a discount in exchange for drug
testing, Howe admits.  "AIG is familiar with
Gregory and Howe's program. They know it's
comprehensive, and they can validate that the
company they're underwriting is doing the
testing," he says.

The fact that an outside firm -- Gregory and
Howe -- is running the testing program is very
important to an underwriter, says James Hughes,
president of Windsor Insurance, a broker who
works with the law firm and with AIG. "One of
the things AIG says is that it's great to have
a drug-testing program, but they want to make
sure it has some bite to it," Hughes tells us.

Discounts come in one of two ways, says Howe.
First, if an insurance company is convinced
that a drug-testing program will drastically
reduce workers' compensation claims, there
could be a 10 percent reduction at the start.

More likely, however, is the "gain-sharing"
program. "It's like profit sharing," Hughes
says. "Let's say we go in and check out the
company with AIG, and agree the annual premium
is $300,000. We'll handle claims payment and
review, and we can reduce the costs. We may be
able to reduce the costs by $100,000, and that
savings would then be shared by AIG and the
employer." The broker uses managed care and
fraud detection to reduce claims costs.
Drug-testing is done also.

In order to qualify for a workers compensation
discount from AIG, an employer would have to
conduct random and pre-employment drug testing,
says Hughes. In addition, a third party -- not
the employer -- would have to oversee the
drug-testing program to make sure "it's done
correctly," he says.

For Howe, "correctly" means following
Department of Transportation protocol: using
labs certified by the Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration, using a
Medical Review Officer to interpret all
positives, and following federal collection
guidelines. Howe says the DOT system is the
most legally sound. With the DOT system, "if a
disgruntled employee wants to take action
against a company, he won't be able to take
them to court," Howe says.

The medical review officer protects the
employee from being labeled a drug user when he
is using only prescription drugs, says Howe.
"Almost weekly we have an opiate positive that
is reversed for dietary or medical reasons," he
says.

Although Gregory and Howe contracts with
laboratories and has a Medical Review Officer,
it is more than a third-party administrator,
says Howe. "There are a lot of TPAs or MRO
organizations that try to sell their services
like they're selling laser beams," he says. "We
start at the top, with the policy." But this
doesn't mean that turnaround time is slow.
"With us, you get good turnaround time -- 24
hours for negatives, and 48 to 72 hours for
positives."

PER-TEST COST: $55

What is the cost of Gregory and Howe's program?
Billing is simple: about $55 per test. The
program setup and administration is built into
the per-test cost. Gregory and Howe also
handles the paperwork--test results are kept on
employees at the law firm. "You're dealing with
an individual's livelihood," says Howe. "So if
an auditor wants to see files, we have them."

As for AIG, the need for antidrug programs in
terms of workers compensation was driven home
by a recent case in which a man fell off a
ladder and broke his arm -- normally about
$3,000 in  claims, says Hughes. But the man's
arm wouldn't heal properly. "It was determined
that the reason it wasn't healing was because
the man was a drug user -- an addict," says
Hughes. The workers' compensation board ruled
that the employer had to pay for inpatient
substance abuse treatment as part of the
workplace injury. "AIG knows the benefits of
having workers who are off drugs," says Hughes.
"But they like to see a comprehensive program."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

PRESIDENT'S COMMISSION OFFERS
MODEL DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE LAWS

The President's Commission on Model State Drug
Laws, which spent most of last year holding
hearings on state legislation needed to deal
with drugs in different arenas, has come up
with six different model acts, as follows:
*  Drug-Free Private Sector Workplace Act;
*  Drug-Free Workplace Workers' Compensation
Premium Reduction Act;
*  Employee Assistance Programs and
Professionals Act;
*  Drug-Free Public Work Force Act;
*  Drug-Free Workplace Act; and
*  Employee Addiction Recovery Act.

The purposes of the proposed laws is to reduce
the costs of medical claims, medical
disability, injuries, theft, absenteeism, and
decreased productivity associated with abuse.
The proposed laws also would help employees get
treatment. The statutes would:
  *Require a drug-free workplace program to
include written policies, EAPs or
rehabilitation resources, employee education,
supervisor training, drug testing, laboratory
standards, and provisions for employee
confidentiality.
*  Protect private employers from litigation
from a good-faith employee drug test, if the
employers have a comprehensive drug-free
program.
*  Provide for a 5 percent reduction in
workers' compensation insurance premiums for
employers with comprehensive drug-free
workplace programs.
*  Allow addicted or alcoholic public-sector
employees to get treatment without job loss.
*  Allow termination or probationary
employment for any public-sector employee who
is convicted of a criminal drug offense.
*  Require all contractors, subcontractors, and
grantees doing business with or for the state
to have comprehensive drug-free workplace
programs.
*  Set up a state licensing entity for EAP
professionals.
*  Give employers a tax credit equal to 50
percent of what they paid for treating an
employee for alcohol or drug abuse.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

BORG-WARNER GUARDS TESTED AS APPLICANTS

Borg-Warner Security Corporation, which owns
Wells Fargo Guard Services and Burns
International Security Services, does drug
testing on a pre-employment basis only. But
with 65,000 security guards as employees and a
high turnover rate, this is a lot of testing.
It's done with an on-site test called the MACH
IV, which screens for cocaine, heroin,
marijuana, and methamphetamines.

If the MACH IV is positive, the sample goes to
a lab for confirmation, says Joe Allen, a
spokesman for the Chicago-based Borg-Warner.

There's a lot of "self-selection" that goes on
with pre-employment testing, says Allen. "When
people come in, there's a large sign that says
all applicants are tested for drugs. Some
people have to go out to feed the parking meter
or something, and they never come back."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

LAB CERTIFICATION: HEADED FOR FDA?

The laboratory certification currently done by
the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA) may not stay there
forever, according to the chief architect of
the lab program as well as the federally
mandated testing protocols. The certification
program may be headed for the Food and Drug
Administration or the Health Care Financing
Administration.

J. Michael Walsh, Ph.D., who wrote the
guidelines when head of the drug-testing
program at the National Institute on Drug
Abuse, has suggested that the FDA would be a
better place than SAMHSA for the National
Laboratory Certification Program, which he
established. In any event, the certification
program won't go back to NIDA, which is now
part of the National Institutes of Health, and
not involved with regulation. The next move is
up to the Department of Health and Human
Services, which oversees the FDA, HCFA, SAMHSA,
and NIH.

"I really do think HHS has got to do
something," says Walsh, who has been a
workplace drug-testing consultant in Bethesda
since leaving the federal government a year
ago. "The whole program is hanging up in the
air now. And there isn't a good understanding
of how much the private sector relies on it."

While Walsh has no criticism of the way SAMHSA
is running the certification, he says there is
a big problem with lack of funding and lack of
interest. "It's not a high priority now," he
says. As proof, he offers the long-awaited
final rule amending the testing guidelines,
which would lower the cutoff level for
marijuana screens, require Medical Review
Officers to be independent from laboratories,
and make other changes in the protocols. "It's
so long overdue it's ridiculous," says Walsh,
who contends the changes should have been made
four years ago. "There's nothing controversial,
but someone has to sign it," he says. "I never
thought that it would take so long" for
regulatory changes to follow changes in
technology, he adds. The changes aren't merely
formalities, Walsh notes. Lowering the cutoff
level to 50 nanograms per milliliter for
marijuana screens "would triple the positives,"
he says.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

CHANGES IN SAMHSA LAB LIST

There are two changes in the list of
laboratories certified by the Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA) to conduct drug tests for regulated
employers and the federal government.
*  Mayo Medical Laboratories in Rochester,
Minnesota withdrew voluntarily from the
National Laboratory Certification Program on
April 15.
*  Doctors & Physicians Laboratory is now
SmithKline Beecham Clinical Laboratory. The
address is still 801 East Dixie Avenue,
Leesburg, Florida 32748. The telephone number
is (904)787-9006.

The total number of certified labs is 86. The
complete list is published in the April 4
Federal Register. For further information,
contact Giselle Hersh, Division of Workplace
Programs, SAMHSA, Room 13-A-54, 5600 Fishers
Lane, Rockville, MD 20857; (301)443-6014.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

CAN A WORKER BE FIRED FOR A SECOND POSITIVE
TEST
IF HE ISN'T FIRED FOR THE FIRST?

What happened: As a backhoe operator on live
gas lines, William LaGard, an employee of
Columbia Gas of Pennsylvania, was subject to
random drug testing by the requirement of the
federal Department of Transportation.

He also was a member of the Utility Workers
Union, which negotiated a collective bargaining
agreement allowing management to fire workers
for "proper cause."

When he tested positive for cocaine in 1992,
Columbia Gas referred LaGard to the EAP, and he
was afforded the chance for treatment. After he
returned from treatment and the company's
Medical Review Officer cleared him to return to
work, the company worked out a last-chance
agreement with him which clearly stated that
his next positive test for drugs or alcohol
would result in his termination. At this
meeting, LaGard declined union representation.

But less than a year later, LaGard again tested
positive for cocaine. The company fired him,
and the union cried foul.
*If the first positive test wasn't grounds to
fire the worker, then neither was the second
positive test.
*In negotiating directly with LaGard, Columbia
Gas violated the collective bargaining
agreement, making the last-chance agreement
invalid.
*Union and management never agreed that two
positive tests are justification for discharge.

The company rebutted that it did have the right
to fire the worker.
*Had it so desired, Columbia Gas could have
fired him after the first positive test; just
because it waived its right to do so doesn't
mean it can't do so after the second.
*Firing the worker is necessary to uphold
public policy, which is rooted in protecting
the safety of the public.
*LaGard said he didn't want union
representation at the meeting during which the
last-chance agreement was negotiated.

The ruling: LaGard stays fired, ruled
Arbitrator James C. Duff in a January 31
decision. The deciding factor, the referee
said, was "proper cause." When a worker is
employed in a safety-sensitive job, as LaGard
even admitted he was, and when that worker
twice tests positive for drugs, he has no
guarantee of his job, according to the ruling.

And the arbitrator was impressed by the fact
that the worker had been given the chance to go
to treatment. "Nothing guarantees that multiple
treatment and/or rehabilitation opportunities
will be afforded to multiple offenders," said
Duff.

The idea that if a single positive test merits
treatment instead of firing, then so should the
second positive, is "too strained to be
accepted," he said, noting that the employee
had been clearly notified that his next
positive test would not be followed by the same
degree of tolerance.

 As for the validity of the last-chance
agreement, LaGard lost his right to argue this
when he declined union representation at the
meeting, the arbitrator said. Furthermore, the
fact that there was "proper cause" for the
termination made the claim of invalidity moot.
(Case not yet reported.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-13</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B047-275</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mt16.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033634 text/html 19629
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:34:40 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:45 GMT
Content-length: 19442
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mt16.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS IN ACTION via NewsNet <BR>
May 1, 1994<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>WHEN DO A GROUP&nbsp;OF EMPLOYEES&nbsp;CONSTITUTE A `CREW'?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(406 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>IS A COMPANY BOUND&nbsp;BY AN ERROR IN FIXING&nbsp;AN EMPLOYEE'S PENSION?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(365 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>IS IT DISCRIMINATORY&nbsp;TO DENY A MERIT HIKE&nbsp;TO A SHOP STEWARD?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(185 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>CAN AN EMPLOYEE&nbsp;BE COMPELLED TO POSTPONE A VACATION?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(363 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>HAS A COMPANY A RIGHT TO SUSPEND AN EMPLOYEE&nbsp;WHO IS UNDER ARREST?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(446 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>WHEN DOES AN EMPLOYEE BECOME PERMANENTLY AND&nbsp;TOTALLY DISABLED?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(435 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>IF AN EMPLOYEE IS SICK MUST HE BE CALLED&nbsp;FOR OVERTIME?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(490 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS IN ACTION via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

WHEN DO A GROUP
OF EMPLOYEES
CONSTITUTE A `CREW'?

What Happened: At the Rolidack Steel Company,
the job of Mould Dipping Laborer was concerned
with knocking plugs off the hot top
moulds,cleaning off the stools, replacing metal
plates on these stools and washing them down.
For a while there were three employee Mould
Dipping Laborers on each shift.

Suddenly, the Rolidack powers ordained that
only two Dipping Laborers were needed. That
brought the union running with a grievance
demanding that Rolidack return to the
three-workers-per-shift policy.

At an arbitration hearing, the union argued:

1. Our union contract guarantees the existence
of a protected crew size--a minimum of three in
the case of Mould Dipping Laborers.

2. The elimination of the third worker has
placed too great a strain on the remaining two
workers.

3. Furthermore, management has not justified
the removal of the third worker on the basis of
significant changes in the job.

A Rolidack official responded:

  *  Because of the varying kind of work done
by the Mould Dipping Laborers, we have never
considered these workers to compose a protected
"crew."

  *  Moreover, recent changes in the job
support the removal of one employee from this
work.


RULING

The Mould Dipping Workers do not compose a
'crew' and the company can change their number
at its own discretion, ruled Arbitrator Thomas
J. McDermott

The referee held:

"The number of Mould Dipping Laborers worked
per (shift) has varied from 1 to 3 and on a few
occasions to 4. No relationship was shown
between the changes in numbers that have taken
place and any given set of working
conditions.Thus, it can only be concluded that
this job has been scheduled on the basis of
what was determined to be the work load. There
is absent, therefore the proof that a protected
work crew...has existed." (46 LA 733)

COMMENT

In another ruling, the same arbitrator
declared:

"Most arbitrators hold...that a crew for
purposes of local working conditions exists
where the employees making up the work force
have a relationship that is interdependent of
each other. This would mean that, when one
member is removed or absent, the remaining
workers are required to assume an increased
amount of work, or there is a significant
change in the type of work they are required to
perform. In other words, there must be a
relationship between the--nature of the work
and the interdependence of members to each
other." (40 LA 67)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS IN ACTION via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

IS A COMPANY BOUND
BY AN ERROR IN FIXING
AN EMPLOYEE'S PENSION?

What Happened: Following surgery to relieve a
cancerous condition, Gerald Mack, who was 62
years old and had been employed by the Carvian
Company for 43 years, felt that his working
days were drawing to a close. He was attracted
by the possibility of early retirement under
the Social Security Act in conjunction with a
pension from Carvian.

Mack took early retirement after consulting his
Foreman and Henry Galt, the company's Personnel
Manager. Both assured him that he would receive
a monthly retirement check from Carvian for
$220.78. Mack's first retirement check was in
that amount and he was again assured by Galt
that the figure was correct.

However, the next month Mack received a check
for $110.39. When Mack demanded an explanation,
an embarrassed Henry Galt admitted that the
original check for $220.78 was an error; the
figure should have been $110.39.

At an arbitration session called to consider
Mack's grievance, the pensioner's union
advocate expounded:

1. Gerald Mack, a faithful, longtime employee
relied implicitly upon the representations made
to him by his foreman and Personnel Manager
Galt that he would receive  a certain sum in
retirement which would make it feasible for him
to cease working.

2. This turned out to be an irresponsible
mistake, which makes it difficult for him to
cover his retirement living expenses.

The company's Personnel Manager answered:

  *  Mistakes in pension figures occasionally
occur in processing retirement requests.

  *  These are inadvertent errors and should
not be made binding on the employer.

Did The Employee Win?  YES  q  NO  q

RULING

The company must continue to pay Mack the
greater pension, ruled Arbitrator John F.
Sembower. The arbitrator declared:

"Gerald Mack was entitled to rely upon the
positive and well-intentioned although
erroneous information supplied to him by his
foreman who, in turn obtained it from the local
officer of the company charged with developing
such information accurately."(63 LA 669)

COMMENT

On the other hand, arbitrators and courts have
held that when a worker who receives by error a
windfall payment of some sort to which he/she
is not entitled, and of a nature which should
have forewarned him that something had gone
wrong, he must make restitution.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS IN ACTION via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

IS IT DISCRIMINATORY
TO DENY A MERIT HIKE
TO A SHOP STEWARD?

What Happened: Five years had elapsed since
Glenn Collier had received a merit increase.
Each time, Collier had been stymied by the
section of the Progress Report Form labeled
"Output." The wording was virtually always the
same: "His output is low because of endless
outside distraction and telephone calls."

Finally, Collier, who was the shop steward,
filed a grievance in his own behalf calling for
a merit increase.The matter was bucked to an
arbitrator before whom Collier thundered:

1. The company's Progress Report Form lists
nine factors considered in awarding a merit
increase: knowledge, judgment, dependability,
cooperation, initiative, communication,
flexibility, creativity and output.

2. I was rated "good"  on all but "output."
Obviously, I'm being discriminated against
because I'm a dedicated steward.

A company spokesman contradicted:

  *  The passage of time does not justify a
merit raise.

  *  A merit raise means that an employee has
done more than is normally expected of him.

  *  Collier's union duties keep him from doing
no more than getting by on his job.That's his
problem, not ours.

Was The Company Right?  YES  q  NO  q

(See Ruling - Page 4)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS IN ACTION via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

CAN AN EMPLOYEE
BE COMPELLED TO POSTPONE A VACATION?

What Happened: Ordinarily, vacations granted to
employees by the Glimbit Corporation occurred
between April 1st and October 31st. The company
reserved the right to determine each employee's
vacation period.

When Paul Gregory requested a two-week vacation
in August, it was denied him because, according
to Glimbit, it did not have an experienced
replacement. "We can't spare you during the
period prior to October 31st without affecting
the efficient operation of the plant," a
Glimbit higher-up told him. However, on
November 18th, Paul Gregory was told he would
start his vacation on November 21st.

Paul Gregory hotfooted to union headquarters
and had the Local process a grievance
protesting the manner in which his vacation
desires had been treated by Glimbit. At the
arbitration hearing, Gregory contended:

  *  I've been treated unfairly by Glimbit. The
company pretended I could not be spared during
the month of August, the period during which my
and my family's vacation needs could best be
met.

A company official rejoined:

1. We genuinely could not have spared Gregory
until November.

2. Anyway, the granting of time off in the
usual vacation period is not mandatory. Our
company has the exclusive right to schedule
vacations.

     Was The Company Right?  YES  q  NO  q


RULING

The company had the right to postpone the
employee's vacation, ruled Arbitrator Peter M.
Kelliher. The referee stated:

"The contract does not require that employees
be granted a vacation during the period of
April 1st to October 31st. (The contract)
indicates that the vacation season shall
'preferably' be during such a period. It is
also noted that the final right of determining
the vacation period of any employee is
exclusively reserved to the company to insure
efficient operation of the plant."  (15 LA 481)

COMMENT

Here's the provision in the union contract
which reserved to management the right to
determine when vacations could be granted:

"Section 8. Vacations shall insofar as possible
be granted by the company at time between April
1st and October 31st most desired by the
eligible employees, but final right of
determining the vacation of any employee is
exclusively reserved to the company  to insure
efficient operation of the plant." (emphasis
added)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS IN ACTION via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

HAS A COMPANY A RIGHT TO SUSPEND AN EMPLOYEE
WHO IS UNDER ARREST?

What Happened:On October 8, 1992, Travis
Lowery, a Security Protection Officer (SPO)
employed by the Vansellor Security Service, was
arrested while on duty at a facility operated
by an oil company. Lowery was charged with
committing the crime of assault and battery. He
was taken to a local jail and released on bail
24 hours later. When Lowery returned to work,
Vansellor immediately suspended him without pay
pending the outcome of the criminal charges
against him.

Lowery's union came to his defense with a
grievance for his reinstatement. The union's
demand was adamantly rejected by Vansellor and
both sides soon squared off before an
arbitrator. At the hearing, the employer
maintained:

1. A security officer like Lowery is held to a
higher standard than other workers because he
carries a weapon and has authority over people.
Lowery was arrested for a crime of violence. We
can't take the risk of permitting him to
continue on duty.

2. To permit a security employee, who is under
arrest, to remain at his post would cause us
great embarrassment among our clients.

Lowery's union advocate insisted:

  *  During his 6 years as a Security
Protection Officer at Vansellor, Lowery has
been an excellent employee and has received
high performance evaluations from his
superiors.

  *  Vansellor did not conduct any
investigation of the charges made against
Lowery, nor produce any evidence he is guilty
of the offense.

  *  There was little publicity about Lowery's
arrest - and Vansellor has suffered little, if
any, embarrassment.
   Did The Employee Win?  YES  q  NO  q


RULING

Reinstate the Security Protection Officer,
ruled Arbitrator Charles H.Frost. The
arbitrator saw no merit in the employer's plea
of "embarrassment." He could find no proof that
there was widespread public knowledge of
Lowery's arrest--or that his co-workers were
reluctant to work with him. The arbitrator was
also impressed by the fact that Lowery had
received disparate treatment in that  other
security personnel who had been charged with
more serious crimes were not disciplined. (94-1
ARB Par.4100)

COMMENT

Where an employee is arrested at the work site
for committing a crime, the employer is faced
with two options. If the employer finds that
the offense calls for discipline, it can
proceed to prove its case  in the same way as
if the employee were charged with industrial
misconduct. On the other hand, the employer can
leave the matter to the courts and reserve
final decision until the verdict is rendered.

Bear in mind that if an employer decides to
suspend the employee, it must be able to prove
that keeping the employee on the job pending a
court decision, would have an adverse impact on
its operations.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS IN ACTION via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

WHEN DOES AN EMPLOYEE BECOME PERMANENTLY AND
TOTALLY DISABLED?

What Happened: While cutting torque converters
in the course of his job with the Nedicrode
Corporation, Edward Fowler reached up to pull a
converter from a pallet. The act caused him to
feel a burning sting and to pass out.

Fowler was hospitalized and treated by various
neurosurgeons and orthopedic surgeons. He
underwent operations which, among other
results, led to the removal of the disc around
the nerve in his lower spine. Despite all the
treatment rendered to him, Fowler was often
racked  by severe pain.

Fowler pressed a claim for Workers'
Compensation and was awarded permanent and
total disability benefits. While conceding
Fowler's entitlement to Workers' Compensation,
Nedicrode's insurance company challenged his
right to total benefits. Both sides wound up in
a courtroom, where Fowler's lawyer set forth:

1. The physicians and vocational experts who
have examined and treated Fowler unite in
declaring that he is 100% vocationally disabled
because of his pain. He will never again  be
able to do the only work he was trained to
perform.

2. There is no choice but to grant him
permanent and total disability benefits.

The insurance attorney replied:

  *  If he tried, Fowler could find employment
other than that he performed prior to his
accident. He could be retrained to handle
lighter jobs. After all, he has no restrictions
on walking or driving.

  *  It is unreasonable to place a relatively
young person such as Fowler into virtual
retirement on full benefits.
     Was The Insurance Carrier Right?  YES  q
NO  q

RULING

Fowler is entitled to permanent and total
disability benefits, ruled the Alabama Court of
Civil Appeals. Fowler's case was strongly
bolstered by testimony from physicians and
vocational experts as to the incurable and
relentless pain visited upon him by his
on-the-job accident. The court brushed aside
the insurance carrier's argument that Fowler
should explore possibilities of alternative
employment.

"The test for total disability is the inability
to perform one's trade, and if so unable, then
the inability to obtain other reasonably
gainful employment. The employee is not
required to be absolutely helpless or suffer
total disability. Gainful employment means
employment similar in remuneration to that
earned prior to the injury (and) compatible
with the employee's pre-injury occupation, age,
education and aptitude," the tribunal held.
(630 So.2d 471)

COMMENT

In an earlier decision, an Alabama court ruled
"An employee who is so injured that he can
perform no services other than those which are
so limited in quality, dependability, or
quantity that a  reasonable stable market for
them does not exist, may well be classified as
totally disabled." (103 So.2d 315)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS IN ACTION via NewsNet
May 1, 1994

IF AN EMPLOYEE IS SICK MUST HE BE CALLED
FOR OVERTIME?

What Happened: "I won't be in today, Mr.
Schultz," Charley Stratton rasped over the
phone to his supervisor one Friday morning.
"I'm down with a cold."

"Hope you feel better. See you Monday,' replied
Schultz.

Stratton looked better on Monday--until he
learned that several members of his unit had
been asked to work overtime on the previous
Saturday.

"Why wasn't I asked,too?" Stratton asked his
supervisor in an injured tone.

"You were out sick. You weren't in shape to
work."

Stratton was so angry that he filed a grievance
demanding that he paid for the overtime denied
him. When the issue reached arbitration,
Stratton fumed:

1.The union contract says that all employees
are entitled to an equal crack at overtime.

2. Although I was sick on Friday, it didn't
mean that I was unwell on Saturday. A telephone
call to my home by the supervisor would have
made that clear.

A company factotum riposted:

  *  When an employee calls in sick, we assume
that he's out of commission - until he tells us
otherwise.

  *  It's unreasonable to expect a supervisor
to call up employees who are at home sick every
time we have to get up a group for overtime
work to check up if they're well enough to come
in.
  Was The Compnay Right?  YES  q  NO  q


RULING

No overtime money for Stratton, ruled
Arbitrator Raymond Goetz. There is a reasonable
basis for assuming that an employee who is out
sick is unavailable for overtime, the
arbitrator pointed out. Furthermore, the need
for overtime usually arises shortly before the
work is to be performed. A company cannot be
expected to phone absent employees to come in
for work on short notice. The logical step is
to ask the employees who are on hand to do the
extra work. (72-2 ARB Par., 8459)

COMMENT

The outcome might have been different if
Stratton had known about the overtime and had
telephoned in to his supervisor to volunteer
for the work. The arbitrator suggested that
then the employer would have been on notice
that the employee was able to work overtime.

RULING

No merit raise for Glenn Collier, ruled
Arbitrator Neil M. Gundermann. The umpire
opined:

"The Progress Review Form did not indicate that
the employee was performing in a manner which
would support a merit increase. To receive such
an increase there must be real merit--greater
output, handling of more difficult assignments,
greater effort or some manifestation of greater
value to the company. A merit increase is not
due merely with the passage of time." (67-1 ARB
Par. 8217)

COMMENT
What won this case for the company is that
management was able to show that it had a true
"Merit Progress" procedure. The employees were
rated every six months--not haphazardly--but in
face-to-face talks with their supervisors. Good
and bad points were discussed and supervisors
encouraged employees to ask questions on how
they could improve.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-14</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B047-318</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mt21.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033701 text/html 86769
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:34:55 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:45 GMT
Content-length: 86582
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mt21.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1995<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>QUARTERLY APPRAISALS REPLACE NATWEST'S ANNUAL PAY REVIEW</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1001 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS BRIEF</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>CENTRAL BANK NEEDS TO CUT JOBS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(132 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>RAPID GROWTH IN SALARIES FOR UK MANAGERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(114 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>FIRST UNION ABANDONS COMBINED SALESFORCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(173 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>STANDARD CHARTERED TO CUT STAFF</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(132 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>SWISS RE TAKES DERIVATIVES STAKE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(92 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>VOLUNTARY WORK BENEFITS EMPLOYEES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(182 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>ATMS ON THE RISE IN JAPAN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(82 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>BUILDING SOCIETY STAFF OPT FOR REDUNDANCY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(242 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>FRANCE: REFORM OF BANKING HOURS FALLS THROUGH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(514 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>FRANCE:  UAP FAVOURS PART-TIMERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(233 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>STAFF SUPPORT SCHEMES CATCH ON WITH INSURERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(233 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>PORTUGAL: BPSM'S OVERSTAFFING CURE: MORE BRANCHES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(521 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>CONSULTANTS ARGUE FOR FLEXIBLE BENEFITS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(964 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>PUTTING AN END TO RECRUITMENT HASSLE?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(782 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>TAPPING ASIA'S MASSIVE POOL OF TALEN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(497 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>TRAINING KIT KEEPS FUTURE LEADERS INDOORS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(539 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>EUROPE: BANK STAFF FALL DOWN ON FUND TRANSFERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(830 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>MIDLAND GAINS STRENGTH FROM DIVERSITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(975 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>A COLLECTION OF FAMILIAR TALES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2202 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FEATURE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>DON'T FIRE ALL YOUR BRANCH STAFF YET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2618 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

QUARTERLY APPRAISALS REPLACE NATWEST'S ANNUAL PAY REVIEW

THE UK'S National Westminster Bank has introduced a new employee
appraisal system in an effort to do away with the stress of an annual
pay and performance review.

In Britain, January is traditionally the time when banks and insurance
companies review their employees' progress in the last 12 months and
the time when performance-based pay increases or promotions are made.

But many human resource executives - and staff members - are unhappy
with having only one opportunity a year to discuss performance.

At NatWest two new measures based on quarterly meetings between staff
and their line managers have been introduced to tackle the remoteness
of the annual review.

Kelvin Moore, senior human resources executive in NatWest's UK branch
business, said the new appraisal system is aimed at creating "an
ongoing dialogue" between staff and line managers about their
individual development and their management and technical abilities.

"The view was that there needed to be far more thinking about how an
individual develops," Moore said. So the bank started a new programme,
"valuing individual performance", which is aimed at identifying
employees' development needs, possible training courses and other
activities. The programme applies to all staff every three months.

"When we talk about people's developmental needs we would seek
opportunities in their current roles to develop their skills," Moore
said.

Running along side "valuing individual performance" are "individual
performance plans" which set out what the individual should be trying
to achieve. "We are moving away from saying that the only thing that is
important is profit and increasing our focus on corporate health,"
Moore said.

"Individual performance plans" use balanced business score cards.
Similar score cards are also used for business units within the NatWest
group and for the group itself. "The individual performance plans
should be feeding into that," he said.

The balanced score card seeks results and achievements in four areas:
financial; customer service; quality; and organisational development.
"Organisational development is about how you manage and motivate to
help our staff perform," Moore said. "There are quality targets at each
branch and we use a customer service index and mystery shoppers to test
the level of service in each branch.

"If everyone is performing according to their individual plan that will
have an upward effect on the organisation. The totality of their input
will lead to improved organisation. The objective is to further
motivate that totality."

NatWest admits that a three-monthly appraisal system costs much more in
terms of paperwork, time and money, as an annual review - but Moore
believes the approach is more cost effective.

"It is more valuable to us," he said. "The only way to get sustainable
market advantage is through the collective achievement of your staff.
Under the old annual review system people often forgot towards the end
of the year what happened in the first three months. There are huge
efficiencies in our new system because it's forward looking, it helps
us plan our training and development schedule. In 1994 we were looking
ahead to our human resource needs for 1995."

Alan Ainsworth, assistant secretary of the Banking, Insurance and
Finance Union, admitted that "in crude terms the system is very good".
But the trade unionist believes there are problems with its
implementation.

"If people are in an office that has very tight staffing levels there
are problems finding time appraisal," Ainsworth said. "There is also a
problem with people not understanding the system - both staff and
managers. Under the old system, if you got a high score, you knew that
would be reflected in your pay rise. People don't see how the new
system relates to their pay packet.

"The new system is so vague that no one is comfortable with it. Staff
are used to managers telling them what to do, they are not used to
managers talking about it."

Despite trade union misgivings, Moore claims the system is popular with
NatWest's workforce. "Our internal surveys show that our 55,000 staff
have welcomed this," he said. "They see it as something that is
developmental and training orientated. It is very important to them
that they continually update their skills and it's very healthy for the
organisation to have staff in a developmental frame of mind."

NatWest also claim that the quarterly staff appraisal has helped team
work. "We wanted to encourage local teams and managers by getting a
dialogue going between individuals and their line managers," said
Moore. "'Valuing individual performance' encourages line managers to
have conversations about staff development as part of their day to day
activities and it makes our managers more coaching orientated."

Though the new quarterly appraisal system applies to all staff, NatWest
is continuing to use its old system of measuring competencies among
senior managers.

"At NatWest group we are quite well advanced in our understanding and
use of competencies which we have developed over 40 years," Moore said.
"We have identified 11 critical competencies needed by a quite a small
percentage of high performance managers which differentiates units in
terms of performance. The real ideal is understanding them and relating
them to individual performance. Research has shown that most highly
successful managers are good at two or three competencies
- but they know which they are good at and play to their strengths.

"After identifying individual strengths and weaknesses we do not go
about a remedial exercise. It's important to find out what people are
good at, then get them better at that. To use a sporting analogy, if
you have a good goal scorer in a football team, you do not start
training him to be a goalkeeper, you work at making him a better
striker. You organise teams so that they have a range of skills between
them. A team where people have different strengths and competencies
will always perform better than a team of all rounders."

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

CENTRAL BANK NEEDS TO CUT JOBS

FRANCE'S CENTRAL bank needs to cut between 4,000 and 6,000 jobs in the
next five to ten years, according to an external report by consulting
firms McKinsey, Bernard Bruhnes and Gide Loyrette Nouel.

The report commissioned by the governors of the Banque de France, has
sowed fear among the current staff of 16,500.

The consultants claim the move is needed if the Banque de France is to
become as competitive as other European central banks. The report
outlined the importance in information processing and the printing and
sorting of banknotes. At present 2,050 people are employed by the
central bank and one French banknote costs between 80 centimes and 1
franc to manufacture, a sum far higher than most other national issuing
houses.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

RAPID GROWTH IN SALARIES FOR UK MANAGERS

SALARY COSTS of managerial and professional staff in the UK grew at a
faster rate in 1994 than in the previous year.

According to research by London-based Incomes Data Services (IDS), pay
awards for managerial staff between August and October this year
averaged 3.4 percent - compared with average increases of only 2.7
percent in 1993.

IDS warned that the increase in pay awards does not necessarily mean
the start of a new inflationary spiral. The independent research
organisation said relatively few pay awards are made in the third
quarter of the year. "January and April are much more significant
months," said IDS's Steve Glenn.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

FIRST UNION ABANDONS COMBINED SALESFORCE

THE ONLY major US bank with a combined salesforce for its trust and
brokerage departments is abandoning the initiative after two years.

In 1992, First Union, based in Charlotte, Carolina, combined its 80
brokers and 40 salesmen from its personal trust department to create an
integrated salesforce of "personal investment counsellors" (PICs).
Since then the number of PICs has grown to 200.

But now the super-regional bank is scrapping the initiative. "The sales
were not as high as expected," a spokesman said. "In the future, we
want to go after the trust side of the business more aggressively."

The bank plans to refocus its PICs exclusively on brokerage sales and
will recruit an entirely new salesforce of 75 dedicated trust
professionals between now and January 1995. The decision comes soon
after the resignation of Lamar Polston, First Union's retail brokerage
chief, in September.

"My guess is that their cross-training didn't work," said John DeMarco,
a director at wealth market research firm, PSI.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

STANDARD CHARTERED TO CUT STAFF

STANDARD CHARTERED, the UK's seventh-biggest bank in terms of assets,
is reducing its worldwide staff by 3,000 between now and the end of
1995.

The UK-based international bank, which employed 30,000 last year, is
well on its way to meeting that target. A bank spokesman said it has
already shed about 1,000 staff in India and Africa using voluntary
redundancy schemes.

"We are selling off non-core assets," the spokesman added. "It is a
positive move as far as the business and shareholders are concerned."

The 10 percent cut in Standard Chartered's workforce is aimed at
cutting running costs in the medium term. According to its last interim
report, Standard Chartered's operating costs rose by 7 percent in the
first half of 1994.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

SWISS RE TAKES DERIVATIVES STAKE

A STRATEGIC alliance has been formed between insurance company Swiss Re
and the banking group CS Holding, the parent company of Credit Suisse.
Swiss Re is taking a 20 percent stake in Credit Suisse Financial
Products, a derivatives joint venture between Credit Suisse and CS
First Boston.

A joint statement by the new partners said the move would"enable both
companies to benefit from each other's expertise by developing new
products, and to respond to new market developments which link
reinsurance products with banking products."

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

VOLUNTARY WORK BENEFITS EMPLOYEES

POSTING STAFF on charity assignments is an excellent human resource
practice, claims a UK group, Action: Employees in the Community.

Many UK banks and insurance companies have recognised the public
relations value of staff who are involved in voluntary work. But now,
they are beginning to see the training benefits too. National
Westminster Bank is one of a group of companies which are trying to
find a method of measuring these benefits.

Action claims that temporary charity assignments for junior and
middle-managers may be a way of solving the problem of how to give
staff a taste of responsibility in today's flatter organisations.

TSB uses charity work as a key part of its management training
programme and candidates for promotion are encouraged to take part in
short-term projects, such as helping charities to draw up business
plans. The bank thinks charity work is also a way of developing
leadership skills - in an environment where most people are volunteers,
dictatorial management does not work, volunteers need to be coached,
encouraged and motivated.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

ATMS ON THE RISE IN JAPAN

AUTOMATIC TELLER Machine (ATM) branches in Japan are expected to
outnumber staffed branches at 11 city banks by the end of 1995.

Unmanned branches are likely to increase by 428 to 3,922 by the end of
March. At present the banks have 3,573 staffed branches.

The new ATM units will reduce running costs while extending the banks'
retail base. Japanese banks are under heavy pressure to reduce costs
because of bad debt write-offs.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

BUILDING SOCIETY STAFF OPT FOR REDUNDANCY

STAFF AT the Halifax and Leeds Permanent Building Societies are said to
be queuing up for voluntary redundancy payments.

The two building societies' plan to merge and then convert to a public
limited company with full banking licence (see HRBI 18) has been
approved by the UK authorities. President of the board of trade Michael
Heseltine has said he will not refer the planned move to the Monopolies
and Mergers Commission.

The societies hope to reduce staff numbers after the merger through
natural wastage - but, according to their staff associations, many
employees are hoping to benefit from the voluntary redundancy packages
on offer.

Two factors are given for the popularity of the redundancy schemes: the
packages on offer are generous, for example, Leeds staff who succeed in
volunteering for redundancy would receive two and a half times their
annual salary in a lump sum; and with overall numbers employed in the
building society sector increasing, many staff feel they will easily
find employment elsewhere.

The members of both societies will vote on the merger proposal this
spring. If it goes ahead, there is already speculation that a further
merger with TSB Group may be in the offing. The advantage of such a
move is that it would immediately give the Halifax a large number of
new current account holders who do not yet have a relationship with
either building society.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

FRANCE: REFORM OF BANKING HOURS FALLS THROUGH

A MUCH hoped for reform of bank opening hours in France has collapsed
after all five unions involved failed to agree with the proposals.
Talks on the issue lasted for almost a year, and at one stage, a
breakthrough seemed likely (see HRBI 17).

Since 1937 French bank opening hours have been restricted by a decree
limiting freedoms that banks elsewhere take for granted. For example:
shift working is restricted - 9 am to 5 pm is still the general rule;
and many banks are barred from opening on Saturdays.

The restrictions applied to members of the Association Francaise des
Banques (AFB). But three key players in France's financial sector are
not AFB members and so are not limited by the decree.

These are: CCP, the banking arm of La Poste, which opens 59 hours a
week and employs shift workers; Credit Agricole which was originally a
farmers' bank and was given greater flexibility to serve rural
customers; and the co-operative and savings banks, which were not
regarded as full banks in 1937.

The AFB argues that its member banks are losing business to those
financial institutions which are exempt from the decree. In the last
ten years savings banks have expanded steadily, while AFB members have
been forced to rationalise and cut jobs.

The decree could have been annulled by the labour minister using laws
aimed at removing job creation barriers. Instead, he called on the
banks to negotiate with the unions.

But the talks got off to a poor start. Early on two unions, the
Confederation Generale du Travail (CGT) and Force Ouvriere (FO),
launched anti-reform campaigns that painted a picture of employees
working around the clock, seven days a week. This left the AFB with
only three unions with which to negotiate: the managers' union, the
SNB/CGC; the CFDT; and the CFTC. These unions, refusing to discuss a
repeal of the 1937 decree, said they would only consider its revision.

After a brief deadlock, the AFB agreed to discuss revision and a
30-month trial period ending in November 1997 was agreed. The three
unions said if the trial lead to job creation it would become
permanent, while the AFB offered to cut working hours by 20 percent for
those working later than 6 pm.

But the proposal collapsed when the CFTC claimed that staff incentives
were not good enough to guarantee that employee participation would
indeed be strictly voluntary and the AFB refused to include
a"volunteers only" clause in the agreement.

The SNB/CGC also wanted more detailed negotiations with individual
banks, a move the AFB said would delay the trial by a year.

By December, the AFB's only hope was the CFDT, which still seemed to
favour reform. Additional concessions were given, including one where
employees received payment for 39 hours' work, while only working a 35
hour week. But the final nail in the coffin came on December 15, when
more than 60 percent of the CFDT's members voted to reject the
proposal.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

FRANCE:  UAP FAVOURS PART-TIMERS

EUROPE'S SECOND-largest insurer, UAP, has signed a "contract for state
employment" with the French government.

The deal signed by UAP president Jacques Friedmann and labour minister
Michel Giraud means that an agreement made by the company last May to
introduce voluntary part-time working for administrative personnel at
UAP will go ahead.

The accord aims to put in place a job share scheme that will take
advantage of the new legislation on part-time work, which UAP said will
"increase employment but not reduce the company's volume of work".

UAP hopes to create 400 new jobs in 1995 through encouraging existing
staff to work part time or to take "progressive retirement".

The company said it hopes, on the one hand, to contribute to the
collective effort to fight unemployment and, on the other hand, to
correct its "age pyramid" by taking on younger staff who will bring new
skills to the company. In the meantime, employees aged over 55 will be
offered a "progressive departure" programme which will allow them to
pass on their expertise to younger employees through a newly
established tutoring system.

Always keen to be seen as innovative in matters of human resources, UAP
wishes "to demonstrate that job sharing is the way forward, viable on
the ground and beneficial to all involved: the company, the employees
and the group".

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

STAFF SUPPORT SCHEMES CATCH ON WITH INSURERS

MOST NORTH American insurance companies now have formal staff support
schemes aimed at helping employees overcome personal problems,
according to the Life Office Management Association (LOMA).

The schemes, described by LOMA as employee assistance programmes
(EAPS), are designed to identify and resolve those employee problems
which may lead to reduced productivity. The problems may be
work-related or domestic. According to LOMA, the EAPs address issues
including: personal health; marriage and family; money management/debt;
alcohol/chemical dependency; legal problems; or job stress.

A LOMA survey of 145 US and Canadian life and health insurers found
that about two-thirds or respondents offered EAPs and saw them as a
method that reduced absenteeism and improved productivity and work
quality.

Eighty percent of companies which provide EAPs do so through subsidised
counselling services. More than 90 percent of them also extend their
services to employees' immediate families.

Responsibility for EAPs usually rests with human resources departments,
however, the survey found that about 80 percent of the companies with
EAPs provide them through outside agencies.

According to LOMA, assistance with marital/family problems was the most
commonly used service, with psychological assistance running a close
second - particularly for problems related to clinical depression.
Alcohol and substance abuse, the original impetus for the development
of EAPs in the early-1980s, ranked fourth on the list of frequently
used treatments.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

PORTUGAL: BPSM'S OVERSTAFFING CURE: MORE BRANCHES

THE FIFTH-LARGEST bank in Portugal plans to increase its branch network
by more than 50 percent in the next five years and thus help solve a
chronic overstaffing problem.

Banco Pinto & Sotto Mayor (BPSM) is now back in the hands of the
Champalimaud family, 19 years after it was nationalised in 1975. BPSM's
former owners Antonio Champalimaud and his son Luis, now hold 80
percent of the bank after paying Esc1,528 ($10) per share for 24.4
million BPSM shares. Their bid was considerably higher than the
Esc1,300 offered by the only other bidder in the reprivatisation, Banco
Financia.

BPSM's return to the Champalimaud empire, which includes one of the
country's largest insurance group, Cia de Seguros Mundial Confianca,
creates the biggest financial group in Portugal.

As if this was not enough, Luis Champalimaud, in an interview with the
weekly newspaper Expresso, said that a massive expansion programme is
planned for the bank. This covered not only increased credit and
deposits, but also a huge increase in the number of bank branches and a
corresponding increase in employees.

BPSM currently has about 220 branches, and plans to increase this
number by at least a further 130 over the next five years.

Raising cash for the expansion programme - the price tag was not
revealed - will be done in three ways according to Luis Champalimaud.
Firstly, BPSM will embark on an aggressive campaign to increase
deposits. Secondly, the bank plans a Esc20 billion capital increase
over the next two years. Thirdly, funds from a similar sized capital
increase in Mundial Confianca will be transferred to the bank.

Luis Champalimaud dismissed worries concerning overbanking: "It is true
that in some places there is, or could be, too high a concentration of
bank branches, but at the end of the day it's a case of survival of the
fittest - and we are fitter than most."

Analysts point out that BPSM has a massive potential network of
branches at its disposal via Mundial Confianca and add that the
conversion of any number of these insurance offices into allfinanz
branches could be done at a minimum cost. "Banco Mello is expanding on
the back of insurer Imperio in precisely this manner," said Jose Freire
at Banco Espirito Santo.

The move would also aid BPSM's overstaffing problems - when Banco
Comercial Portugues bid for BPSM last year, it said it would slash
BPSM's workforce by at least a third - because existing employees can
be relocated to new branches, avoiding a big and expensive recruitment
campaign.

As Luis Champalimaud said:"We have too many staff at the moment. That
means that we either reduce the number or we find work for them to do.
We are opting for the latter."

The Champalimaud family is also looking to expand in other areas and
has made public its interest in acquiring the 26 percent indirect stake
held by Banco Espanol de Credito in Banco Totta & Acores, which the
Portuguese government is desperately trying to win back from the
Spanish bank.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

CONSULTANTS ARGUE FOR FLEXIBLE BENEFITS

FLEXIBLE BENEFIT programmes can help organisations control costs, but
many companies have yet to realise its advantages, according to
consulting firm Towers Perrin.

The consultancy says flexibility in benefits is on the increase,
particularly when it comes to pensions and company cars, and the
financial industry is leading the way. But it adds that many companies
are unwilling to make their pay and conditions more flexible - because
they believe it will increase administrative costs.

Towers Perrin's conclusions are based on a survey of 400 UK companies
employing 2 million staff, carried out in conjunction with the
Confederation of British Industry.

Helen Freeman, a Towers Perrin principal, said: "Motivations to
implement benefit flexibility centre on either or both of the
following: the desire to improve employees' appreciation of the
benefits provided, maximising the value to the company of the amount
spent on benefits; and the desire to control benefit costs."

Twenty nine percent of the companies in the survey were in the
financial services industry and Towers Perrin found that in the banking
and insurance sector there is greater employee choice in compensation
packages, particularly when it comes to pensions. For example, 24
percent of the financial companies surveyed offered pension benefits on
a flexible basis, compared with 17 percent of non-financial companies.

This may be because the financial sector has a better understanding of
pensions and greater access to a wider range of pension schemes.

"Many companies do not consider pensions appropriate for flex and may
be missing an opportunity to address one of the most expensive employee
benefit programmes they offer," Freeman said.

When it comes to company cars, 74 percent of financial companies
offered employees a choice between a car and cash, compared with 62
percent of non-financial companies. Eighty percent of financial
companies allowed employees to chose a higher value car by contributing
towards the cost of it, an option available to only 56 percent of
non-financial firms.

"The trend towards flexibility within car and pension arrangements may
reflect the fact that these are often the highest-cost employee
benefits," said Freeman. "Companies may be recognising that, if flex is
to have a significant cost-containment effect, these benefits must be
included."

Other areas of possible flexibility within compensation packages
include: company parking; subsidised cafeteria; luncheon vouchers;
subsidised health club memberships; company gyms; annual health
screening; dental care; private petrol allowances; travelling expenses;
share ownership; group discounts; employee, accident insurance; loans;
subsidised mortgages; school fees; company creches; and child care
vouchers.

The survey found that on-site creches and child care vouchers were the
least popular forms of supplementary benefit offered to employees,
available at only 7 percent and 5 percent of companies respectively.

Towers Perrin also found that giving employees greater choice about
their length of annual holidays is also unpopular, though companies in
the financial sector are a little more flexible on this issue.

"Few companies allow or intend to allow employees either to buy or sell
holidays in exchange for cash or other benefits," said Freeman. "This
may be because allowing employees to sell holidays is a cash cost to
the company, which may not be made up in increased productivity.
However, 57 percent of respondents do allow employees to carry forward
unused holiday (72 percent of financial companies) and 37 percent of
respondents overall allow employees to take unpaid time off to extend
their holiday."

Reviewing the survey, Freeman concluded: "Cost containment within
private medical programmes is emerging as an issue, presumably because
of recent double-digit increases in health-care costs. Benefits with
little or no cost to companies (such as parking and supplemental
disability insurance) are increasingly included in benefit programmes.

"However, despite the increase in benefits flexibility, and in its
perceived advantages, companies continue to express concern.
Administrative complexity and cost tops the list of perceived
disadvantages. This concern must be weighed against the advantages. It
is the experiences of companies who implement flex that will determine
whether a role for this approach is secured more broadly within benefit
programmes."

Another Towers Perrin principal, Marc Hommel, went even further: he
sees flexible benefits as one of the main trends in employee
compensation for the future.

"It is very new. It is going to increase," he said. "I would say the UK
is between the US and Continental Europe when it comes to progress in
this area. In the US, there is very high flexibility and choice in
benefits, under the banner of employee empowerment.

"On the continent, it is right on the other extreme. There, companies
are seen as much more paternalistic. Employees like their employers to
make all sorts of decisions for them. For example, in France, when it
comes to holidays, it is August or nothing. In countries like Germany
the only flexibility on pensions is whether you accept a lump sum or an
annuity, there is greater flexibility on pensions in the UK.

"But we are beginning to see things change on the continent. That is
being driven by recession and high cost of employment. The employment
costs currently experienced by European firms is unsustainable.

"Unions and works councils have been very anti-choice - they are into
collective bargaining and agreements made with works councils in
Holland, Germany, Belgium and France cover very senior employees. But
the workforce is changing and we are seeing an end to the job for life.

"We are beginning to see larger German companies looking at cost
control. They want to reduce costs but not loose employee appreciation.
Rather than provide all employee benefits en masse, you can offer a
choice. Offering choice makes you an attractive employer at very little
extra cost."

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

PUTTING AN END TO RECRUITMENT HASSLE?

NEW SOFTWARE developed by a Californian company may reduce recruitment
headaches for human resource executives.

Resumix, a world leader in electronic systems used for processing
application forms and resumes, recently announced partnership
agreements with Oracle, ADP, RAMCO Systems, Integral, Decisis, ESSENCE
Systems and Worksmart- Technologies.

A new Resumix product, known as OpenAccess, was the catalyst for the
partnerships. OpenAccess is a set of flexible computer interface tools
which help automate and synchronise data exchange between the Resumix's
processing systems and other human resource management systems (HRMSs).

Resumix spokesman Joseph Hnilo explained that OpenAccess will make
databases more easily accessible to HR system suppliers. Resumix's own
knowledge base contains over 100,000 rules and concepts related to
recruitment in specific industries, he said.

"The Resumix knowledge base applies an objective standard of
measurement to job candidates, and can therefore eliminate the
subjectivity in the selection process," Hnilo said.

"Our system is not designed to tell people who to hire. But we enable
recruiters to quickly and accurately assess candidates' skills and
qualifications - that helps companies save time and money."

The Resumix system standardises job applications and resumes by
categorising candidates' previous job titles and assigning numerical
values to candidates' skills. Client firms can enter their hiring needs
into the Resumix system to find the best matched candidate for a
particular position. It is a process which, according to Hnilo, takes
only minutes.

Job candidates' resumes can be scanned into a database using fax or
electronic mail. The system then captures an exact electronic image of
the resume, making the recruitment process "paperless".

Paperless recruitment has decided advantages for human resource
departments in large US companies, as many receive thousands of
applications for hundreds of different jobs every year and each resume
must be kept on file for a set period of time. For example, Californian
state law requires companies to keep resumes for every job application
for at least two years.

Once a job application has been scanned into the Resumix system, a text
file is created so that it can be transmitted anywhere electronically.
The system also automatically extracts information from job
applications, including listed skills and work experience, without the
need for additional data entry by client companies.

Resumix is currently targeting the financial services industry, and its
list of clients includes Bank of America, ITT Hartford, Salomon
Brothers, Principal Mutual Life Insurance, Wells Fargo Bank, and
American Express.

Founded in 1988, the company sold its services mainly to high-tech
firms during its first three years of operations. Now its market
includes the financial services industry, telecommunications companies,
universities and colleges and even manufacturers.

"Banking has a lot of similarities to many of our earlier users," said
Hnilo. "Like high tech companies, banking requires a great degree of
skill specificity, from portfolio managers to tellers.

"Our system can help banks in re-engineering efforts. For example,
banks can apply the software internally, to analyse their current
employees in terms of matching them to future projects and planning."

Noting that the bigger international banks are moving aggressively into
Asia and Latin America, Hnilo added: "The system can also be used by
banks or insurers who are expanding into new technology or geographic
markets, to find staff for their new locations."

Because it works with many different data entry systems, Resumix
OpenAccess allows recruitment data to be freely imported from HRMSs,
E-mail, electronic kiosks, application forms scanning systems, and
groupware such as Lotus Notes and Microsoft Exchange.

This versatility attracted its current list of marketing partners,
including another Californian company, Oracle, who is a leading
supplier of human resource solutions. Resumix's OpenAccess will operate
with Oracle's Cooperative Application Initiative (CAI) programme,
creating a resume scanning and processing system that will be offered
with Oracle's HRMS.

Oracle's vice-president of Migration Services and Worldwide Alliance,
Marc Herbert, said the Resumix partnership will enable his company to
provide "fast and effective management and deployment of human
resources to help companies react quickly and respond appropriately to
changes and opportunities in today's demanding market."

Automatic Data Processing (ADP) will market Resumix to interface with
its HR software. ADP, America's largest provider of outsourced payroll
processing services, selected Resumix to enhance its human resource
management systems.

ADP's director of Strategic Alliances, Elaine Myrback, said her company
was impressed with "both the functionality of the Resumix system and
the flexibility of its data exchange capabilities".

A private company, Resumix posted a 130 percent revenue growth from
1992 to 1993, and its financial services base, according to Hnilo, now
stands at"5 percent and growing".

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

TAPPING ASIA'S MASSIVE POOL OF TALEN

Banks and insurance companies may find it easier to recruit bilingual
employees in their fast growing Asian markets, thanks to a database
being developed by a US recruitment company.

International Career Information (ICI) of New Jersey, claims that its
database of bilingual Asian college students in the US in unique.  The
database holds details on 25,000 undergraduate students from countries
including Japan, China, Singapore, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Malaysia,
Indonesia, Korea, Vietnam and Thailand, who are all studying at US
universities.

The database's customers include retail banks Citibank and National
Westminster Bank, and investment banks such as Bankers Trust and
Goldman Sachs.

According to ICI's director of operations, Wayne Allen, the database
can be tailored to meet the companies' specific hiring needs for a fee
raning from $1,500 to $3,000. Clients can be provided with a list of
possible job candidates including details on their natinalities, their
educational achievement and work experience.

"A bank, for example, can select a certain subject major, such as
finace, computer or technology major," Allen said.  "Once we receive
the criteria from the bank, we can send each qualified student a
targeted, proactive notice, making them aware of the bank's interest in
their qualifications".

Allen explained that ICI is the international arm of a Japanese
recruitment firm, Recruit Company, and has traditionally kept track of
Japanese graduate and undergraduate students studying in the US.
However, duirng the past two years, ICI has widened its remit to track
the progress of all Asian students in the US.

Now the company is developing a database on mid-career executives
interested in returning to Asia, Alled said.

A recent ICI survey of 2,300 Asians studying in the US revealed that a
large majority - 89 per cent - preferred to work for a foreign
multinational rather than an Asian-based firm.  This, according to
Allen, creates an opportunity for US and European banks and insurers
that want to recruit the best staff for their new Asian operations.

Most of the leading US financial houses, including JP Morgan, Merrill
Lynch, Citibank and Chase Manhattan, are rushing to establish offices
in the fast-growing economies of Singapore, Thailand and China.

US insurance companies are also moving agressively into the region.
Jeffrey Malkovsky, vice-president and chief financial officer of CIGNA
International, predicted that Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and
Thailand will offer the greatest near-term opportunities for insurance
companies.

Allen contends that ICI is well placed to meet the requirements of
multinationals in Asia.

The company unveiled its database system at the Pan Asia MBA Job Fair
last September in New York, where it linked up a personal computer with
one in Singapore.  The cross-Pacific link-up allowed corporate
recruiters in Singapore to interview Asian students attending the job
fair.

ICI plans a similar intercontinental link-up at the Pan Asian
Engineering and Computer Science Job Fair, which is scheduled for
February 24 in San Jose, California

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

TRAINING KIT KEEPS FUTURE LEADERS INDOORS

OUTDOOR PURSUIT exercises have long been recognised as valuable
training methods, particularly in developing leadership and teamworking
ability - but the days of military style exercises in the great
outdoors may be numbered.

Outdoor pursuits are expensive in terms of money and staff time.
Another drawback, particularly in the middle of winter, is that not
every prospective business leader reacts favourably to the prospect of
several days living in the wilds. Plus there is the risk of losing
valuable staff time through injury or illness caused by exposure to the
elements.

Now UK consulting firm Martin Thompson Associates has developed a more
comfortable and less costly alternative. It is a large scale
construction kit, similar to oversized pieces of Lego or Mecanno, that
can be used indoors and outdoors.

The kit, a collection of plastic pipes, joints, platforms and wheels,
weighing 22kg and packed in two bags each measuring 30 x 42 x 55 cm,
was originally developed by name partner Martin Thompson two years ago
as a way of marketing his consultancy services. Since then, the kit has
taken on a product life of its own.

"We only expected to sell about 50 a year," Thompson said. "In the last
two years, we have sold 500. Our international sales include sales to
France, Switzerland, Germany, India, Dubai, Hong Kong and Canada."

In the UK, the list of clients includes: Abbey National, Barclays,
Lloyds Bank, Hill Samuel and Zurich Life.

The kit is "all you want from a training resource", said Shaun Lang, a
training centre manager with Yorkshire Bank. "I would unreservedly
recommend the resource to anyone involved in the training and
development of managers and leaders."

Colin Keast of Hill Samuel also described it as "the best #480" that
his firm had spent on a training resource.

Thompson has developed six training exercises using the kit, he claims
that each exercises raises basic leadership and teamwork issues,
including: listening, planning, decision making, giving and receiving
commitment.

Additionally, Thompson claims that each of the exercises, focuses on a
specific area: customer orientation; team objectives versus individual
objectives; inter-group working; communications; roles of team members
and leader empowerment; and negotiating win/win solutions.

For example, one of the exercises, Over The Bridge, calls on a team to
build a bridge and a vehicle that can pass over it. But teams must be
aware of customer needs and wants, and should ideally ask their
training facilitator for customer criteria.

"It is amazing how many teams - particularly those from a marketing
background - who assume that there may be any limitations on what the
vehicle may be use for or what kind of span the bridge must cross,"
Thompson said."Typically, people do not ask questions, they do
everything from a straight forward production point of view and have no
concept of what the customer required. In the discussion afterwards,
the importance of the customer is really brought home to them."

A group discussion lead by a trainer follows each exercise and
participants are encouraged to spend time individually considering how
the lessons learnt can be applied effectively in their place of work.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

EUROPE: BANK STAFF FALL DOWN ON FUND TRANSFERS

BANK BRANCH staff in Luxembourg, the UK and Italy are the most
competent in Europe when it comes to arranging cross-border payments
and money transfers, according to research carried out for the European
Commission.

Surprisingly, bank staff in the Netherlands - a country with a
distinguished history in foreign trade and whose people are
traditionally regarded as the most multilingual in Europe -scored the
worst, with a rating of "below adequate".

The survey of 352 branches of 165 banks was carried out by UK
consultancy Retail Banking Research on behalf of the commission, which
wanted to gauge the transparency of banking charges and conditions when
consumers transfer money from one European Union member state to
another.

The commission believes transparency in cross-border banking is vital
to the future of Europe. It stated recently: "The full benefits of the
single market will only be achieved if it is possible to transfer money
as rapidly, reliably and cheaply from one part of the [EU] to another."

Based on the results of the survey and an earlier one carried out in
1993, the commission has decided to introduce a directive in October
that would help regulate the area and improve banks' results in the
field.

That directive was opposed by the European Banking Federation, which
wanted the banking community to have its own voluntary code of conduct.
But the commission has put its foot down, after Retail Banking Research
found widespread double charging for cross-border fund transfers.

In 36 percent of cases, recipients were charged by intermediary and/or
beneficiary banks, though fund transfer instructions stated that all
fees had already been paid by the fund originators.

The European Banking Federation's general secretary, Nikolaus Bomcke,
claimed that double charging is an unavoidable part of sending
international payment. He said most sending institutions warned
customers that they could not guarantee that a charge would not be
levied on fund receivers. "We do not control the transfer chain," he
said. "Clearly, there is room for improvement, but I believe strongly
in a market solution."

Whether a market solution can solve the dismal performance of Dutch
banks remains to be seen. Banking staff in the Netherlands were found
to be the worst in Europe when it came to general helpfulness. And they
were the second worst when it came to providing customers with
information about the various options available for transferring funds
across borders; how long a transfer might take; and how much it would
cost.

The survey found that many Dutch banks "were reluctant to give cost
information to the researcher, since he did not have an account with
the bank".

Bank staff in Luxembourg scored the best when it came to providing
customers with the options available to them, the time it would take to
complete a transfer; and their overall helpfulness. But, amazingly,
"branch staff often misquoted costs. Many misread brochure details,
others omitted to mention that an exchange commission was payable".

UK branch staff scored the best when it came to quoting charges - but
they benefited from a very simple flat fee charging system, with each
bank's charges ranging from Ecu15 ($18) to Ecu45 for urgent transfers,
and Ecu10 to Ecu26 for standard transfers.

British banks also warned fund originators that electing to pay
beneficiary charges did not guarantee that the amount sent would be
credited to the beneficiary's account without further deductions. One
branch staffer told a researcher "Spanish banks charge the beneficiary
even if the sender requests to pay all costs."

"Virtually all" UK branches said they would be able to trace a
transfer, if delays occurred. In many other countries, branch staff
denied that transfers sometimes were lost in the system.

When researchers approached bank counters in Belgium, Denmark, Spain,
France, Ireland, Luxembourg and the Netherlands, the first member of
staff contacted handled the inquiry most cases. Which points to a
greater level of staff training and work flexibility in those seven
countries.

In the five other EU countries, researchers were more frequently
referred to another member of staff, or a specialist department.
Researchers were asked to make an appointment to carry out their
transaction in only three countries - in 5 percent of cases in France,
4 percent in Portugal, and 2 percent in Italy.

CROSS-BORDER PAYMENT STAFF COMPETENCE, A EUROPEAN COMPARISON

Country    Options   Costs   Time   Helpfulness   Overall Average

Belgium     3.0       3.0     3.2    3.4           3.2
Denmark     3.0       3.1     3.1    3.0           3.0
France      3.0       3.2     3.4    3.4           3.2
Germany     2.9       2.9     2.6    3.4           2.9
Greece      2.8       2.5     3.2    3.1           2.9
Ireland     3.3       3.1     3.3    3.3           3.2
Italy       3.4       3.5     3.6    3.5           3.5
Luxembourg  3.7       3.3     4.1    4.0           3.8
Netherlands 2.7       2.7     2.5    2.9           2.7
Portugal    2.9       2.8     3.1    3.2           3.0
Spain       2.2       3.1     3.2    3.3           3.0
UK          3.4       3.8     3.6    3.7           3.7
EU Average  3.0       3.1     3.2    3.4           3.2

Source: Retail Banking Research

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

MIDLAND GAINS STRENGTH FROM DIVERSITY

Midland Bank was singled out for praise by the UK Equal Opportunities
Commission for its policies aimed at ending discrimination in the work
place. Cian Molloy looks at some of the bank's initiatives

CYNICS MAY describe equal opportunity statements as empty words - but
not at Midland Bank where UK regulators have praised its equal
opportunity schemes.

The bank has a dedicated equal opportunities department with human
resource executives in charge of equal opportunities in gender, race
and disability.

There are good business reasons for their approach, according to
Midland's equal opportunities executive on race, Andie Constantinides.
"Equal opportunities is about diversity and reflecting the community,"
she said. "The more our staff reflect the community they are working
in, the more they will understand that community and the services that
our customers need.

"Diversity also helps teams. Decision making is better when the people
making decisions come from different backgrounds. Every individual has
their own thing to bring to an organisation. The more diverse the
individuals in an organisation, the more diverse the skills and
qualities that they will bring."

Official Midland policy states: "We seek to employ a workforce which
reflects the diverse community at large, because we value the
individual contribution of people, irrespective of sex, age, marital
status, disability, sexuality, race, colour, religion, ethnic or
national origin.

"We will treat all Midland employees with dignity and respect and we
will provide a working environment free from unlawful discrimination,
victimisation or harassment."

The bank goes further to state that if any act by an employee breaches
its equal opportunities policy, the matter "will be taken seriously, be
fully investigated, and may be subject to disciplinary procedures".

Indeed, Midland has become so competent in investigating cases of
alleged discrimination or harassment, that the bank is now marketing
its training courses in investigating complaints of racial and sexual
harassment.

The bank has its own Disability Equality Action Group which meets
regularly. It is a panel of disabled employees who provide management
with feedback on issues affecting disabled people.

To encourage job applications from members of ethnic minorities Midland
has been running a fellowship programme since 1991 where final year
college students are offered work experience placements during their
summer holidays. Midland audits its graduate selection process for
equal opportunity purposes and in 1993 16 percent of its graduate
intake came from ethnic minority backgrounds.

At present 5 percent of Midland's domestic workforce are from ethnic
minority backgrounds. The bank regularly holds "focus groups" with its
ethnic minority staff to identify new initiatives in this area and to
get feedback about their experience of working for the bank.

The director of the equal opportunities unit, Anne Watts, is also a
founder member of a new government-funded initiative, Race for
Opportunity, being set up later this year. Race for Opportunity will be
similar to another national initiative, Opportunity 2000, which is
aimed at increasing the quality and quantity of women in the British
workplace by the end of the century.

Midland was also involved in the launch of Opportunity 2000 in 1991.
Now women represent 21.5 percent of all managers, compared with only
7.5 percent ten years ago.

Like most British banks, the majority of Midland's part-time staff are
women, 96 percent. But even part-timers who fit their hours of work
around school schedules can run into home care or baby-sitting
difficulties during school holidays. Because of this, the bank runs
holiday play schemes in 40 different locations dotted around the
country.

"Play schemes form a natural extension to the bank's nursery provision,
allowing employees to work during school holidays, confident that their
children are being looked after in a caring and creative environment,"
said Watts. "The rationale is the same as with Midland's nurseries -
the recruitment and retention of high calibre experienced staff in a
cost effective manner."

The bank does not subsidise its holiday play schemes, but it provides
nursery facilities in partnerships with public sector organisations and
staff, with a satisfactory performance rating, have access to over 100
nurseries.

"Although the strategy is business driven, the implementation is wholly
child centred. Children with special needs will be accommodated
wherever possible," said Watts.

"The provision of nurseries has had an impact on retention of staff. In
1989, only 30 percent of women returned after maternity leave, but by
1993 this figure had risen to 75 percent. The profile of this group
shows that typically they have worked for the bank for at least ten
years, have received a considerable amount of training and are
experienced and effective employees. This represents retention of a
very valuable resource."

Five days a year of family leave are available to all employees with
emergency caring responsibilities. Family leave covers care of sick
children and other sick or disabled dependents, recognising that with
Britain's ageing population more staff members are caring for elderly
relatives.

As well as getting the best from staff, Midland's equal opportunities
are also aimed at improving customer service.

Midland's marketing department has appointed a manager to develop
business with ethnic minorities and the bank also runs a training
course for managers to heighten their awareness of ethnic minority
business issues. The bank is also running a pilot scheme in six of its
branches aimed at improving the service offered to ethnic minority
customers.

During customer focus training staff are taught how to welcome disabled
customers and Midland is a member of Britain's Employers Forum on
Disability.

Induction loop systems have been installed in all of the bank's
branches to help hearing aid users and copies of customer brochures are
available in braille, large print, and on audio cassettes versions for
those with loss of vision.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

A COLLECTION OF FAMILIAR TALES

Job cuts were again a recurring theme in the financial services
industry last year. Cian Molloy looks back at these and other human
resources issues that made the headlines in 1994

JANUARY

EIGHT SENIOR executives of Gota Bank in Scandinavia were taken to court
by the Bankstodsnamnden, the government's bank support authority.

Gota Bank was one of the bank's worst hit by the Scandinavian banking
crisis and the government was seeking damages for losses caused by poor
lending decisions made in 1990.

The previous year, the bank support authority had threatened Nordbanken
with similar legal action, but that case was settled out of court.

BARCLAYS BANK in the UK implemented its first major compulsory
redundancy scheme in the bank's history.

WORKERS AT Spain's fifth-largest bank, Banco Espanol de Credito
(Banesto), were promised there would be no drastic job cuts in the
foreseeable future.

The promise was made by Banesto's new chairman, Alfredo Saenz, after
the bank was taken over by Spain's central bank at the end of December
1993.

FEBRUARY

US PRESIDENT Bill Clinton gave his support to calls for international
agreements strengthening workers' bargaining powers.

While on a visit to Europe, Clinton praised the European Social Charter
and expressed the view that some of its provisions should be extended
to workers in the Third World. "We must create more jobs," he said.
"But if more jobs involve giving up standards for which people have
fought for in the past, this could be very dangerous. It could result
in the collapse of the middle class or working class in our countries."

A THREE-year pay deal was agreed in Ireland between the government, the
Irish Congress of Trade Unions (ICTU) and the Irish Employers and
Business Confederation.

The deal covered bank staff because the Irish Bank Officials
Association (IBOA) is now a member of the ICTU. IBOA general secretary
Ciaran Ryan was elected to the ICTU's executive in 1993.

The IBOA joined the ICTU following its traumatic strike action in 1992
when many IBOA members crossed official union pickets and banks were
able to keep branches open, thanks to new technology. Previously, while
outside the ICTU, the IBOA had been successful in winning pay increases
higher than those achieved by unions in other sectors.

PRUDENTIAL INSURANCE Company of America launched a multi-media
interactive training scheme, claiming it would improve staff
recruitment, selection and retention.

AMERICA'S SECOND-largest bank, Chase Manhattan, offered a stock option
to all its employees as part of a performance based reward scheme.

Every employee were to receive an option on 400 shares, priced $35.50
each, but the shares were unavailable for purchase unless certain
performance-based conditions were met.

The bank's chairman Thomas Labreque said: "The option grant will align
the interests of our worldwide staff and stockholders, and provide
employees with a strong incentive to perform at levels that exceed
stockholders expectations."

MARCH

SPAIN'S THIRD-largest bank, Banco Central Hispano (BCH), announced a
staff reduction and branch closure programme aimed at cutting running
costs by Pta85 billion ($700 million) over five years.

It is planned that about 3,000 staff will be shed and 400 of the banks
2,700 branches will be closed by the end of 1995. The bank was formed
in 1991 through the merger of Banco Central and Banco Hispanoamerica.
At the time of the merger, the bank employed 31,472 people and analysts
calculated that it was overstaffed by as much as 40 percent.

Between 1991 and 1994, 750 branches were closed and 5,000 jobs shed
through early retirement and voluntary redundancy schemes.

THE NUMBER of Americans who telecommute - work from home using
computers linked to their offices - increased to 8 million, double the
number in 1990.

Improved technology, the Los Angeles earthquake, and bad weather on the
east coast of the US were cited as reasons for the increase in
telecommuting.

APRIL

UNICE, THE European employers organisation, reckoned that 3,000
European companies in the financial sector will be affected by the EU
directive on European Works Councils.

The directive affects all companies in the EU which employ more than
1,000 staff members with at least 100 staff members employed in a
second EU state.

HUMAN RESOURCE managers have little effect on the quality of industrial
relations, according to research by the London School of Economics.
After surveying data from the UK's Workplace Industrial Relations
Survey, researchers Sue Fernie, David Metcalfand Stephen Woodland,
concluded that human resource executives" do not improve the climate of
employee-management relations and probably detract from it".

BUT HUMAN resource managers do have a role in preventing employee
fraud, according to a director of an international risk management
consultancy.

Chris Barrett of WBK International said that during fraud
investigations it is often found that staff sense something had been
amiss, but feel they cannot voice their concerns because of
unapproachable management.

"I'm not advocating a police state," Barrett said, "but simply
suggesting that management should be readily accessible to employees."

Barrett also suggested that human resource managers develop better
systems for detecting changes in employee's personal behaviour,
including unexplained new-found wealth or increasingly frequent visits
to casinos. "By far the biggest category of employee fraudster is the
previously honest employee facing a change in the circumstances of
their lives," he said.

MAY

AN HRBI survey of European branch opening hours found that Turkish
banks stayed open longest, averaging 46.9 hours a week.

Banks in nearby Cyprus had Europe's shortest opening hours, averaging
only 21.3 hours a week. Swiss banks were ranked second with 42.6 hours
a week, while Poland with 41.9 hours, the Netherlands with 39.1 hours,
and the UK with 37 hours, were ranked third, fourth and fifth.

PAY RISES for bank staff in the UK were higher than the national
average in the first quarter of 1994.

Bank personnel saw their pay packets increase by an average of 2.6
percent in the first three months of the year, compared with a national
average for the private sector of 2.4 percent, according to the
Confederation of British Industry. The biggest wage increase was at
Lloyds Bank where the average increase based on merit was 4.5 percent.

BANC ONE Corporation in the US announced a plan to cut its running
costs by hundreds of millions of dollars without resorting to layoffs.

Banc One's chairman John McCoy said the bank planned to save $150
million in 1994 and $200 million in 1995 by using new technology to
streamline back office operations. But he added that Banc One would
redeploy staff instead of laying them off. "For example, we see an
increasing demand in retail credit, with a downturn in mortgage
financing. Therefore, we will move now to redeploy the workforce
towards retail credit, and away from refinancing."

JUNE

A SPANISH bank was left reeling by head hunters after it lost ten of
its most senior executives.

Banco Bilbao Vizcaya (BBV) was robbed of some of its most valuable
employees following Banco Santander's acquisition of Banco Espanol de
Credito (Banesto).

The BBV executives had been seconded for four months to Banesto while
it was being administered by the Bank of Spain. Poaching the BBV staff
after buying Banesto had obvious advantages for Banco Santander as the
move caused little disruption to Santander's management hierarchy and
the head-hunted staff all have experience of running the newly
purchased bank.

METROPOLITAN LIFE, one of the biggest insurance companies in the US,
shed 1,000 of its 13,000 salesforce after being fined $20 million for
mis-selling life insurance policies.

CREDIT LYONNAIS, the troubled French bank, announced plans to shed 10
percent of its workforce over three years in a move to boost
productivity. The bank's president Jean Peyrelevade set a target for
zero growth in running expenses in 1994.

SEPTEMBER

ITALIAN BANKS were hit by strike action following a break-down in talks
between employers and trade unions about the financial industry's
annual collective agreement.

Assicredito, the bank employers' federation, offered a monthly pay
increase of L83,000 ($53), but that was not good enough for the trade
unions who demanded a monthly increase of L128,000 backdated to January
1993.

THE BRITISH Bankers' Association claimed that banks were no longer
cutting their branch networks. These conclusions were based on a
comparison with 1993 which showed little change. But in the last decade
Barclays had closed 700 branches, Lloyds closed 400, Midland 600 and
National Westminster 700.

OCTOBER

AMERICAN EXPRESS said it planned to shed 6,000 staff in the next two
years.

The move, which involved compulsory redundancies, was aimed at cutting
the company's costs by $500 million a year. Most of the staff affected,
4,000, were US based. Out of the 2,000 employees being shed worldwide,
400 were in Europe working in support functions including legal, public
relations, and human resource offices.

Amex chairman Harvey Golub said: "These efforts will build a stronger,
more successful organisation that will move us closer to achieving our
vision of becoming the world's most respected service brand."

FORTIS AMEV launched a performance pay scheme for its back office
staff.

The Dutch parent of the Fortis insurance and banking group, Fortis AMEV
already had a profit share scheme in operation. The new performance pay
scheme, payable this summer, could be worth up to 15 percent of salary
for some employees.

TSB BECAME one of the first UK financial institutions to switch its
insurance salesmen from commission-based income to salaries in advance
of new disclosure rules coming into operation in the UK at the start of
1995.

TSB ALSO said it was closing 17 percent of its branch network over a
12-month period. The UK's eighth-largest bank by assets had already
closed 100 outlets in 1994 when it announced that another 200 branches
were to close to cut its total number of branches to 1,000.

John Townsend of the Banking, Insurance and Finance Union said he
believed TSB was aiming to prune its network further to 800 branches.

NOVEMBER

ITALIAN BANKS and trade unions signed a four-year collective agreement
after a long-running industrial dispute.

Naturally, both sides claimed victory. Assicredito, the bankers'
federation, won concessions on hiring part-time workers, opening hours
and the use of annual bonuses which were brought in line with
productivity and bank profitability. The unions won bonuses for staff
who work Saturdays and an agreement that 12 percent of vacancies would
be kept for bank personnel who are "between jobs".

ABN AMRO, the biggest bank in the Netherlands, was caught by surprise
when a leaked report from its works council claimed the bank needed to
shed 5,000 staff in the next three years.

The bank had said earlier in the year that it planned to shed only
2,100 workers in three years or 2,800 workers over four years.

STAFF SUGGESTIONS at Midland Bank saved the company #250,000 ($400,000)
in one year, it was revealed after the bank's suggestion scheme won
praise from the UK's Industrial Society.

THE SPANISH insurer AGF-Union y el Fenix said it needed to shed 35
percent of its workforce as part of its recovery plan.

The company was faced with a great deal of staff duplication following
the merger of AGF Seguros and Union y el Fenix in June.

DECEMBER

NATIONAL WESTMINSTER Bank became the first UK bank to open its branches
on a Sunday.

Twenty three NatWest branches, each offering a full counter service,
opened on the two Sundays before Christmas - a move which took the
bank's nearest rivals Barclays, Midland and Lloyds by surprise.

Though the move was described as "a trial", the Banking, Insurance and
Finance Union claimed it was a prelude to seven-day opening throughout
the year.

TRADE UNIONS took one of the world's most profitable banks to court
last month claiming their new code of conduct infringed civil
liberties.

Banco Popular Espanol, Spain's biggest bank, was taken to court by the
Commissiones Obreras and the Union General de Trabajadores.

The code prohibits staff from living outside the town or village where
they work; no bank employee should act as a guarantor for a loan; and
no close family member of an employee should set up a business
enterprise. The code also states that"the bank does not encourage
friendship between managerial staff and the bank's clients or between
bank staff themselves".

DEUTSCHE BANK said it planned to freeze personnel costs in its domestic
banking business in 1995 - but its vice-president and head of personnel
Christoph Woehrmann told HRBI that he wondered if the target was
achievable.

Woehrmann said the bank planned to shed less-qualified clerks,
particularly in payment transactions and branch operations, by using
improved technology.

THE FOURTH-largest bank in the US, Chemical Bank, said it was shedding
3,700 employees, or 9 percent of its workforce. The move was aimed at
raising its return on equity from 14 percent to 16 percent.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
HUMAN RESOURCES INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1995

DON'T FIRE ALL YOUR BRANCH STAFF YET

Conventional wisdom has it that the branch network's days are numbered,
that the future lies in ATMs and direct banking. Not so, says David
Rhodes, a believer in reconfiguration, rather than eliminatation

REPORTS OF the death of the branch are very much exaggerated. But, like
anything else, bank branches need to be evolved, to be reconfigured and
used in an effective way.

If you believe some commentators, traditional networks will be swept
away by the combinations of telecommunications and technology which
will create the virtual bank. Specialist competitors, such as mutual
fund companies, will pick over the bones that are left and customers
will desert those few remaining branches in droves.

But let me take you back in time and across Europe to East Germany. The
Berlin Wall has just come down. Imagine a bank in the town of Leipzig -
let us call it "Bank A" - with $4 billion of assets, 1,300 employees
and 67 branches. Some 400,000 customers, all in Leipzig, give the bank
a 67 percent market share.

Well, when the wall came down the bank found that life would never be
the same. Big, successful, modern banks such as Deutsche and Dresdner
moved into Leipzig with their bright, more customer-focused branches.
So the bank conducted some research among its customers - Chart 1 shows
the results.

"Bank A" is ahead in only two areas - low fees and convenient branches.
So, what do you think happened to this bank? What do you think happened
to market share? What do you think happened to profits? What on earth
do you do to fix all this?

Needless to say, one suggestion would be to close branches. Across
Europe many bankers say branches are becoming obsolete. They argue
there are too many branches and they are being made redundant by
automatic teller machines (ATMs), the telephone, cards and video
technology.

The Big Four in the UK, for example, have closed almost a quarter of
their branches in the last ten years. Midland, the most aggressive, has
cut 30 percent of its network. Midland, incidentally, has stated
publicly that it does not intend to cut any more and here are my views
why.

Imagine your business as a healthy tree. However healthy it is, it
cannot survive continual cutting of its branches. Banks are no
different. If you cut branches you lose customers and balances, you
lose a critical recruitment tool, you actually only achieve limited
cost savings. You lose cross-selling opportunities and so you lose
contribution and suffer reduced profitability. Let us look at why these
statements are true.

Chart 2 shows that more and more customers are shared with competitors.
In a world with fewer exclusive customers and more competition, you
need to think very carefully before you take away a critical
recruitment and service delivery point. In the UK, 75 percent of
customers have relationships with more than one institution, and while
a typical bank has 80 percent of the loans held by its customers, it
only achieves 20 percent share of their mortgages and 30 percent share
of their deposits.

At the moment, in the UK at least, branches are still heavily visited.
Fifty percent of customers visit their branch more than two to three
times a month. Only 10 percent never visit their branch.

But why do customers like to visit their branches? One reason is that
they are not always as eager to embrace technology as we would like
them to be.

Recent UK research found that 40 percent of customers preferred to
withdraw cash in person. This is only partly to do with age, another
reason is mistrust of machines. In Britain, there have been well
publicised cases of phantom withdrawals. This is a behavioural and
attitudinal issue that cuts across all socio-economic and demographic
segments. The mistrust of machines is even higher when it comes to
depositing cash and cheques. Finally, over 80 percent of respondents
prefered face to face financial advice, largely because advice is about
relationship and trust.

The research also showed that some customers prefer remote technology
solutions for some transactions. Any branch banking strategy needs to
reflect the fact that large numbers of customers prefer the telephone
or ATMs for some of those transactions. There is also the classic
dilemma of people not knowing that they want something until of course
you give it to them. But I do think that it is important to remember
that personal contact is central to all banking relationships.

There is another reason why branch closures may not be an attractive
option. Location is the number one reason why people choose a bank. In
the UK nearly 90 percent of people bank within ten minutes of where
they live or work.

Recruiting customers is of little value unless you sell attractive
higher margin products to them. We talk a lot about databases, customer
information files, marketing central information files, and so on. Some
people are enjoying success with these tools but none of them have
dispensed with the branch.

The most crucial aspect of selling is getting branch staff motivated
and trained. To take the example of one of the best European banks in
selling life insurance and pensions, 80 percent of the leads came from
staff talking to customers, only 20 percent came from targeted
marketing using the databases.

If we dissect those leads generated by the branch, 70 percent of the
customers had originally come into the branch just to conduct a
transaction, only 2 percent had come to inquire about life and
pensions. One other point, the conversion rate of leads to sales was
higher for the warm branch-based leads than the cold database-generated
leads.

Let us look at what happens if you do choose to close branches. First
of all, direct cost. In one large European bank less than 5 percent of
branches failed to cover their direct costs. The question is: how many
do you need to close before you can make significant reductions in
central or shared costs?

But calculating the business impact of closing branches is very
difficult. We found that many customers will not move two kilometres to
another one of their existing bank's branches, if a competitor has a
closer branch. We found that within two years of closure a bank is
doing well to have retained two-thirds of the customers from a closed
branch. The only exception, of course, is the merging of two branches
which are virtually adjacent.

Many customers use branch closure as an excuse to move. It crystallises
dissatisfaction and it seems that many of the most attractive customers
defect. Many customers are very traditional in their bank habits, have
large numbers of competitive branches nearby, and resent the upheaval.
Indeed, our analysis shows that closing 20 percent of branches saves
just 2 percent of network costs (Chart 4). That is not enough to solve
anyone's problems.

Yet, we need to recognise that changing channel dynamics will leave
behind any under-used network. As volumes switch from the branch it
seems probable that branch transaction costs will rise by about 15 to
20 percent over the next few years.

The development of the debit card, smart cards, new electronic point of
sale technology, increased ATM functionality, will all reduce the
volume of cheque and cash transactions at the counter - but only by
around 25 percent over the next few years. Equally, the telephone and
ultimately multi-media technology will allow simple sales, inquiries
and transactions such as bill-paying to be removed from the branch.

Of course, consumers will accept technology more and more as they get
used to things like armchair shopping and the greater convenience and
efficiency technology might bring.

But, again, this does not suit everybody. Research has shown that
financial services came around 50th in a list of uses for the
information superhighway. This is partly because the superhighway
cannot be used for physical transactions and partly because consumers
do not want their financial records in what they see as the public
domain.

The solution is reconfiguration - reconfiguration to cut cost, to build
sales and relationship management capability.

A Consumers Association survey of UK retail banking found a very large
gap between customers' expectations of bank staff efficiency and
service and what customers actually get. There is enormous room to
build better customer satisfaction and I want to emphasise the
importance of the branch in delivering service. If we are to justify
keeping branches then we need to provide the level of service that our
customers demand.

Quality is best achieved by fixing the processes by which you deliver
customer service. If you cannot do this, your branches will not achieve
the cross-selling and recruitment potential that justifies them. This
requires setting explicit ambitious customer service targets and
keeping to them.

One bank conducted customer research and concluded, for example, that
counter wait times should be restricted to less than two minutes in the
branch. When they achieved this the staff saw a man looking lost in the
bank lobby. "What's the matter?" they asked. "I'm worried," he said.
"Is this bank in trouble? There always used to be long lines of people
and now there are none. What's happened to all your customers?"

Another one of the bank's standards was based on new accounts. Account
opening was to take place at a sales desk, not at a teller's counter.
An ATM card and cheque book were to be offered immediately, specific
additional personal information was to be obtained and the customer was
to be given an introduction to some of the bank's other services. The
bank then measured its performance in achieving these things.

This very simple example illustrates a number of things: service
criteria were set in relation to customer needs; the account opening
process was designed to provide a relationship framework, collect
information for future marketing purposes, and to lay the seeds in the
customer's mind of what the bank could offer; and to do this through
personal, rather than through written communication. That is an example
of a bank trying to maximise the benefit of a face-to-face branch
interaction.

The next step in boosting service in an existing branch network is a
complete rethink of the role of the branch.

Someone said to me recently that the relationship between a bank and
its customers was built on trust and that selling products would
destroy that relationship. I have to say that individual must have
little faith either in the products his bank sells, or the staff who
sell them.

If, like me, you believe that branches are your sales outlets, you will
definitely need to recognise the emerging roles of your staff in a
sales-focused branch. The job today - and in the future - is for branch
staff to identify customer needs, to solve customer problems, to lead
the marketing and sales effort. Rather than being accountable for
balancing the books and making sure the cash transactions are done
efficiently.

In the future, branch staff are really going to be accountable for
customer satisfaction and sales. And that means they will need very
different skills from the skills they have today. They will need
greater communication skills dealing with customers -negotiation skills
in a way - and, of course, greater product knowledge. All this implies
that staff must be better trained.

Now, if you achieve this you will be doing a lot better than my next
example: a sort of lost potential used to justify the closure of
branches. It is to do with the cross-sale of mutual funds. In this
bank, 1,350 target customers for mutual funds came into a branch in any
given month. Of those 1,350 customers only 50 were recognised by the
bank staff as potential mutual funds investors; only 15 were approached
to see if they were interested, and only three actually made an
appointment with a sales person.

This was partly because the tellers lacked the confidence and the sales
skills to approach people; they were offered a $100 incentive, yet it
just did not work. Essentially, 99 percent of the market potential was
missed by the branch staff. Changing that would have changed the
branch's economics.

Another role that the tellers can play in reducing branch costs is by
helping customers to use ATMs. If a customer tries to cash a cheque
over the counter, it can be turned into a relationship opportunity
because the teller takes the customer to the ATM and shows them how it
works ie the customer feels that the teller is delivering valuable
assistance. If the teller has the right information in front of them,
they could use the opportunity to look at the customer's account
history and maybe spot an opportunity to suggest certain credit or
investment products. If tellers do not talk to customers, they cannot
create this sort of opportunity. And the opportunity certainly cannot
be created, if the tellers have no branch to work in.

So, what will the branch of the future look like? Well, much of the
back office will have been stripped out of the branch along with the
staff who felt happier doing the administration. Re-engineering will
have streamlined the customer processes at the front end and
centralised the factory processes at the other end into lower cost,
high scale, highly automated and highly efficient processes.

One day, the only processing a branch will do is a little point of sale
inputting before sending all the paperwork to a regional or a national
processing centre. The counter staff will move from an administrative
role to a relationship management and sales role. This will allow
branches to employ fewer, but more flexible staff. This also means that
in future branches will be smaller.

On the left of chart 5 is a picture of the standard format of a UK
bank. In the past, most of the branch space was given over to
administrative activities behind the glass screen. Customers were
crammed into the small area at the front.

On the right of the chart, we see the small branch of the future with a
much more open customer and merchandising area. The administrative
area, once nearly half the branch, is less than a quarter. There is
more automation for the customer, and for the staff, whose paperwork is
nearly eliminated. There is much less space so the branch's running
costs are much lower. This means a bank's physical presence on the high
street can be maintained while cutting costs. With less space needed,
the bank can afford better locations. Supporting these branches will be
a number of remote branded ATMs.

Is fixing the branch network really worthwhile? Well, you may have
wondered what happened to our bank in Leipzig. I am pleased to say that
it still exists. It re-engineered its branch processes and redesigned
its branches. It introduced a relationship and sales culture. It added
ATMs and it introduced a telephone banking service for existing
customers which, incidentally, won a pan-Germany marketing prize. It
kept almost all of its branches.

Two years later the customer survey was repeated and, as chart 6
shows,"Bank A" is now doing better than its competitors in many areas.

David Rhodes is a consultant with the Boston Consulting Group. The
above text is an edited version of a speech given to the First Global
Convention for Retail Financial Services late last year.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-15</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B048-66</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mt26.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033820 text/html 193363
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:35:55 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:30 GMT
Content-length: 193175
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mt26.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Cover Story:  Room Service</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2936 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>Stack Attack</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1129 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Workplace:  Pass The 10q, Partner</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3425 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Clippings</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1850 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>The Last Word</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(255 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Short Takes</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2095 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Taking Stock Of the January Effect</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2203 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>The 1996 Business Strategist's Software Directory</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(7542 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>Special Focus:  Taking Technology In Hand</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2722 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>Special Focus:  A Tale Of Three Web Sites</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3730 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>Special Focus:  Cyber-Strategy</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2500 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

Cover Story:  Room Service


TURN THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF 51ST ST.  AND SEVENTH AVENUE in New York and
you're at the doorstep of the Michelangelo.  No hawking awnings herald its
presence, only two discreet brass plaques:  one, with its name, the other,
identifying it as a Summit International hotel.

Down the avenue at 48th St., an antique clock atop Victorian lettering
introduces the Renaissance amid a visual onslaught of the Times Square
neighborhood neon.  Like the Michelangelo, its entrance is conspicuously
simple.

Welcome to "hospitality heaven," anchored at 45th and Broadway to the south by
the Marriott Marquis in the heart of the theater district, and to the north by
the New York Hilton at 53rd St.  and the Avenue of the Americas, extending
east and west for another half-dozen blocks.  This stretch of rooms with and
without views runs the gamut from glitzy to sedate, with clientele from
tourist to first class.  The names on the marquees are familiar:  Holiday Inn,
Sheraton, DoubleTree, Embassy Suites.

Beyond the guest room doors, the bars and restaurants and shops, however, a
highly competitive business battle is being waged to win the hearts and minds
of upscale business and leisure travelers.  It involves a savvy blend of
marketing and financial strategies that boil down to a common denominator:
service.

But service comes in many forms.  Both Renaissance Hotels International and
Utell International are service and management companies.  Neither owns the
hotels that are their clients.  For the Renaissance group, equity stakes in
some of these clients will broaden the income base.  Utell's client base has
grown from the vast network of travel and reservation agents and Utell member
hotels around the globe that use its reservations and booking systems, to
hotels that carry the Summit International brand, like the Michelangelo, and
are part of Utell's sales and marketing network.  Whether it's reservations or
financial services for travel agents, state-of-the-art technology is the glue
that holds it all together.

Each company has set out to create a niche in a highly competitive environment
that is rebounding from the rampant hotel expansion in the last decade that
sapped profitability.  Now, with an improving global economic climate, a
resumption of leisure travel, and an explosion of business travel, these
competitors are charting strategic courses to guide their businesses into the
next century.  And the name of the game is branding.

When Renaissance Hotel Group N.V.  launched an initial public offering in
September on the New York Stock Exchange at $17 per share, branding was a key
factor.  The IPO is aimed at reaping a return on the investment of its parent,
New World Development Co.  Ltd., a publicly traded Hong Kong company, while
concentrating on what Renaissance does best:  hotel management.  Renaissance
calls itself the only "pure" hotel brand management company in the field:  no
contracting services for laundry and restaurants, no casinos, no
entertainment.  The restructuring brings together its three international
brands-Renaissance, New World, and Ramada-and converts the 28 Stouffer hotels,
acquired in 1993, to the Renaissance brand.

Utell, whose hotel reservations system is considered by travel industry
professionals as the industry standard, has evolved into an integrated sales
and marketing business in the past 25 years.  In 1991, Utell created Summit
International, while it continues to serve travel agents and hotel owners
around the world.  Since its founding in 1930 by travel writer Henry Utell,
the company has passed through three owners and now is part of Reed Elsevier,
the Anglo-Dutch travel and publishing giant.

While their approaches differ, both companies have some common strategies.
They rely on regional management and organization, with local management from
the operating country.  Service is the driver, and enhancements are aimed at
the business traveler and conference organizer seeking first-class
accommodations.

Renaissance has 109 hotels under management around the world, as well as
Ramada Inns in the U.S.  under a master franchise agreement.  The company has
equity stakes in some of the properties under management.  It operates an
integrated reservations system, and is one of five hotel companies
participating in American Express' Membership Miles program.  Renaissance has
its own incentive services, too.  Club Express is a frequent stay guest
program with an email address, Meeting Express is aimed at conference
coordinators, and the RSVP Club rewards people who book guest rooms for other
individuals.  Reaching out to the business traveler, the Stouffer Renaissance
Chicago Hotel a year ago was the first U.S.  hotel to offer a 24-hour retail
Kinko's on-site business center.

Utell represents 6,500 hotels in 164 countries, with 44 sales and reservations
offices.  It is connected to the Global Distribution System (GDS) through
450,000 airline reservation systems terminals worldwide.  Through central
offices in Omaha, Neb., London, and Singapore, it runs a sales and telephone
reservation network that circles the globe.  Among the cornucopia of
technological services afforded to reservation and travel agents is
UtellVision, which offers guided tours via computer terminal of
Utell-represented hotels.  Utell's global reservation service, and sales and
marketing activities, are available to its Summit International hotel members.

"This business is all about sales, marketing, and image," Michael Ball says of
Utell's focus, and its strategy of launching the five-star Summit
International brand.  "Hotel owners still want to build up their hotels.  They
don't want to give up their identity and exclusivity."

Ball wears many hats.  At Utell, he is the worldwide sales and marketing
director, with executive responsibility for the development and implementation
of strategy.  At Summit International, he is the managing director, where his
watch also includes Insignia Resorts.  And in several months, he will add
another topper when the company launches a third brand.

One would not be off course to include the Utell "brand" with those of the
company's branded hotels when the talk turns to strategy.  Utell does not own
hotels.  Indeed, the Michelangelo's owner is Star Hotel Group, an Italian
chain that was seeking a different feel and look for its New York property.
Enter Utell, which handles the chain's reservations system; now, through
Summit International, it provides the marketing savvy.  Sitting in the lobby
lounge of the Michelangelo, Ball points to the hotel's midtown Manhattan
"neighbors" as an example of Utell's role in the business.  "Owners are
competing with all these other brand names within a 10-square block.  They're
saying, 'We need marketing to compete.' Branding in America is everything;
it's not as strong in Europe."

For Renaissance, which posted first-quarter fiscal 1996 net income of $7.8
million on revenues of $29.1 million, building the brand meant consolidating
businesses that joined the New World Development family through a series of
acquisitions:  Ramada, Stouffers, Penta, New World Hotels International.  By
bringing the United States based business under one name, Renaissance aims to
bring added value to the parent and pull in its own return on investment.
Today, Renaissance manages 53 hotels in the Americas, 49 in Europe, and 35 in
the Asia/Pacific region; 94 management contracts have remaining terms of more
than 5 years.  Licensing the Ramada name in the U.S.  contributes close to $20
million per year in cash flow.  The company has 27 new hotels under
construction or development worldwide.

Robert Olesen, chief financial officer and the strategist behind the IPO,
notes that the Renaissance hotels represent $30 million of balance-sheet
equity and $500 million in market equity that were buried in the parent
corporation.  Now New World Development owns 55% of Renaissance, 34% is
publicly traded, and the balance is held by private investors who had owned
50% of New World Hotels International, the Asia/Pacific-based brand that is
part of the revamped company.

Public Access

"For us to sit on their books as a $30 million asset, it's very difficult for
the shareholders of that company to see the value of what's buried in that
very large conglomerate," he says.  New World Development has extensive real
estate interests in Hong Kong and China, and is the largest foreign holder of
land use rights in China.  New World Infrastructure, another unit that went
public at the same time Renaissance was listed, is a partner in developing a
toll road in south China, and is participating in construction of a power
plant.

"Shareholders can't value conglomerates," Olesen observes, citing the
difficulty of assessing values to assets that have different growth prospects,
different patterns for business.  "Now it's easier for the investor to give
proper value to it."  The IPO is a value enhancement for the company.  "When
word got out in Hong Kong, it got attention.  The value of New World
Development stock went up and continued to rise despite the Hang Seng Index
going down.  I think the shareholders in Hong Kong appreciate the values being
recognized."

To maximize value, Olesen adopted a two-step plan:  a tax strategy and a
branding strategy.  The tax strategy involved restructuring the assets
geographically.  "We made a fundamental change in the way we do business," he
explains, "restructuring what was a U.S.  company to where we took the assets
outside the U.S.-the real estate, and management/franchise agreements-and
broke them out from under the U.S.  umbrella.  They're free from U.S.
taxation and are taxed locally.  Then we created a Netherlands company to be
the umbrella.  All our U.S.  assets are in a series of U.S.  companies."

From a management standpoint, this reorganization shook up priorities.  Now,
the first is as hotel managers, and second as managers of real estate.  "It
takes some getting used to.  As a manager, is my goal revenues or
profitability?  And how do I serve the hotel owner?  We view the cash we
generate in a totally different manner than we did four months ago.  We don't
look at that cash as available to invest into new beds, new wallpaper.  It is
to be invested into new hotel projects.  Now we look at hotels, after paying
expenses and fees, as what is the cash flow needed to improve an operation."

New World Development, the Renaissance group's owner, now has hotel capital
expenditures on its balance sheet.  Most of the hotels under Renaissance
management are owned by New World.  Olesen's oversight extends to both the
hotel company and the real estate company.  But Renaissance Hotels is not in
the real estate business, he states.  It is not an owner, but a management
provider.  "Hotel ownership has different investment objectives, lower current
earnings requirements because of the perception of long-term value," he says.
"Management is a fee-based, current earnings business.  It's
profitability-oriented.  In most instances, management agreements give a
percentage share.  Long term, the real estate company is very limited in what
it can do.  Local financing drives the business.  With the management company,
there's not as great a need to go international."

To meet earnings objectives, Olesen is targeting 10% per year growth in the
number of hotels under management.  In the next five years, that translates to
175 hotels.  He expects franchises will hold steady near the current level of
30.  "More would require the acquisition or takeover of another hotel
management company, some outfit with 20 under management," he says.

By focusing on management, Renaissance produces "free cash" that can be
committed to new projects.  "We can buy into equity ownership of the hotel;
that sets us apart from the competition," he says.  A net holding of slightly
less than 20% can be accounted as an investment on the books.  A 20% stake is
worth $5 million.  Currently, five projects are open and operating; five are
under construction.  Olesen would like to add 5 or 10 projects per year with
equity ownership.

Diversification is not part of the plan.  "I'm a strong proponent of focused
business, focused management," Olesen says.  "There are opportunities enough
in the hotel management business that we don't need to get into ancillary
businesses."  He cites consolidation of the hotel industry, and the
consolidation of brands.  "We don't have to focus entirely on internal growth.
There are rebranding opportunities out there all the time."

No Reservations

At Utell, diversification of services is its stock in trade.  Fifteen years
ago, Utell shook up the reservations industry when it broke with tradition on
two fronts.  "Until then, the norm was to represent a few hotels in one
market," Michael Ball recalls.  "To break this approach, we opened offices
worldwide, about one a month until we got to 44.  Also by tradition, hotel
marketing companies don't work with competing products.  We said, 'No.' And we
went from 600 hotels to 6,000.  Most people said it can't work:  'Join Utell,
you join a supermarket.' Those two strategic thrusts kept us busy until the
'80s."

The strategies worked because Utell incorporated a third element:  technology.
In the '80s, PanAm developed Panamac, a joint reservation system for airlines
and hotels.  "We were the first company to recognize the effect technology
would have," he says of Utell's participation in Panamac.  Today, Utell's
reservation system, called UNISON, connects to all of the major GDSs.

"I remember sitting in a room talking about this.  Our view was the business
was going to go to a variable cost business from a fixed cost business," Ball
says.  "Utell became the leading technology agency.  Ask the man in the
street, he doesn't know who Utell is.  Ask a travel agent, he'll say the best
in technology."

Utell's three customers are the hotel, the travel agent, and the traveler.
Half of its marketing is directed at hotels, the other half, at travel agents.
"We're a reservation service.  The market decides where the guest stays.  Our
job is matching expectations."

Expectations within the Utell organization regarding its next strategic move
were another matter.  The 1990s brought a "What's next?"  from management.
"We were faced with the problem of having a successful company that we wanted
to grow by 20% to 25% per annum," Ball says.  "There was the danger of doing
alchemy in reverse:  taking 6,500 hotels and 44 offices and converting that to
a small, traditional reservations company."

Just as dramatically as Utell's numbers had zoomed, growth was capped.  "We
saw the need to build loyalty with existing partners.  So we stopped signing
up hotels and focused on restructuring to build loyalty."  Regionalization
replaced the British-oriented company based in London.  The three head offices
were established, and corporate staff was slashed to a half-dozen from several
hundred.  In addition to London, Omaha, and Singapore, a Mexico office looks
after Latin America, and sales and marketing are based in Secaucus, N.J.
"Thinking global, acting local" became a mantra.  In Europe, Utell has a
policy that all employees must speak three or four languages.  And employees
regularly are transferred to different countries.

To make a success out of its new game plan, Utell capitalized on a company
staple:  cutting-edge technology.  Ball credits this commitment, and the
creation of the Summit International brand, as pivotal in Utell's strategic
success.  As a service provider, technology is becoming Utell's most
marketable product.  Ball draws fine distinctions when describing the roles of
Utell and Summit International in the lodging industry universe, but
ultimately there is a synergistic interplay.  The Summit client, by his
description, does not need the management and finance support, or the neon
sign.  It needs technology.

"Our hotels are concentrating on managing rooms.  We're spending $22 million
in 1995 and 1996 with IBM, and we're halfway through and on track and on
budget," Ball says.  The new system is a response to the enormous changes in
reservation lead times, which have shrunk from 21 days to 6, and the enormous
matrix of rates and terms.  "The new system allows access to the Internet.
We're building a home page for Utell.  And Summit is going live on the Travel
Web in January," he says.  These services will benefit the traditional Utell
client and the independent Summit hotel.

Summit International's 71 hotels include 25 added in 1995.  Ball expects a 20%
increase in 1996.  The corporate target is 250 properties in 80 cities.  "The
biggest challenge to our business is to introduce the segmentation," Ball
says, citing the distinction between the Summit brand and the 45 luxury
resorts that bear the Insignia name.  "We'll double the size of the company
every four years.  We've done it the last 10 years."

Utell's challenge is making its name a household word to the traveler in the
way it is to the travel agent.  The Summit International brand, created to
appeal to independent hotels, is the key, Ball says.  And he believes the
evolution of the lodging business after overextension and retrenchment in the
past decade has created a market for the independent.

"For many years, a lot of 'reluctant owners'-the banks-were making decisions
about hotels.  We saw an enormous growth of branded hotels as a result.  Then
the banks began to realize there were alternatives to the brands.  Technology
is allowing greater competition-you've got 23,000 hotels in SABRE-and some of
the more ambitious finance houses are seeing the benefits of going the
independent route."

The influence that comes with name recognition, he believes, can be
transferred to the independent hotels without compromising their independence.
And Summit International is poised to benefit.  "I'd be horrified in a few
years time if travel agents didn't know the Utell name, and I'd be horrified
in a few years if the traveler didn't know the Summit name," Ball says.  "The
strategy is to play at two different levels.  Our growth?  We attribute it to
daring to be different.  We've taken the threat out of technology."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

Stack Attack


Why authors think that just because they have a new angle on
strategy-psychological, self help, or sporty-that the new approach makes the
information fresh, is outta my dysfunctional ballpark.  The only way these new
takes work are with humor, self-parody (unintentional does count), or some
redeeming worth buried in the footnotes.

In most cases, the so-called sport/business books bite off much less than they
can chew and then they choke anyway.  There are only so many Heimlich
maneuvers a reader can do.  Sports as an analogy for business...Sports as
business...Business as sports...Business as an analogy for sports.  Watch out,
because this is where this marketing gimmick is going.


Branch Rickey's Little Blue Book:  Wit and Strategy from Baseball's Last Wise
Man, by Branch Rickey.  Published:  Macmillan, New York.

Author's Credentials:  Rickey teams won eight pennants and three World Series
championships between 1926 and 1949.  The book was edited by John J.
Monteleone from 131 cartons of Rickey "stuff" in the Library of Congress.

Thesis:  Resist any tampering of the status quo if you already are
successfully manipulating it.

Scope:  1880s to 1980s.

File Under:  Manager as coach.

Reason to Buy/Read Longer than a collection of quips, shorter than a
collection of essays, it's more absorbing than the typical boys-of-summer
fling.  Features L.B.  Mayeresque Rickeyisms like "An addition by subtraction"
and interesting excerpts from Rickey's scouting reports (which he called
"Prospects & Suspects").

Placement in Your Life:  On the bedside table in the guest room if you suspect
that your weekend guest has designs on becoming a regular visitor.

How to Read:  Read the shaded boxes (the scouting reports) first as you skip
around.  Thread your way through the locker room lectures (junk) and try to
find Rickey's letters and relatively analytical comments on things from the
High School Rule (one of the status quo items he successfully manipulated) to
the farm team system (which he pioneered).

Irresistable Miscellanea:  Before signing Jackie Robinson in 1947, Rickey
spent several years scouting Puerto Rico, Panama, Cuba, Mexico, and the
Caribbean "only to find that the great Negro players were right in our
country."

You will throw this book across the room if:  Cliches along the lines of "If I
was a ditch-digger at a dollar a day I'd want to do my job better than the
fellow next to me" drive you nuts.

Price:  $14.95

Value:  Rickey fanatics:  $12.95 (wait for the bio, some people are not best
in their own words); all others $7.95.


Birdies in the Boardroom:  Golfing Your Way Up the Corporate Ladder, by Joey
West.  Published:  Push Pull Press, JSA Publications, Oak Park, Mich.

Author's Credentials:  Former caddie, golf humor columnist.

Thesis:  Golf is a paradigm for business success.

Scope:  14th century Scotland to the present.

File Under:  Golf think, golf do.

Reason to Buy/Read It ranges from tall tales to subtle humor.  Everything you
need to know about golf as it relates to etymology, history, personality,
grass analysis, and the Tax Act of 1994.

Placement in Your Life:  One of those non-essentials you've absolutely gotta
have.

How to Read:  Skip the odd bits of very basic golf advice-"This is the ball,
no?"-and read everything else.  The only thing missing in this screamingly
funny book is an index.

Irresistable Miscellanea:  In 1457 James II issued a decree prohibiting the
sport of golf, arguing that his kingdom's defenses were weakened due to a
precipitous decline in the skill of archers (who were on the links).

You will throw this book across the room if:  You tire of the lengths it goes
to justify its title.

Price:  $8.00

Value:  Golf lore/humor:  $8.00; has the business sense of a whiffle ball.


The Breakthrough Team Player:  Becoming the M.V.P.  on Your Workplace Team, by
Andrew J.  DuBrin.  Published:  Amacom, New York.

Author's Credentials:  Professor, psychologist, and "frequent guest on network
television."

Thesis:  You can be a superior team player and still stand out from that dreck
you have to work with.

Scope:  Iacocca-'80s

File Under:  Subtitle:  How to let the glory rub off on you while you appear
to be a team player.

Reason to Buy/Read Missed the business/self-help movement of the past 25
years.

Placement in Your Life:  Un-time management, a treatise on doing it all.

How to Read:  Skip anything in italics and anything that starts with the names
Sara or Mark.  Read Chapter Three, How to Avoid Conforming to Group Norms, for
the true message of the book.  Skip around to pick up neat ways of criticizing
someone else's work while advancing your own cause.

Irresistable Miscellanea:  Bausch & Lomb has uncovered the fact that an
estimated 200 million Chinese people need vision correction.  They figure up
to 50 million are potential buyers of B&L contacts.

You will throw this book across the room if:  You won't-a member of your team
will.  And, if it turns out to be a good idea, you'll get credit.  If it
doesn't, you had nothing to do with it.

Price:  $16.95

Value:  Is that pesos?


Finding a Way to Win:  The Principles of Leadership, Teamwork, and Motivation,
by Bill Parcells with Jeff Coplon.  Published:  Doubleday, New York.

Author's Credentials:  Former head coach of Superbowl-winning Giants.

Thesis:  Winners don't need to be recognized as brilliant.  They should be
dominant.

Scope:  Sportswise, 1964 to present; businesswise, 1980s to present;
Parcells-wise, high school to the present.

File Under:  By way of an analogy.

Reason to Buy/Read Abrasive, sarcastic, demanding person writes book by
screaming at meek journalist taking notes.  Interesting and frank perspective
on the narcotic of winning.

Placement in Your Life:  A vacation book you don't mind leaving behind.

How to Read:  Skip the first couple of dozen pages-they're pathetic in their
attempts to reference anything other than sports into the narrative.  However,
Parcells does share some interesting comments on the difference between skill
and talent, the NFL, the Patriots he "inherited," and dogs ("If they don't
bite when they're puppies, they usually won't bite.")  Was there supposed to
be something else?

Irresistable Miscellanea:  While Lawrence Taylor was the greatest player he
ever coached, Parcells considers Dennis Conner (the yacht racer) the greatest
guy he's seen in sports in the last 20 years.

You will throw this book across the room if:  The overuse of gimmicks like
italics and BOLD TYPE IN CAPS drives you bonkers.

Price:  $23.50

Value:  $5.95 (would've been perfectly priced as a paperback).  u


Bristol Voss is the editor of Operations & Fulfillment.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

Workplace:  Pass The 10q, Partner


HOW MUCH DO THEY KNOW AND HOW DO THEY KNOW IT?  These are questions likely to
be circulating more frequently in executive suites as corporate leaders take
another look at their workforces through a new lens.

The knowledge under discussion is not about work rules and labor/management
relations, benefits, and overtime pay.  This is about the bottom line-stock
performance, quarterly reports, strategic decisions, capital investment and
expenditures, the costs of doing business-and sharing.  According to a study
released last month by Ernst & Young LLP, U.S.  workers who are treated as
business "partners" are most likely to be more productive and more motivated
to contribute to their company's profitability.

Innovation, according to Timothy Ridge, national director of human resource
consulting at Ernst & Young, is at the heart of the matter.  The initiatives
needed to educate, motivate, and reward employees apply to private and public
companies, union and non-union shops, and will bridge the gap between the
board room and the shop floor, he contends.

This view has been captured by John Case, author of Open-Book Management:  The
Coming Business Revolution (Harper Business, 1995), who says that by learning
how the business they work for works, employees gain a new appreciation for
the company, feel a more direct stake in its success, and, therefore, work
harder to assure themselves the job security they desire.  With a more
knowledgeable workforce, and one that has a stake in the company through stock
options, employee ownership, profit sharing, and bonus plans, the company is,
indeed, a well-oiled machine where all are working for the common good and
"us" and "them" are relegated to the scrap heap.

It's an ambitious effort, and one that has a track record.  Magma Copper Co.
broke the mold in 1991 when it negotiated a 15-year labor agreement with its
unions that built upon the team concept of labor/management relations.  Cost
reductions have enabled Magma to modernize, launch a major U.S.  exploration
effort, and attract the Wall Street capital to invest in Latin America.  The
strategy paid off:  In mid-December, Australia's BHP made a $2.4 billion offer
for the company.

More recently, Southwest Airlines negotiated a 10-year pact with its pilots'
union that incorporates stock options in lieu of salary increases.

U.S.  Labor Secretary Robert Reich points to Xerox and Ford as two
corporations where economic literacy of the workforce has been fostered by the
establishment of labor/management partnerships.  "It's an extraordinary
revolution of the ranks of organized labor to give up work rules for this kind
of empowerment," he says.

"Employees who really understand where they fit in the company strategy
generate real value," Reich notes.  "Employees are assets to be developed,
they're not costs to be cut."  He points to the dual forces of competitiveness
and competing strategies.  "Getting costs under control is the view of many:
cut payrolls, outsource here and abroad.  But there's no sustainable
competitive advantage.  It only comes from what you do uniquely.  Competitive
strength is a product of teamwork.  There's no way we can sustain recovery and
the economy if workers don't have enough pay in their pockets, if their hearts
and minds aren't engaged."

Knowledge Is Power

The Ernst & Young study, conducted December 4-8, was designed to see if a gulf
exists between employees and management.  The results offer an eccentric mix
of responses to 15 key areas.  Ernst & Young interviewed 146 executives (CEOs,
CFOs, senior vice presidents, vice presidents, directors of human resources)
and 251 "rank and file employees" (including managers, customer service
representatives, administrative assistants) at Fortune 1000 companies.

Employees proved to be very well informed on financial issues concerning their
companies, but surprisingly ill informed about the operations side.
Management turned out to be well plugged into the workforce.  Especially
telling was the one question that did not involve communication, but an issue
that cuts close to the bone:  job security.  Only 35% of the employees are
confident management will make sure they keep their jobs.  When the question
was put to senior management, only 26% believed strongly that employees are
confident in them on this issue.  Both groups expect layoffs in the next 12
months:  27% of management, 28% of workers.

But this study was about information issues, and the responses show some
interesting workplace trends.  Both groups think the company keeps employees
well informed about finances and business performance (senior management, 51%,
workers, 53%).  A whopping 70% of the rank and file know stock price trends in
the past quarter, and both groups believe this knowledge is broad based (63%,
54%, respectively).

But only 15% of workers know the cost to manufacture one of its company's
products or the cost of its services.  Most employees (43%) do not think their
co-workers know these costs, while even fewer executives (39%) think workers
are informed.

Workers indicated a need for specific information that relates to their jobs.
Company communications methods, however, are geared to a broader, general
audience:  Newsletters (91%, 84%) and meetings (82%, 73%) command the lion's
share.  Videotapes (43%, 40%) and video conferencing (25%, 28%), both well
suited to a large audience and easy to customize to meet specific needs, were
at the bottom of the list.

Both groups believe employees would be more motivated if they knew how their
work contributed to company profits (77%, 59%).  And most executives (54%) and
workers (53%) think the company helps employees develop new skills to boost
job performance.

Less confidence was expressed by workers asked if management helps them
develop new skills to earn promotions:  44% agree strongly, 8% disagree
strongly.  Contrast this with 42% of management in the affirmative and 1% in
disagreement.

Ernst & Young found the relationship between performance and contribution to
profitability illustrates a desire by workers to change their roles and assume
more decision-making responsibility to benefit the corporate balance sheet.
Management's response was more optimistic (77%) than workers' (59%), however,
when asked if employees will be more motivated if they know how the work they
do helps the company make money.  The second largest worker response group
27%, agreed somewhat to the notion.

Teams represent the dominant culture (80% for both groups), and both agree
teams make their company more competitive (83%, 78%).  Technology improvements
are credited with enabling employees to increase productivity (63%, 60%).

Battling Economic Illiteracy

Open-book management, and the partnering approach, mean management gives up to
get.  John P.  Stack, president and chief executive officer of Springfield
Remanufacturing Corp.  (SRC) in Springfield, Mo., agrees.  Stack says the key
to the strategy in his company was to create a paradigm:  Wipe out the
economic illiteracy problem among employees.  "It was a way to raise capital
and create jobs," he recalls.  "We had to tell them the success of the company
is derived by the success of the balance sheet."

SRC remanufactures engines and engine components; originally, it was the
remanufacturing plant of International Harvester.  Stack was the plant manager
in 1983 when IH, trying to stave off bankruptcy, was selling off assets.  He
and 12 other managers and supervisors bought the debt-burdened plant and
created SRC as an ESOP.  Hourly workers hold 34% of the stock.

Despite the debt, Stack was able to increase the workforce five-fold, lift
productivity and, with it, the stock price.  Annual sales last year are
estimated at $103 million versus $16 million in 1983.  Growth has been at a
rate of 12% to 15% per year, and debt to sales has shrunk dramatically.  "If
you put $100 in the company in 1983, it's worth $2,700 today," Stack says of
the employee-owners' investment.

At AES Corp., the Arlington, Va.-based global electric power company with $2
billion in assets and revenues exceeding $5 billion, Dennis Bakke's view of
corporate culture takes a page from New Age thinking.  "We need to make the
workplace an efficient place without squelching workforce creativity as the
Industrial Revolution did," AES' co-founder, president, and chief executive
officer, maintains.  "We need a paradigm shift.  We need to eliminate
management, the people who train, strategize, make decisions, the things I
learned at Harvard Business School.  Then we also have to eliminate labor,
people who want to be taken care of."

Radical?  Maybe.  But it works for him.  Bakke's view is guided by a culture
that sees business as more than a money-making venture.  He cites a quartet of
"shared" values:  to act with integrity, to be fair, to have fun, and to be
socially responsible.  Bakke argues that 99% of businesses across the board
"still operate on the assumption we're all interchangeable parts."  To counter
this, create a fun workplace, where using one's skills builds loyalty and
dedication and workers enjoy themselves in the process, he urges.

"It starts with radical power sharing, really giving up power," he says,
explaining the unstructured style at AES.  "We don't have any set
authorization limits, no central budgeting.  We don't send information to
people, we try to generate it.  Information sharing is not sending people
information.  There's no central staff operations, except for accounting.  And
if I could decentralize accounting, and I think I have the software to do it,
I will."

Information is free and flowing.  AES employees don't have to wait for
quarterly earnings reports.  Monthly financials are published in the corporate
newsletter, making all employees "insiders."

Partnering

At the end of the day, opening the information loop stands as the critical
element, and workers as business partners the device to redesign the culture.

"Partners get real information, not what management decides they need to
know," Case maintains.  "In business, real information lies in financials, the
balance sheet, sales reports, what's needed to make decisions.  Partners take
responsibility for the business, the exact opposite of the 'hired hand'
mentality.  When you're a partner, making money is everybody's job."

Jim McCann, president and chief executive officer of 1-800-FLOWERS, cites the
"15 minutes of fame" his company has been able to stretch in the past two
years when it's been "white hot," and the challenge of sustaining current high
growth levels for another three years.  "To make that happen, I have to build
a winning culture," he says.  "My real job is to be a cultural engineer."

A former social worker, McCann built his $250 million company in 10 years.
Today, it is the world's largest florist:  2,000 shops, 150 of them company
owned.  Customer service is at the heart of his business, and he uses it as a
tool to empower his workforce-a function of the cultural engineer.  Creating
an upbeat work environment, giving recognition to a people-oriented workforce,
these are fundamental to his strategy.  Customer service, in effect, becomes
an information channel.

His management style incorporates a kind of retro, back-to-basics approach.
"I was the product of the post-war period.  If you were a shopkeeper doing
really well, you couldn't show it.  You had to be discreet.  That's changed
dramatically in 20 years' time," McCann observes.

In the business marketplace, people want to go to work and work hard, and have
an environment that is compelling.  Creating that environment is McCann's job.
Innovation is the key.  He points to Ben & Jerry's for ice cream, Swatch for
watches, WalMart for retail as shining examples of this approach.  The culture
factor opens a window on why businesses struggle, he adds, pointing to Kmart's
financial woes:  "The difference with Kmart and WalMart, I think, is that Sam
crafted a culture."  That culture carries an openness unheard of in highly
competitive fields like retailing, a strategy McCann emulates.

"You must teach what ownership is all about," Stack says.  "The objective is
to match people with opportunities.  Something magic happens when people begin
to understand (how business works)."  SRC's employee-owners, with their
initial $100 investments 12 years ago, are a perfect case in point.  "The
people who started with our company have $60,000-in Springfield, Mo., that's a
house.  The trouble is, now they want a boat, and all the other things.  But
change shows they can get it."


Going Global:  Exploring The "Intranet"

Networks command a lot of IT management's time, in part because of their
strategic importance and in part because they are complicated and built on
fast-changing technologies.  But there are emerging alternatives to
do-it-yourself networking, starting with the Internet.  About two-thirds of
the companies in a recent Dataquest survey say the Internet is a key part of
their IT strategy.  Of particular interest is the "Intranet"-the corporate use
of the Internet for email and collaborative, groupware-like applications.
"Some companies are relying very heavily on the Internet for internal
communications and abandoning their own efforts to create parallel networks,"
Erik Brynjolfsson, a professor at MIT's Sloan School of Management, observes.

In the area of more robust, international networks, some vendors are starting
to offer global telecommunications services.  Their target customers:
multinationals that traditionally purchased network services on a
country-by-country basis from various local carriers, usually state-owned PTT
monopolies.  The new breed of global service provider intends to do away with
that hassle by offering "one-stop shopping," allowing multinationals to get a
wide range of voice and data network services in all the countries where they
have a presence from a single source.

The advent of global service is the result of political and financial efforts,
rather than technological breakthroughs.  More and more countries have been
deregulating their telecommunications markets, making it possible for a vendor
to offer cross-border, end-to-end service.  But creating a global capability
takes a tremendous amount of capital and technical expertise, a burden that no
provider wants to shoulder alone.  As a result, vendors have been aggressively
forming partnerships, joint ventures, and alliances.

"Each of the major country PTTs and telecom companies are linking up madly in
a series of marriages to be able to provide a global infrastructure," John
Scholes, president of Regent Associates International, in East Hartland,
Conn., says.  These ventures include World Partners, a product of AT&T,
Singapore Telekom, and several other PTTs; Concert, formed by British Telecom,
and MCI; and Phoenix, formed by Sprint, France Telecom, and Deutsche Telekom.
The opportunity for these companies is clear.  For example, after just a year
and a half in the market, Concert offers services across dozens of countries
and has signed up more than $700 million worth of customers.

Despite such rapid advances, true one-stop shopping for global telcom services
is not quite here yet, observers say.  "Pieces of it are in place," Scholes
says.  The remaining portions should come together quickly as deregulation
comes to more markets-including most of Europe's, which are scheduled to be
open in 1998.  As regulatory barriers fall, prices will come down and global
reach will increase.  "There will be more choice," Scholes notes.  "Companies
will be able to buy from a number of partnerships, choosing those that can
offer them the most services worldwide."  -P.H.


Alcoa Builds A Superhighway

At Alcoa, the maxim "Think globally, act locally" is not just a slogan.  It's
a blueprint for the company's organizational structure.

"We do not have a single business.  We have a whole array of businesses, with
very different customers and very different customer behavior," Keith
Turnbull, vice president of strategic analysis/planning and information, says.

Pittsburgh-based Alcoa, the world's largest aluminum producer, posted record
1995 revenues of $12.5 billion.  The company's businesses are in sectors as
diverse as aerospace, transportation, and construction.  Its 169 operations
sites span 26 countries and run the gamut from bauxite mining in Australia to
the manufacture of auto parts in Brazil, building products in Belgium, and
bottle caps in Japan.

So when Alcoa announced in November a $150 million joint venture with
Microsoft and Hewlett Packard to build its own information superhighway to
connect more than 15,000 computers in the Alcoa system, Wall Street pricked up
its ears.

"Better and faster access to information is the lifeblood of Alcoa's strategy
for maintaining product quality, serving worldwide markets, and building
partnerships with our customers," Paul O'Neill, Alcoa's chairman, said at the
time.  Alcoa's corporate strategy has kept the company a Wall Street favorite,
even in tough economic times.  The joint venture, called the Common
Infrastructure Initiative (CII), gives Alcoa the ability to leverage
technology as it leverages its industry position in international
manufacturing joint ventures.  And it takes Alcoa to the next step in the
corporate evolution begun five years ago.

In 1991, to get closer to its broad customer base, Alcoa reorganized a
centralized corporate structure into 22 business units, each with the freedom
to align its processes and products with its customers.  Among other things,
that means those units are free to pick their own information systems.

Initially, these systems were effective in supporting local operations, but at
the enterprise level, they had to be strung together so information could be
moved throughout the corporation.  For example, Alcoa found itself with eight
different email systems.  "We have to put them together, we interface them and
translate them," Turnbull explains, all of which impedes information flow and
adds to the complexity and cost.

Last autumn, Alcoa began rebuilding its systems using the same hardware and
operating system software around the globe.  "The decision was that we would
craft a common infrastructure that would cross over all the business units and
provide a capability for the aggressive and convenient sharing of
information," Turnbull says.  And CII was born.

When completed in mid-1997, CII will deploy 10,000 Microsoft Windows NT
workstations running Microsoft Office and 450 servers running components of
Microsoft BackOffice.  There will be a single, integrated email system.
Hewlett Packard is providing project management through the implementation
phase, hardware configuration and delivery, and ongoing support that includes
a help desk.  In the first phase, now underway, 250 of the servers will be
installed, 4,000 desktop computers will be replaced or upgraded, and the help
desk will be open at some 150 U.S.-based businesses.

This uniformity will make it easier to manage the systems centrally and
distribute software upgrades over the network.  At the same time, it will
leave Alcoa's business units with the local processing power and flexibility
they need to work with specific customers in specific markets.  "This is a
common infrastructure that we can play across," Turnbull explains.  "But we do
not impose a way to run the business."

He likens the CII to building a road.  "The people who design the highway
don't decide who will use it, or how many trucks there will be on it.  But
they do decide what the lane width will be, what the curvatures will be, so
each trucker can make independent decisions about how to travel.  It's just
common enough to make it useful, and just free enough to make it
entrepreneurial and adaptive."

When the project is complete, employees in one part of the company will share
a wider range of information with employees in virtually every other part,
accelerating overall responsiveness and decision making.  "The speed with
which we can deploy questions, draw back the data, clock the responses, and
feed it back for worldwide interaction-you just can't match it," Turnbull
says.  "With commonalities of technology, your ability to bounce that back and
forth is really fast and pretty painless."

The simplified sharing of information will make it easier for business units
to tap into the wealth of knowledge located throughout Alcoa.  While customers
vary, production technologies often are similar.  Business units can learn a
lot from each other by directly sharing breakthroughs and transferring new
technologies and techniques.  "It's very useful to be able to trade best
practices from one location to another," Turnbull observes.  "Ideally, that
trading should not have to climb up some hierarchy and come back down again."

Finally, a common infrastructure helps management keep its eye on more
competitive issues.  If one of Alcoa's automotive units is developing a new
process, "they don't have to decide what kind of desktop hardware or server to
use-and those aren't really going to determine whether your business succeeds
or fails," Turnbull says.  "The infrastructure decisions are already crafted
and deployed, so they get to skip that and concentrate on what it takes to
make a better car.  The efficiencies come from being able to spend more of
your time dealing with the business issues, and less of your time dealing with
infrastructure issues."  -P.H.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

Clippings


Teambuilding:  Whoa, team!

Everybody's cheering on corporate teams, but they're not infallible.  From:The
Paradox Principles, by The Price Waterhouse Change Integration Team.
Published by Irwin Professional Publishing, Chicago.

Teams are pervasive.  According to a recent survey, 68 percent of Fortune
1,000 companies were using self-managed work teams in one form or another in
1994.  But not everyone sees teams as effective.  Here are some common
problems:

1.  Teams assigned to inappropriate tasks.  The greatest error of all is to
form a team as a knee-jerk reaction to a problem that an individual ought to
tackle.  Teams too often reflect a manager's reluctance to take action or to
empower someone to "get it done."  Teams are not appropriate for all tasks.
2.  Inadequate commitment to a clear performance objective.  The single most
important determinant of team performance is that each member understand
clearly the team's performance goal and that each be fully committed and
mutually accountable for its achievement.  This is seldom the case.  Many
teams are simply patchworks of people who would like to achieve an objective
but who have no unifying obsession to get it done.  An important corollary
here is that team goals should be explicitly connected to significant
issues-and this connection must be ratified by senior management.  3.
Inadequate (and inappropriate) training.  By and large, team training is a
mess.  People come into teams with diverse experience, technical abilities,
and-most important-social skills.  Seldom is the training crisply focused on
what this team needs to know.  Training is abundant but often unfocused and
unproductive.  When we asked one interviewee what he had learned from a series
of sessions on self-directed work teams, he responded, "I learned that you
need an agenda for meetings"-and in so many words, he added, "and not much
else."  4.  Unrealistic management expectations.  When management sees teams
as a way to transform the organization beyond the teams' specific goals, the
use of teams is likely to disappoint.  There is little evidence that teams
have changed whole cultures or radically altered employee attitudes toward the
organization.  Most teams are groups.  We've been working in groups for
decades amidst cultures strong and weak.  5.  Indecisiveness.  Teams are
rarely as decisive as the individuals who make up the team.  How can they be
when they're struggling to gain consensus, make everybody happy, and craft a
compromise solution?  Teams should produce better ideas.  But those ideas will
be of little use if they arrive too late.

Technology Watch:  Net results

From the keynote address to Comdex/Fall 1995 by Louis V.  Gerstner, Jr.,
chairman and chief executive officer of IBM Corp.

If you look at microprocessors, memory, software, storage, you'll see that the
laggard of the technology family has been communications technology.  PCs and
servers have become enormously powerful, but they communicate through the
equivalent of soda straws.  All that is changing.  Very powerful networking
technologies-principally ATM-will be the next phase of computing what the
microprocessor was to the current phase.  I think the most profound
implication of this new technology is that it will change the nature of
computing itself.

If the communications link between the PC and the network is cheap enough,
fast enough, and has virtually unlimited bandwidth, why not migrate a lot of
the functions that currently reside inside the PC to the network-the
applications, the data, the storage, and even some of the processing?  This is
not a throwback to the mainframe era.  End users will still have the
user-friendly features they value in PCs.  They'll click on applications, and
response time will be just as good, if not better.  And because we won't have
to stuff this new device with lots of technology, it can be much less
expensive to purchase, maintain, and upgrade...

When will network-centric computing arrive?  Well, it's already arriving-just
look at the Internet, the most powerful and important of all networks.
People, organizations, and networks are connecting at a rate no one expected,
and that pace will continue, if not accelerate.

I think we'll see network transactions-electronic commerce-take hold very
quickly.  The final step-pushing the applications, operating system, storage,
and processing up into the network-will take longer.

A lot of people are looking for network-centric computing to pay off in the
consumer space first...but we are seeing it take off first in businesses....
That's because while I've talked a lot about technology driving us toward
network-centric computing, technology is only an enabler of a much more
powerful force:  a whole new way that...companies, have conceptualized their
strategic priorities.  They've discovered a powerful new form of leverage:
the leverage of organizational knowledge as a means to compete more
effectively and to differentiate themselves in the marketplace...

The most important, most valuable, most sought-after content in the world
belongs to corporations and large institutions.  It's created and collected
every minute, around the world:  intellectual property, designs, market
intelligence, supply and demand, customer trends.

The problem is, this knowledge is spread across incompatible computer systems.
It's distributed across PCs in various departments, it's locked up in desks
and filing cabinets, and, yes,some of it is locked in the heads of employees.
Powerful networks can unlock this knowledge and move it to the people who can
use it effectively.  This drives shorter cycle times and allows teams of
people to become more productive and creative.

Computer Analysis:  Shrink rap

If you believe your employees or your customers won't respond to "cold,"
computerized response systems, you may adjust your thinking after reading this
from Reengineering Human Resources, by Lyle M.  Spencer, Jr.  Published by
John Wiley & Sons, New York.

Eliza is a computer program developed by MIT computer science professor Joseph
Weizenbaum in the 1960s to test artificial intelligence ideas about
human-computer interactions.  This program essentially acts as a nondirective
Rogerian psychotherapist.  Rogerian therapists reflect:  they repeat whatever
their clients say in a caring, questioning "tell me more" tone.

When you load Eliza, the screen displays a welcoming message:  "Hi!  I'm
pleased you want to talk with me.  What would you like to talk about?"  If you
type "I'm angry at my girlfriend/ boyfriend," the computer, using
psycholinguistic analysis, identifies the feeling word "angry" and object
(boy*/girl*) in your sentence and asks you:  "Why are you angry with him/her?
Tell me more."  The program continues a slightly stilted but plausible
conversation, politely prompting you to explore your thoughts and feelings for
as long as you want to play with it.

To Weizenbaum's astonishment, the finding regarding computer empathy was that
MIT students and other adults who used Eliza actually preferred the computer
shrink to human psychotherapists.  Clients found the computer more caring,
more accurately empathic, and more responsive.  And, of course, Eliza was
always available, 24 hours a day, with complete privacy, on students' own
terminals, free, or at least immensely cheaper than a $100-an-hour,
hard-to-get-an-appointment-with human therapist.

Marketing:  Can I see your ID?

From Building Strong Brands, by David A Aaker.  Published by The Free Press,
New York.

In Japan, corporate brand-building efforts often are aimed primarily toward
current and prospective employees.  An impact on customers is seen as almost a
bonus, and certainly not as the only benefit.  Japanese firms consider it
vital that employees feel pride in their firm because of its values, purpose,
past success, and future goals.  They believe that workers who feel this pride
will then be more effective and motivated and will buy into the group
activities and culture that are at the heart of the Japanese management style.
Corporate advertising in Japan is thus largely justified on the basis of its
internal impact.  In contrast, employees in the United States and Europe are
rarely considered to be an important audience for the corporate advertising
effort.

Stimulating Strategic and Organizational Change In Japan, firms often engage
in corporate identity (CI) programs, the goal of which is to obtain consensus
among a broad cross-section of employees as to what the corporate identity
should be.  The process not only results in a corporate identity for which
there is "buy-in" among employees but it also provides a vehicle to stimulate
change and renewal within the organization.  For example, in 1985 a broad set
of groups within Asahi Breweries discussed the identity and vision of the
firm.  The result was a new attitude that made Asahi Dry and other programs
feasible.  One tangible sign of the new Asahi was a decision to change the
firm's rising-sun logo, which was more than a century old.


Management:  Language lesson

For managers, powering their own speech patterns may be as important as
empowering their staff.  From The Art of Framing, by Gail T.  Fairhurst and
Robert A.  Saar.  Published by Jossey-Bass, San Francisco.

Linguistic anthropologist William O'Barr and his colleagues have identified
several "powerless" speech forms:

Hedges:  language that reduces the force of an assertion by allowing for
exceptions or by avoiding commitments, such as "sort of," "a little," and
"kind of"

Intensifiers:  language that increases or emphasizes the force of an
assertion, such as "very," "definitely," "very definitely," and "surely"

Hesitations:  "meaningless" expressions, such as "oh well," "let's see," "so,
you see," "uh," "um," and "you know"

Questioning forms:  use of rising question intonation a the end of what would
otherwise normally be declarative sentences, such as "I weigh 125?"  or
"Definitely we could do that?"

Intangible Assets:  Designer labeling

From Why Firms Succeed, by John Kay.  Published by Oxford University Press,
New York.

Reputation is the most important commercial mechanism for conveying
information to consumers.  But reputation is not equally important in all
markets because customers find out about product characteristics and product
quality in many ways.  Sometimes they learn from searching.  Other attributes
become apparent as soon as a product is used.  The importance of reputation
can be seen in those markets-from car rental to accounting-to which product
quality is important but can be identified only through long-term experience.
In these markets, reputations are difficult and costly to create but, once
established, can yield substantial added value.

Empowerment:  If it's not one thing, it's another

Is "power to the employees" your new corporate mantra?  It may not be enough.
From Focused Quality, by Harvey K.  Brelin, Kimberly S.  Davenport, Lyell P.
Jennings, and Paul F.  Murphy.  Published by John Wiley & Sons, New York.

When visiting a major hotel chain's property, the enthusiasm of the staff was
obvious.  A front desk clerk wore a large button that said "I'm empowered."
When asked what that meant, she said, "I can do anything to keep a customer
happy so long as I don't give away the property."  She was asked how and
replied, "If something goes wrong, I can give you one of these green tickets
for a free drink or meal and if needed even a room."  However, when asked
whether she ever looked at the processes to avoid having to compensate for
mistakes, she answered with a worried look, "What's a process?"





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

The Last Word


Intelligence-artificial or otherwise-bombards us from all directions.  It's
not surprising that Steve Martin, playing a cutting-edge neurosurgeon in "The
Man With Two Brains," saw a major business opportunity.  Entire rooms, floors,
even buildings are dedicated to the kinds of technological advances Dr.
Hfuhruhurr couldn't begin to imagine...and that's not counting the "flesh and
blood" thinkers.

So we asked some experts about intelligence, and gave them carte blanche to
pick their descriptive niche.

"Intelligence is understanding what you don't know, and where to find the
answer."

-Donald Dinan, international trade attorney and partner, O'Connor & Hannon


"Intelligence can be knowing where we're not going.  Sometimes an aggressively
executed non-strategy is as good as a strategy."

-Thornton May, vice president, Cambridge Technology Partners


"Intelligence is the product from the gathering of secret information for a
variety of possible purposes, including to support policymakers, in response
to military needs, or to offer conference negotiators an advantage of advance
notice of adversary intentions."

-David Whipple, executive director, Association of Former Intelligence
Officers and 35-year veteran of the Central Intelligence Agency


"Intelligence is a person's ability to assimilate abstract or complex concepts
and present them in understandable terms."

-Douglas C.  Yearley, chairman, Phelps Dodge Corp.


"Intelligence is information that's been analyzed to the point where a
decision can be made.  Anything less is just a lot of information.  And we
have too much of that already."

-Leonard Fuld, president, Fuld & Co.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

Short Takes


Blanket Coverage

Boyd, Brown & Co.  has come up with a new way to manage your risk if your
business is international trade.  Risk-Transfer, the trademarked financial
product it developed in partnership with Chubb Insurance as the underwriter,
protects the financing of purchase orders for import, export, and domestic
trade transactions by covering them with proprietary specification compliance
insurance.

This insurance provides the collateral required by lenders, guaranteeing loans
will be repaid either from the transaction proceeds or by the insurance firm.
The cost is approximately 2% of the transaction value.  This compares to 3% to
4% typically charged by government or other private insurers.  Commercial
banks, no strangers to economic and political risk, normally require customers
to post collateral for 100% of the trade finance funds advanced.

Boyd, Brown, based in Chicago, is an international trade banking firm
specializing in purchase order financing.  Worth Brown, president and
co-founder, says Risk-Transfer was created "to move the financial risk of
trade from the risk-averse lenders to the risk-accepting insurance carriers."

Protection is extended to issues of quality and late deliveries by overseas
manufacturers, too.  Shipments are tracked to confirm the transaction has been
completed.  Worldwide on-site inspections are conducted for specification
compliance; logistics management services monitor the progress of
transactions.  And, as an extra feature, Risk-Transfer ensures the parties
responsible for transportation, customs clearance, and delivery "are competent
and adequately insured."

Boyd, Brown thinks Risk-Transfer can help solve the industry-wide problem of
"trade dispute" that arises from quality and finance issues.  These are plain
vanilla problems-wrong size, wrong color, who pays?-but can turn a simple
business transaction into the deal from hell because conventional credit
insurance or export guarantys usually exclude coverage when "trade disputes"
occur.

"There are heated battles all the time," a Boyd, Brown spokesman says.  "With
Risk-Transfer, there aren't any questions.  The insurance company pays."

Start Me Up

So you're thinking of opening a branch office in Chile.  The political climate
is warm, the economic climate the best in Latin America.  You know Chile is
the only country in the region with investment grade bonds, more copper than
anywhere else in the world, good skiing, and some mighty fine wines.  But
where do you set up shop?  What about real estate?

Nacore International has rolled out the welcome mat with its 1996 edition of
its International Starter Kit series, or everything you ever wanted to know
about the business climate-specific to real estate-and culture of foreign
countries.  No fear here.  The trade group's 3,300 members manage real estate
for non-real-estate companies.

The choices are many:  Argentina, Brazil, the Czech Republic, Hungary, India,
the Philippines, Russia, and Vietnam are part of the new edition, joining
Chile, China, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Portugal,
Spain, and the United Kingdom.

Each Starter Kit includes economic indicators and benchmark comparisons;
benchmarking data for major market rents worldwide; office and leasing
guidelines; expanded travel tips and cultural and business guidelines; and
tips and contact information written by Nacore members doing business in each
country, an instant networking tool.

Members are entitled to three free kits; after that, each kit costs $20.
Nonmembers pay $25.

The kits are the brainchild of Mark Hoewing, Nacore's executive director.  The
research is by Nacore and Colliers International.  Each kit contains a
"culturegram" from Brigham Young University that describes the particular
country, from its climate to its politics.

Is This the Party to Whom I Am Speaking?

Voice mail and poor diction mangle names and numbers ruthlessly.  As
communicators, we've turned into a nation of spellers.  It used to be only
those of us with complex or eccentric surnames (and I speak for legions)
learned the drill from our parents of patiently spelling it out, complete with
little clues like "F as in Frank" for the difficult-to-differentiate letters.

Are businesses immune from these linguistic gymnastics?  Au contraire.  And
thanks to mergers, acquisitions, buyouts, and creative consultants, the name
you hear at the other end of the phone line may have nothing to do with the
party you thought you were calling.

Last year, 1,154 companies took new names, representing 13.9% of the more than
8,300 companies surveyed by Anspach Grossman Portugal Inc., a corporate
identity management consulting firm based in New York, for its 26th annual
tally of corporate name changes.  The survey tracks companies listed on the
New York Stock Exchange, American Stock Exchange, and the Nasdaq Stock Market,
as well as major private corporations and U.S.  subsidiaries of foreign
companies.

The 1995 results show an increase of 4% from 1,114 changes in 1994.  But that
pace trails the 1,285 changes recorded in 1992, the highest since 1991.

"Corporate managers are realizing that a name change should reflect the new
way the company views itself, or the metamorphosis it has undergone," Jim
Johnson, president and chief executive officer of Anspach Grossman Portugal,
says.  "Like the products a company names or the services it provides, a
company's name and identity have to be sold to the public."

So much for "household words."

Corporate image, interestingly enough, jumped 16% from 1994's 179 changes.  By
and large, though, the new "noms de biz" are born out of a variety of reasons:

* n Mergers/acquisitions:  602, or 53% * New corporate image:  307, or 27% *
NYSE or Amex listings:  78, or 7% * Nasdaq listing:  123, or 11% * Financial
sector:  288, or 25% * Manufacturing/industrial:  172, or 15% *
Communications:  182, or 16% * Health care:  139, or 12%

New York led the geographic list with 139 changes, followed by California
(98), Texas (69), Pennsylvania (56), and Ohio (52).

Mergers and acquisitions resulted in a mixed bag of monikers.  Kidder, Peabody
& Co.  disappeared from the landscape when acquired by the re-dubbed Paine
Webber Group, Inc.  And Lockheed Martin Corp.  came into being when aerospace
giants Lockheed and Martin Marietta merged.

While market research may select a name that better conveys a new corporate
focus, consumers may be in for a reality check.  Take Greyhound Financial, now
doing business as Finova Capital.  Or imagine if you're a customer of
Rochester Telephone, returning from a year's sabbatical in Zambia.  Well, say
hello to Frontier Corp.

Mind the Gap

So you've been posted to London.  You have a flat, a travel card, an adapter
for your appliances.  Your friends in Des Moines are filled with envy.  What
they don't know is that your wages and benefits are below those of your new
colleagues in the same office.

Terence Boudreaux, senior marketing executive for Cigna International's group
and employee benefits division, doesn't buy it.  In his view, expatriate and
third-country national (TCN) employees should be paid under the same plan.

"U.S.  expats and TCNs are often paid on different scales-and they know it,
because they often work side by side," Boudreaux says.  "If their benefits
also differ, it can lead to dissatisfaction-usually among TCNs-and,
ultimately, the loss of talented people who figure prominently in the
company's success."

Furthermore, this plan should be distinct from the parent company's U.S.
plan.  Benefit costs average 10% to 20% higher in the U.S.  than other parts
of the world, he notes, making it more cost-effective to the company to cover
these groups under a "carve-out plan" that takes into consideration the
special needs of foreign-based employees.  And the plan should be portable.

"The plan you create for these groups should be structured to follow them
around the world," Boudreaux says.  "A new assignment shouldn't mean a loss of
benefits or require that the employee meet new preexisting condition
limitations or deductibles."

And he urges companies to demand service at least equivalent to U.S.
standards, basics like having one contact point from any location, direct
claim processing, 24-hour access to claim personnel, and specialized services
like language translation and currency conversion.

"Employees don't want to have to pay a $15 or $30 currency conversion charge
when they try to deposit a $50 reimbursement at the local bank," he observes.


Born to Run?

The eternal leadership debate-born or bred-keeps consultants in business and
business schools in vogue.  As companies restructure and business sectors
reinvent themselves, however, more responsibility, power, and leadership
demands are shifting to people without the formal training and, more
frequently, the natural talent.

Development Dimensions International, the Pittsburgh-based leadership training
experts, developed a quiz that reduces leadership issues to its simplest
terms.  To develop the questions, DDI surveyed close to 1,500 people-from
executives to business associates-from 25 organizations in the United States
and Canada:  13 manufacturing companies with an average 500 to 1,000
employees, and 12 service firms with an average 1,000 to 5,000 employees.

1.  Sharing rationale and personal feelings about decisions with employees is
a sign of weak leadership

True ___ False ___

2.  As a leader, I need to step in and take charge if an employee's project
runs into major problems.

True ___ False ___

3.  Delegating just causes employee resentment, plus it takes less time to do
the work myself.

True ___ False ___

4.  When two of my employees are having a conflict, it's best for me to step
in and resolve the problem quickly.

True ___ False ___

5.  In this era of downsizing and restructuring, it is critical for me to keep
open and honest communication with my staff.

True ___ False ___

6.  Leaders should take every opportunity to tell employees what they are
doing wrong.  This will increase productivity and ensure goals are met.

True ___ False ___

7.  It is important for a leader to act as a catalyst-to inspire or motivate
employees as they work on projects.

True ___ False ___

8.  The best way to build employee confidence is to supervise projects
closely.

True ___ False ___

9.  The most important characteristic of a leader is:

A) Ability to motivate employees and inspire commitment

B) Remaining consistent

C) Willingness to promote teams

D) Enhancing employee's visibility

E) Control the way work is done

SCORING:  For questions 1 through 8, score 5 points for each correct answer;
for question 9:  score 5 pts.  for B, 3 pts.  for A or C, 1 pt.  for D;
subtract 5 pts.  for E.

A score of 41-45 indicates you're an accomplished leader; 31-40, your skills
are inconsistent-analyze your strengths and work on your weaknesses.  If you
scored 0-30, better get to work...and read this magazine!

ANSWERS:

1.  False.  Disclosing your own feelings, thoughts, and rationale about a
situation in a balanced way will instill loyalty, motivation, and enthusiasm
in employees.  2.  False.  Taking over when things go wrong, while tempting,
sends the wrong message to everyone.  A leader's role is to provide support
without removing responsibility and coach people to find their own solutions.
3.  False.  Delegation is an important leadership tool.  The challenge is to
consistently match the right person or work group to the assignment and then
provide support.  Delegation maximizes involvement, productivity, motivation,
and growth for the individual and team.  4.  False.  Taking charge, or even
ignoring conflict, is not the best approach because you remove responsibility
for solving problems from the employee.  As a leader your best choices are to
listen and mediate or provide support as the parties work through the source
of conflict.  5.  True.  Fear is the most common reaction to change.  The best
way to allay fears is for leaders to regularly communicate full, accurate
information so employees understand their role in change and what's ahead for
them and the organization.  6.  False.  Feedback should be used primarily as a
tool for growth.  Always giving people negative feedback is de-motivating.
Feedback should be balanced, specific, and oriented toward learning.  7.
True.  Today's most effective leaders place an emphasis on sharing
responsibility, coaching, providing resources, helping people through change,
and forming partnerships.  A catalyst maximizes and stimulates the talents and
skills of others.  8.  False.  With greater spans of control, leaders simply
don't have time to look over someone's shoulder.  Leaders need to help
employees develop self-leadership behaviors.  By helping others to think
through problems, ideas, and opportunities, leaders create an environment in
which high performers do their best work.  9.  B.  Being consistent ranked the
highest in a survey of most desirable qualities for leaders.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

Taking Stock Of the January Effect


By Mike Braude


Stock market investment strategies have one ultimate goal-to buy low and sell
high.  If only it were that easy.  The multitude of options available to
investment strategists and portfolio managers today, coupled with the myriad
of vehicles in which to pursue them, often leaves many perplexed.  Some
business people have a clear advantage-they can sense where the market is
headed.  Many cannot-at least not until now.

Twenty years ago, researchers identified an investment opportunity during the
year-end holiday season that has since been dubbed the January Effect.  The
name refers to the tendency of small stocks to outperform larger, blue-chip
issues at the end of one year and into January of the following year.

Since 1975, analysts have spent a great deal of time studying the January
Effect's various degrees of activity.  While market research doesn't suggest
that the financial markets will trend upward each January, it does indicate
that small-cap stocks tend to outperform large-cap stocks at that time,
whether the general market trend is up or down.

Although this phenomenon has occurred nine out of every ten years since 1926,
it went unnoticed for a long time because it is not apparent from following
the performance of large stocks, such as those that comprise the S&P 500 and
the Dow Jones Industrial Average.  In fact, if you look at the S&P 500 for the
period from 1926 through 1985, you'll find no evidence of the January Effect.
However, if you compare the performance of the S&P to a broader stock index
that includes a number of smaller stocks, such as the Value Line Arithmetic
Index, the Effect is clearly evident a majority of the time.

The January Effect is not limited to U.S.  stocks.  Numerous countries around
the globe have experienced significantly higher stock market returns in
January.  In Belgium, the Netherlands, and Italy, the average stock market
return in January has been greater than the average return for the whole year.
In fact, it is the only month of the year with a positive return for every
country.  In 65% of the countries where stock is traded publicly, January
contributes more than 50% of the total return for the year, excluding
dividends.

Why January?

There are investment-driven explanations for the timing of this trend.
Investors tend to sell losing stocks in December for tax purposes.  The
selling pressure forces stock prices below their equilibrium value, and when
the pressure is suddenly released in January, prices spring upward.  Another
theory holds that secondary stocks come under pressure at the end of the year
from window dressing-a tendency by portfolio managers to "clean out" the
stocks of smaller, lesser known companies from portfolios for reporting
purposes.  Stocks are then repurchased after the reporting period ends.  Still
others subscribe to the notion that renewed interest in buying stocks occurs
after the holidays, when investors search for stocks they consider to be
underpriced.

Whatever the reason, the fact remains that during the January Effect period,
small-cap stocks can achieve returns 10 to 12 times higher than those of
large-cap stocks.  The stocks most likely to achieve these gains are those of
companies valued at less than $200 million; issues that underperformed the
previous year; stocks with high betas (the measurement of stock responsiveness
to the broad market) considered especially volatile; stocks with low
price/earnings ratios; and stocks paying no dividends.

Certainly, small company stocks tend to outperform other stocks in general
because their risk is higher and investors expect to be rewarded for this
increased risk.  But the reward they receive in January tends to be far higher
than in any other month.  According to finance professors Robert Haugen of the
University of California and Dr.  Josef Lakonishok of the University of
Illinois, nearly all the risk premium for investing in small firms is earned
in January.

Futures Key to January Effect Trading

Investment strategists, portfolio managers, and others can take advantage of
the January Effect in a number of ways with varying levels of financial
commitment:  taking positions in individual stocks, trading options on
individual stocks, or trading stock index futures or options on the futures.

Of these alternatives, market analysts often suggest stock index futures and
options on the futures for trading the Effect.  Taking positions in individual
stocks, or options on stocks, does not necessarily ensure a broad
representation of the stock market.  In addition to being subject to broader
market phenomena like the January Effect, stock performance is vulnerable to a
range of factors from earnings reports to labor/management problems.

Stock index futures and options, like many other financial index products,
have the benefit of providing the broader market representation while
requiring only one transaction for investment.  Market analysts often
recommend KCBT Value Line futures and options for trading the effect.  The
Value Line Arithmetic Index, on which Value Line futures are based, is
comprised of some 1,650 stocks.  Each stock is equally weighted, so that a
stock trading at $150 per share has the same weight as one trading at $20.  A
3% minimum fluctuation in the price of a stock with 2 million shares
outstanding has the same weight as a 3% change in a stock with 10,000 shares
outstanding.  As a result, the Value Line is viewed as a good indicator of the
secondary, or small-cap, market.

To capture the January Effect, the Value Line can be spread against stock
index futures representative of blue-chip stocks, such as the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange's S&P 500 Index, a capitalization-weighted index that
measures the performance of 500 of the largest, mostly blue-chip, companies;
the CME's Major Market Index for monitoring a broad section of 20 blue-chip,
heavily capitalized stocks; and The New York Futures Exchange's New York Stock
Exchange Composite Index for measuring the performance of the 2,500 stocks
traded on the NYSE.

Recent studies indicate trading the January Effect is more profitable with
small-cap value stocks than small-cap growth stocks.  A growth stock would be
a stock that has a market value significantly higher than its book value,
while a value stock would be a stock that has a market value below its book
value.

New York Stock Exchange small stocks tend to be primarily value stocks.
Nearly 75% of the 1,650 stocks included in the Value Line index are NYSE
stocks.  For this reason, the Value Line index is a logical index for one side
of a January Effect spread.  It also is the only index with two futures
contracts:  the Value Line and the Mini Value Line.  The latter is one-fifth
the size of the larger contract, allowing for greater flexibility.  In
addition to being a vehicle for trading the January Effect, the Value Line
also is an excellent tool for portfolio and pension fund managers to hedge
their stock market risk.

Trading the January Effect

One easy way to trade the January Effect is with a futures spread.  Selling
one blue-chip stock index futures contract (taking a short position) and
buying one small-cap stock index futures contract (taking a long position)
enables investors to capitalize on the relative performance between the
secondary and blue-chip markets.

To initiate a spread, you could buy a Value Line futures contract and sell an
S&P 500 or an NYSE Composite Index futures contract to capture the blue-chip
section of the market.  Hypothetical performance results compiled by the Moore
Research Center based in Eugene, Ore., reveal that Value Line/S&P 500 and
Value Line/NYSE Composite futures spreads produced positive results every year
the contract has traded.

If both indexes go up, the Value Line leg of the spread would make a profit,
while the S&P/NYSE leg would incur a loss.  However, the Value Line profits
would be expected to be larger than the S&P/NYSE losses, making for an overall
profitable trade.

Trading the January Effect through futures spreads is more affordable than
taking actual positions in each equity, because spreads tend to be less
volatile and therefore have more favorable margin treatments.  Transaction
costs could eat away most, if not all, of the potential gains derived from
January Effect trades conducted with the corresponding basket of securities,
and the market impact would be far greater.  Stock index futures allow
investment through one simple transaction for a small percentage of the
brokerage cost of a similar investment in actual stocks.

Options strategies also can be incorporated.  For example, if you are
concerned a declining market could erode the performance of the small-company
side of your small-cap/blue-chip spread, you could protect your small-cap
component by buying Mini Value Line put options.  By buying a deep
out-of-the-money put, whose strike price is lower than the current market
value, you can lower your option premium and, at the same time, help to insure
against extreme losses on the small-cap leg of your spread.  Like the Mini
Value Line futures contract, Mini options have a value of $100 times each
index point, compared with a value of $500 times each index point for Value
Line futures.

Timing the January Effect

As with any commodities spread, timing is an important aspect of participating
in the January Effect.  Research shows the optimum results occur when
positions are initiated in December and liquidated in January, although some
investors may try to put on positions earlier and hold them later.  Professor
William Ziemba of the University of British Columbia and commodities trader
Ross Clark looked at the Value Line/S&P 500 spread from 1976 to 1986.  Their
study, which included making actual futures trades between 1983 and 1987,
found the best time to initiate the spread-buy one Value Line contract and
sell one S&P 500 contract-was on Dec.  15, with a suggested closing out on
Jan.  15.  The four years of actual futures spreads yielded a mean return of
3.47 index points.

In another study, Ziemba and Bruno Vander Cruyssen of Bankers Trust
International Plc, London, updated the futures market performance information
in the earlier study using data from 1983 to 1993.  They found the average
gains in these 10 years of futures spreads was 4.72 points, while the average
gain for cash spreads between 1976 and 1982 (prior to the introduction of
Value Line futures) was 2.23 points.  This second study points out how the
Effect seems to defy the standard market theory that when investment trends
become more widely known, market efficiency means they will no longer work.
Of all the years Ziemba and Vander Cruyssen studied, the 1992-1993 January
Effect was the most pronounced, and the Value Line/S&P spread continued to
narrow through the end of January as small-cap stocks continued their
outperformance of blue-chips.

According to Moore Research, 1994 was another great year for the
small-cap/large-cap index spread, whether the S&P 500 or the NYSE Composite
was used as a large-cap component.  Interestingly enough, the Value Line/NYSE
Composite spread performed substantially better.  For the 12 years studied,
the average theoretical profit has been $1,000 more for the Value Line/NYSE
Composite trade than for the Value Line/S&P 500 trade.

What About November?

Another seasonal trend similar to the January Effect occurs earlier in the
autumn.  Dubbed by some market watchers as the November Effect, it is less
consistent, with a narrower window of opportunity.  Academic research is
minimal.

Moore Research found the optimum time-frame strategy:  initiate a buy Value
Line/sell S&P 500 spread on Nov.  2 and exit the spread about Nov.  11 using
December futures contracts.  Another way is to use the NYSE Composite Index as
the blue-chip component of the spread, using December contracts, initiating it
on Oct.  27 and exiting Nov.  12.  Moore's hypothetical trading results showed
both spreads were profitable 11 of the past 13 years.  Moore Research found
that once this limited effect ends, the broad market tends to dip in mid- to
late November.

New Year Effect

Does the January Effect have a future?  History suggests it does.  But keep in
mind that a number of factors can influence it in any given year.  Take the
recent bullish stock market.  Some observers say the type of stocks leading
the rally can make an impact on the January Effect.  If blue chips are leading
the rally during the January Effect period, the Effect could be subdued.  On
the other hand, if a rally in blue-chip stocks slows at the turn of the year,
bulls may switch to small-cap stocks, enhancing the Effect.

Currency markets may play a role in the January Effect's performance.  A
strong U.S.  dollar tends to enhance the Effect.  A decline in the dollar can
lessen it because of the presumed positive foreign exchange impact for some of
the large, multinational blue-chip companies.

Whatever the market situation, it is important to recember that history is no
guarantee of future market performance.  And as more people attempt to
participate in the January Effect, the opportunity for profit could be reduced
or eliminated.


Mike Braude is president of the Kansas City Board of Trade, which introduced
the first stock index futures contract using the Value Line Arithmetic Cash
Index in 1982.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

The 1996 Business Strategist's Software Directory


THE STEAMROLLER OF TECHNOLOGY MOVES ON.  OKAY.  SO the 1950s predictions of
robots walking the streets have failed to materialize (so far, anyway).
Still, revolutionary software is transforming strategic planning in ways that
even Jules Verne wouldn't have imagined.

In this directory, we've chronicled a few of the latest software wonders that
are recasting business analysis.  We assembled this year's list after
discussions with a number of business professionals and analysts working in
industries from software engineering to food service.  We present software
that improves management productivity and offers tools for superior decision
making-all packages to support strategic analysis with the goal of improving
the bottom line.

While it's no longer news, the 1993 introduction of Intel's Pentium and
Motorola's PowerPC chips opened the gate for desktop PCs to tackle problems
that had been the exclusive domain of pricey UNIX-based workstations.  The
combination of sheer computer power (Pentium and PowerPC), advanced market
analysis tools (idea-building tools, statistical and mapping analysis
software), and global connectivity (through the Internet) are changing the
rules of international business.  Even small, locally owned companies are
experiencing national and offshore competition.  Profit margins are eroding
across industries and markets.  To meet the challenge, players must employ
cutting-edge technology to penetrate and succeed in the worldwide arena.

To address the internationalization of strategic analysis, in this year's
roundup more emphasis is placed on geographic-analysis products than last
year.  Why?  Because more and more strategic marketing questions are best
identified and analyzed on a map rather than in the form of a 40-column by
40-row spreadsheet.  Products such as the hot, new (and pricey) ProphetPoint
from Equifax might have produced in years past a 200-page analysis with rows
of numbers and cross-referencing.  Of course, it would have been nearly
impossible to interpret.  The same data represented geographically is concise
and easy to understand.  While many organizational issues don't lend
themselves to geographic analysis, almost any market, customer, or sales
question does.

In this opening section of the Directory, we've left out the obvious.  While
all of these tools are testaments to the computer's fast-growing role in
businesses of all sizes, from Mom and Pop store to the marketing department of
every Fortune 500 company, there's no write-up on IBM's newly procured Lotus
1-2-3, and we didn't include the standards such as the heavy-weight statistics
package, SPSS.  Since strategists and marketing professionals already use many
of these products, there's no point in going into detail.  However, we have
created a listing section, which follows this one, that updates Business
Strategy's 1995 software directory.

We recommend that you check into each product's reputation and usefulness to
your problem-solving requirements before signing the purchase order.  Some of
these products are expensive (although we think worth the money), and they may
not match your organization's requirements.

This section focuses on fresh new possibilities that may help you reap a
better bottom line.  It examines 21 tools that can help you identify,
quantify, and take advantage of the global market that looms large as we close
in on the second millennium.

Strategic Planning and Market Analysis Tools

In software, new authoring environments for the Internet are making waves for
net surfers.  Internet tools are becoming easier to use, offering features
that allow users to build Web pages quickly and with little computer
programming expertise.  In fact, word processors and page layout programs are
including basic programming for building Web sites.  In terms of analytical
software, the new Atlas Select, from long-time GIS maker Strategic Mapping,
opens the door to affordable mapping technology with a focus on strategic
market analysis.  And Equifax' hot-off-the-press ProphetPoint is a powerhouse
analytical tool that provides, within minutes, existing locations for 10
million businesses and the ability to forecast business growth not just for
next year, but for five years in the future.  Talk about a crystal ball in a
box!  Just the money saved on visits to a consulting palm reader alone
justifies the purchase price.

Editor & Publisher 1996 Market Guide:  A Wealth of Strategic Data for Just
$395

There's no shortage of companies providing demographic data, but what is
unique about the Editor & Publisher 1996 Market Guide is that for a single
price you receive an enormous amount of information to use for surveying
everything from installed gas meters to local newspapers to climate.  That's
in addition to the standard population, household, and retail business data.
(The disc even includes information on the tap water pH!).  The Market Guide
disc includes its own proprietary search engine, which also can be used to
whittle down information and export it in formats compatible with spreadsheet
and database software, and mapping programs.  Maps are included with the
product, and a paper-based version ($100) is available for further reference.

PLATFORM:  DOS 3.3 or better, or Macintosh 6.07 or better.

PRICE:  $395

DEVELOPER:  Editor & Publisher

PHONE:  212-675-4380

FAX:  212-691-6939

EMAIL:

http://www.mediainfo.com/edpub

EasyStreet:  Market Maps in 30 Minutes

Yes, as seasoned reviewers of mapping technology, we'd be the first to admit
that it's not all that easy to use.  But the results are astounding-a clear
analysis of a problem so sticky that a month pouring over spreadsheets can't
disclose what a map conveys in a glance.

Now there's a new mapping program for the rest of us.  EasyStreet is a mapping
environment that presents a series of eight buttons across the top of the
screen.  Clicking on each in turn selects the cartographic data and loads the
attribute data by asking the user to point to the right file.  Finally,
minutes later, the product builds a gorgeous map.  If you've been waiting for
mapping technology to become easier to use, your time has come!  And the
guarantee is real.  If you can't produce a useful map from EasyStreet within
30 minutes, you can return the product for a refund.  Now that's a guarantee
we like.

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better.

PRICE:  $495

DEVELOPER:  OverPlay Data Co.

PHONE:  800-OVERPLAY

FAX:  606-225-9257 EMAIL:  (CompuServe) 70353,1604

Proximity:  Market Mapping for Direct Marketers

Of the three geographic market analysis programs described in this article,
only Proximity is designed with the requirements of direct marketing in mind.
Direct mail is one of the fastest growing promotional technologies of the past
two decades.  It's a highly competitive business with the possibility of an
expensive mailing falling flat because of any one of half a hundred factors.

Proximity provides executive-level geographic (GIS) information that helps
users define direct mail efforts and follow-up tools to test hit rates and
market penetration.  Most important, it's streamlined for speed.  Users can
ask relevant questions without getting snared by the technology or hunting
through directories for files with names like VEGASDT4.MAT.

Designed after three years of research into the needs of direct marketing
analysts, Proximity contains built-in geocoding ability that converts
addresses into points on a map.  A mailing list can be mapped along with
income, population, housing, and business locations at the street, town,
county, or state levels.  Or an area can be scouted by zip code or census
block to determine which areas to go after and which to ignore as
inappropriate.  Five-year projections also are included for a glimpse into the
future.

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better

PRICE:  $1,995

DEVELOPER:  Decisionmark Corp.

PHONE:  319-365-5597

FAX:  319-365-5694

EMAIL:  dmark@inav.net

Problem Solving and Creative Thinking Tools

While it's true that computers can't really think, even after 40 years of
research into artificial intelligence, they can help you think.  Working with
a computer-based strategist can make it easier for you to work through the
issues in a structured and logical manner.  Your silicon partner may even
remind you of issues you forgot or considered irrelevant to the current
strategic question.  Of course, if you find the session running off the edge
of the map, you can always start over or toss the session into Window's new
recycling bin or the Mac's trash can-something you can't do as easily with
human managers, management, and board members.

4Thought:  A Unique Business Analysis Package

4Thought is one of a new generation of business analysis, modeling, and
forecasting programs.  It works with your input to help you make decisions
concerning everything from product pricing to studying the seasonal impact of
product and service commitments.  Yes, it's hard to describe such a
multi-legged beast in a couple of paragraphs.  4Thought users sit down for a
thoughtful session on a rainy afternoon and build a model of their business
using spreadsheet input.  4Thought's tools are then used to better understand
their business operation and assemble "what-if" queries for the future.

Once the underlying model is complete, barring major strategic revamps of the
company or its product line, queries can be thrown at 4Thought as needed, and
answers divined from the program's analytical capabilities.  Unlike earlier
generations of such software, 4Thought has no problem with building small
models based on limited data.  Data can be imported from Excel, Lotus 1-2-3,
most databases, and SPSS.

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better.

PRICE:  $9,500

DEVELOPER:  Right Information Systems, Inc.

PHONE:  800-803-0933

FAX:  508-462-9198

EMAIL:  yeames@coastal.com

Product TechKnowledgy:  Strategic Planning And Portfolio Management

Product TechKnowledgy from NorthPoint is a self-assessment module/model
designed for senior managers for evaluation, planning, and quantity in-house
expertise.  It also is used to predict the critical delivery process timetable
for product delivery.  Using it, managers can build scenarios and subsequent
reports that validate the steps and time estimations for design to delivery
product cycles.  The company also offers a series of risk management programs
in their RiskTech series.  Five products evaluate everything from corporate
stability and prospects to studying tactical business relationships to
understand if a strategic (or deeper) alignment makes business sense.  This is
very unusual and unique software that has been used by everyone from Adobe
Systems to Lotus.

PLATFORM:

PRICE:  $60,000

DEVELOPER:  NorthPoint Software and Services

PHONE:  508-370-4212

FAX:  508-370-4216

EMAIL:  npss@northpoint.com

CRUSH:  Real-Time Market Segmentation and Analysis

From the HOT group (Hands-On Technology) comes "CRUSH-an interactive
multimedia tool that helps sales and marketing management and analysts develop
marketing strategies and action plans for crushing their competition."  (Uh,
no, we didn't write that line.  It came from their press release.)  What we
have here is a database-based tool capable of building competitive "tables"
that allow users to position themselves against the competition.  It even can
be used for the difficult task of comparing one division against another in
order to build the correct separation between them.  The product is based on
the methodology of public relations guru Regis McKenna and contains A/V clips
of his advice.  CRUSH can be customized to fit the profile requirements of
each user.

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better, and Macintosh OS 7.1 or better

PRICE:  $499

DEVELOPER:  Hands-On Technology (HOT)

PHONE:  800-772-2580

FAX:  415-579-7739

EMAIL:  info@HOT.sf.ca.us http://www.HOT.sf.ca.us

Intell.Xx:  Real-Time Summarizer and Trend Analyzer

If you've ever been hobbled by your electronic news source providing a
dizzying 200 messages cached from news groups and other sources, Intell.Xx has
a product that can thin the daily deluge dramatically.  Described as
"summarizer technology," this remarkable tool can be employed to reduce the
daily volume of email and electronically distributed news reports by reducing
the text into an outline format of key points, names, and bullets.

Clicking on an article or email message icon opens it in a
reduced-to-essentials view with the elimination of words and sentences to
reveal the important content.  A long-winded email message that might take 5
minutes to read could then be scanned for the highlights in 10 or 20 seconds.
If you're bombarded with email messages each week, think of the time the
Intell.Xx could save you.

PLATFORM:  UNIX

PRICE:  Call for quote

DEVELOPER:  IntellXx

PHONE:  800-718-7180

FAX:  703-524-7401

EMAIL:  None

The Marketing Planning System:  Build Your Own Strategic Plan

The Marketing Planning System includes a self-study program that combines a
five-part notebook, application checks, and actual company case studies.  It's
a computer-based application designed to help users wend their way through the
complex process of building a credible strategic marketing plan, be it for
their own company, a division within a larger organization, or as part of a
plan to be pitched to investors or the venture capital crowd.  This system
produces reports that can be shared with everyone from the investment
community to line management.  To put this unique environment to work, users
follow the software's instructions to assemble the requisite components.  The
software assumes that updating will be the normal path of plan evolution and
is structured to build updates and changes into the patchwork that makes a
quality planning document.

PLATFORM:  Windows

PRICE:  $179.95

DEVELOPER:  Strategic Management Group, Inc.  PHONE:  215-387-4000

FAX:  215-387-3653

EMAIL:  http:/www.smginc.com

IntelAssist:  Transforming A PC-Based Server Into a Virtual Crystal Ball

Looking into the future is something simultaneously attractive and repellent.
While you could make a mint in the stock market or on the red and the black,
not everything in the future is comforting.  And, prescient knowledge would
make life dull.  Before going shopping, you would know what was for Sunday
dinner and if (and when) the Mets will win the pennant.

For business, fore-knowledge is everything.  What new products will be
appropriate for the year 2000?  Will a strategy succeed, barely creep along,
or completely bomb?  In which direction should the corporate helmsman steer
the organization?  What governmental regulatory changes will pop up in
response to social agendas, evolving customs, and an aging population?

The Futures Group, founded in 1971, now offers IntelAssist.  An add-on product
for Lotus Notes, IntelAssist takes users step by step through the process of
looking into the future from a strategic point of view.  Users provide
background information which IntelAssist then frames into "KITs"-key
intelligence topics.  Working with the product, KITs are refined and then
become the basis for building guesstimates of the future.  This process
reduces the questions to those central to the business activities under
consideration.  IntelAssist can also internalize external materials such as
exit polls.  The product's integration with Notes allows you to use it to
query material from colleagues, and all participants in an analysis are kept
up to date on activities and results.  Finally, conclusions are built based on
the data recorded and filtered through this corporate-intelligence product.
Printed reports then form the basis of larger strategic documents for
distribution to members of the team and senior management.

PLATFORM:  Lotus Notes (Windows 3.1 or better).

PRICE:  $25,000 per server (unlimited number of users)

DEVELOPER:  The Futures Group

PHONE:  203-633-3501

FAX:  203-657-9701

EMAIL:  FUTURES@TFG.COM


Productivity Increasing Tools and Environments

The toughest agenda in business is correctly structuring the working
environment to maximize intellectual and physical throughput while containing
time sinks of all kinds.  Here are a couple of products that build
productivity without turning you into palpable material for a Sunday comics
Dilbert episode.

PeopleSoft:  Enterprise-Wide Client/Server Software

There's no shortage of enterprise-wide "solutions" that connect users to
corporate databases and handle everything from order placement to asset
management, but what has been missing was a product accessible to
non-technical users.  While PeopleSoft requires skilled engineers to program
applications for each corporate user, the unique toolbox included with the
product builds elegant applications that come down to fill-in-the-blank
routines that won't intimidate people who can hunt and peck their way through
an entry screen.  Add-on modules include manufacturing administration
packages, product distribution control systems, financial superintendence, and
a massive database management and reporting facility.

Companies that haven't invested in Oracle or other related client/server
products should take the time to check out PeopleSoft.

PLATFORM:  Enterprise-wide

PRICE:  $100,000+

DEVELOPER:  PeopleSoft, Inc.

PHONE:  800-947-7753

FAX:  510-946-9400

EMAIL:  http://www.peoplesoft.com

KEYview:  See the Internets In a New Light!

Who hasn't downloaded that hot file from the Internet that's a must-have for a
market opportunity, the grist for the mill of an important strategic plan, or
simply important background information, only to be unable to open the file?
While both Windows and the Macintosh system software include simple
applications for translating or opening foreign files, these prove either
incompatible or choke on the size of large files.

Now there's KEYview, a Windows-based platform for open, view, convert, and
print more than 24 popular text and graphics format files.  Once open, using
the built-in conversion routines, the file can be saved in a format supported
by the user's computer and application software.  For more convenience,
KEYview has hooks into popular Internet access and email tools including
Netscape, Mosiac, and this company's EXPLORE.

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better

PRICE:  $49

DEVELOPER:  FTP Software

PHONE:  800-863-4548

FAX:  508-659-6297

EMAIL:  info@ftp.com

http://www.ftp.com


NamePro:  Is Your PC A Name Dropper?

One of the most thankless corporate tasks is naming a new product, service, or
subsidiary.  Scene One:  You short-list a bunch of name ideas, and in a
meeting run them by stone-faced colleagues, who remains silent while they
weigh their responses.  Scene Two:  You employ several consulting companies to
find a name for you at $100 per hour.  They come up with ideas you already
scratched off when devising your short list.  Scene Three:  You spend a few
hours with NamePro and build a series of names that fit the company's agenda
in just an afternoon.  If the committee gives a thumbs down to your short
list, you head back to your cubicle and, in two hours, produce yet another
list, or 10 lists, or 100 lists!

That's what NamePro can do for you.  Setting up the eclectic search parameters
produces a list of names that, with some yea-and-nay sorting, quickly builds a
credible list of ideas.  Best of all, NamePro is almost a joy to work with in
comparison to hours spent over a yellow legal pad scratching out ideas and
pondering options while wiping sweat from the brow.

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better.

PRICE:  $495

DEVELOPER:  The Namestormers

PHONE:  214-350-6214

FAX:  214-350-7617

EMAIL:

70401.2710@compuserve.com

Location Quest:  Setting Sight On the Right Site

Site location is one of the hardest problems for strategic managers concerned
with complex issues such as trade area, local demographics, natural and
artificial physical barriers and access, and surrounding locations of arch
competitors already in place.  GIS software has become the weapon of choice
for choosing sites, but most GIS packages require the addition of multiple
sets of expensive data, and there's a learning curve associated with each.  In
fact, it's entirely possible that an undertrained strategist might make the
wrong decision using an out-of-the-box mapping product because of choosing the
wrong data or simply inept operation.  Since most GIS packages are "general
purpose" in nature, users must be very familiar with the dozens of available
functions, options, and controls.  And, a poorly constructed market map is
just as convincing as one assembled correctly.  Mapping technology is only as
good as the weakest link.

Now there's Location Quest from PHH Fantus Consulting.  It's not a mapping
package, but a product specifically designed for site location, and it comes
with a robust set of data for just this purpose.  Most important, site
selection can be set up quickly, even given the numerous variables the product
explores.  And, unlike GIS software, Location Quest poses questions that help
users build the site analysis without first spending hours setting up a
general-purpose mapping program for a site location session.  The process
produces comparison tables of labor costs, cost per square foot, and more-all
of the vital information that makes one site more attractive than another.

Once the "Q&A" session is complete, the product provides a snapshot of
potential locations with an analysis of each.  The search then can be further
refined to narrow the list of possibilities.  A separate module helps analyze
complex project requirements, such as time to completion, and one that
provides community profiles.  It's an amazing product.

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better.

PRICE:  $6,000

DEVELOPER:  PHH Fantus

Consulting

PHONE:  800-345-8155

FAX:  206-886-0917

EMAIL:  (none)

Data Visualization:  San Diego Computer Center (and other sites)

Not really a product (yet) is full power, computer-based, territorial data
visualization.  Used recently to persuade wanted war criminal Radovan Karadzic
that the boundaries of the new Bosnian state were drawn to reflect geological
and not political features, these computer-generated landscapes allow users to
virtually "fly" over the countryside.  Data for such a flight is collected
from many sources and then converted into a virtual landscape that can be
explored from the air or "walked" to study the finer points of the geo-image
if data with the appropriate level of detail was collected.  Amazing.

PLATFORM:  Advanced visual workstations (e.g., SGI, Cray).

PRICE:  N/A

DEVELOPER:  San Diego Supercomputer Center

PHONE:  619-534-5000

EMAIL:  redelfs@sdsc.edu

[Note:  As important as this center would seem to be to America's
technological prowess and competitive edge, the San Diego Union-Tribune
reports congressional budget cuts may shut SDSC permanently.]

VIASOFT:  Reengineering The Turn of the Century

COBOL-just the word bring shivers to legions of systems analysts and those
responsible for modernizing mainframe computer software built in the 1960s and
1970s.  COBOL was conceived as a "temporary" programming language for the
military back in the late 1950s, but somehow has survived into the 1990s.  At
this writing, there's ever reason to believe it will be with us until the next
millennium.

As the heart of many of today's airline reservation systems, banking
environments, and more uses than we can chronicle here, COBOL is here to stay.
At least for a while.  VIASOFT (their caps, not ours) builds software that
allows software engineers to study the coding monoliths and repair and update
them.  Everything from abends (bugs) to "dead code" can be found and
eliminated with VIASOFT's intelligent "re-engineering" products.

But now the company has a new product to fix something you see reported at
least once a year in the Sunday paper-major computer systems that can't handle
the awkward transition to the millennia they were built for five or six years'
use back in 1965.  Well, VIASOFT offers a product that can be used to bring
these dinosaurs into the next century without tears.  Impact 2000 is a "phased
approach consisting of specialized consulting services and technology to
handle the century turnover problem."

Good.  Otherwise most mainframe system will revert at the turnover point to
the year 1900.  This worries credit card companies that bill for purchases
because buyers could dispute a VCR purchased, according to the system, 50
years before the invention of video technology.  Or imagine your discount
long-distance service charging you for a call made in 1905!

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better.

PRICE:  $40,000-$200,000 (includes vendor technical support)

DEVELOPER:  VIASOFT

PHONE:  800-525-7775

FAX:  602-840-4068

EMAIL:  http://www.viasoft.com

NewsNet:  The Strategist's Buzz Source

No it's not new, but it is updated daily, and a new interface makes it much
easier to use than ever before.  Based on 800 business news sources, NewsNet
is the first place to turn when doing a keyword search on markets,
competitors, ownership, "reorgs," and just about anything else imaginable.
Unlike the massive DIALOG and NEXIS databases, NewsNet focuses almost entirely
on business, and its interface isn't as difficult or intimating as are the
interfaces of other two.  (At no charge, we once did a text DIALOG search for
a book.  The on-line time amounted to a multi-hundred dollar bill as the
search was badly constructed.)  NewsNet works more like CompuServe with a
window of easy-to-use options through a Windows interface called Baton.  You
can also set up the service through NewsFlash to automatically garner articles
on a selected topic as soon as they appear on the wire.  Other options include
the availability of on-line reports and access to American Business
Information, Inc.'s data on 10 million companies and corporations within the
United States.

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better.

PRICE:  $15 per month plus 25 cents per minute of connect time, $1.50 a minute
for downloads.  Other miscellaneous charges may apply, but the service
apprises users of most charges beforehand.

DEVELOPER:  NewsNet, Inc.

PHONE:  610-527-8030

FAX:  610-527-0338

EMAIL:  none (Yes, it's hard to believe that an on-line service lacks an email
address, but that's what they told us in two calls to their headquarters.)

CD-ROMs in Print:  A CD-ROM Guide to CD-ROMs

CD-ROMs in Print is a complete guide to all the discs that fit.  Formerly a
MecklerMedia product, it's now in the hands of the Gale Research people.
Currently you can purchase Gale's new print version for $130, and the
CD-ROM-based version is being extensively revised and will become available
sometime this year.  (The Meckler version is still available from Gale, but
it's significantly out of date according to a Gale spokesperson.)

Containing about 12,000 titles made by approximately 4,000 companies, this is
equivalent to a Books in Print for CD-ROM users.  The disc includes a separate
keyword search engine for DOS and Windows.  Because both the book and the disc
contain listings for all kinds of discs (everything from games to CD-I
offerings), probably 80% of the listings won't be of interest to business
users, but the disc contains a reasonably comprehensive listing of business
CD-ROMs and demographic data discs.  Reviews from the now-defunct CD-ROM World
magazine are also included but only on select discs profiled in the magazine
before its untimely demise in 1994.

PLATFORM:  MS-DOS, Windows 3.1 or better.

PRICE:  $129.95 (print).  Pricing not set on the revised disc at this time.

PUBLISHER:  Gale Research, Inc.

PHONE:  313-961-2242

FAX:  313-961-6348

EMAIL:  mcdonald@gale.com

What Lies in the Future?

We could have used IntelAssist or 4Thought for this very brief conclusion, but
guesstimating is more fun.  The big growth in strategic software will be in
the area of information management-what to do with the reams of paper the
supposed paperless office produces-and in even better business forecasting
engines.  But next year, don't remind us of what we predicted in this year's
column.


Kim Baker and Sunny Baker are principals in Baker & Baker, a high-technology
marketing and consulting firm based in San Diego and authors of Market Mapping
and 15 other computer, cooking, lifestyle, and business books.  Sunny Baker
also is director of information technologies at the University of California
at San Diego.

Atlas Select:  Market Analysis Software For Senior Strategists

GIS software has been around since the late 1970s, but only within the past
few years has it become reasonably easy to use.  Strategic Mapping is a
long-time player in the GIS market.  Atlas Select is an extension of their
flagship, Atlas GIS.  Equipped with the kind of data sales and marketing
strategists require for in-depth analysis, this comprehensive package
overcomes one of the persistent objections to GIS technology in business:  the
need to buy data separately.

Not only do you get this excellent mapping engine, but a large quantity of
data ships with the product and is included with the purchase price.  This
includes everything from Arbitron Areas of Dominant Influence (ADO) to a
robust set of Census data.  Optional data required for in-depth analysis of
the United States is also pressed onto the same disc that includes the
product.  This includes almost any kind of information required for a
strategic analysis of markets, market share, and five-year projections of
growth.  You simply choose the datasets you desire and then purchase
"MarketData Units" from Strategic Mapping to unlock the information.  This
allows users instant access to the data they require without the wait for a
third-party data provider to deliver.  And without having to geocode or
convert incompatible data files.

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better PHONE:  408-970-9600

PRICE:  $1,295 FAX:  408-970-9999

DEVELOPER:  Strategic Mapping EMAIL:  http://www.stratmap.com

Prophetpoint:  The "Pointman" For Strategic Planners

Equifax purchased National Decision Systems (NDS) several years ago.  Instead
of using consumer and business credit records, all NDS data is either
carefully researched by this division or purchased from top data suppliers
across the nation.  Now Equifax/NDS offers this unique
product-ProphetPoint-which allows users to quickly quantify
business-to-business markets by number of employees, income, location,
customers, and much more.  All data can also be researched by SIC code and
size.  In fact, according to Equifax, the database contains more than 300
billion variables.

No, it's not inexpensive, but it's an awesome product for senior sales and
marketing managers in Fortune 500 companies.  It's a variation on GIS
technology in which, with a single query or two, simple answers can be
obtained from even complex data.  Although it looks much like a GIS product as
it builds maps, it is unique.  Unlike generic mapping environments,
ProphetPoint produces definitive answers to tough marketing questions within
seconds.  Need to know instantly how many matchbook manufacturers there are in
Michigan?  Then this is the product for you and your company.

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better PHONE:  800-699-8990

PRICE:  $110,000 FAX:  619-550-5800

DEVELOPER:  Equifax Business EMAIL:http://www.cts.com/~ends/ Geo-Metrics

Quick Insight:  Petest Your Product Strategy

Strategic planning Q & A?  Yes, Quick Insight is a useful tool for debugging
(or debunking) any kind of product-related strategic planning document.  Using
it, the Edsel would have never appeared in automobile showrooms, Sony would
have signed onto VHS early, and Newt Gingrich would have announced that he
wasn't running for President months before he did.

This software is an unusual addition to the strategic planner's weapons chest.
Its methodology helps not only experienced planners, but also those new to the
game.  Quick Insight's raison d'etre is to help users determine the strategic
justification for introducing a new product or service.  As everybody knows,
these introductions are enormously expensive in terms of both cash and
corporate resources.  A product that bombs in the marketplace not only
"outplaces" many of those unfortunate enough to have championed its
introduction, but leaves companies with egg on their faces as the press howls
about money wasted and corporate incompetence.

Quick Insight depends on the user to feed it information and then returns a
"vote" of sorts on the product or service's prospects in the marketplace.
Just the process of answering the 60 or so questions the software poses can
help strategists sold on an idea come to grips with a frank appraisal of the
product's success or failure potential.  Quick Insight looks at competitive
advantages, regulatory environment, competition, risks and benefits, the sales
channel, pricing, and promotional strategies before arriving at its "vote."

Once the questions are answered, Quick Insight produces a "score" determining
a go/no-go/needs work scenario.  According to the company, the process takes
about two hours.  (It took us about 90 minutes to study a fictional outbound
telemarketing pizza business in which the company calls people and asks if
they would like to purchase a delivered pizza for dinner.  Quick Insight
produced a resounding and completely appropriate NO to the concept!)
Completing the process produces a printed evaluation that can be used as the
underpinning of a merits (or lack thereof) of a new concept.

It's too bad that Gavilan Computer, the inventor of the first battery-based
portable personal computer, that spent $32 million in venture capital before
going bankrupt, didn't have Quick Insight at its disposal.  You do remember
Gavilan Computer, don't you?

PLATFORM:  Windows 3.1 or better.  PHONE:  512-251-7541

PRICE:  $129.95 FAX:  512-251-4401

DEVELOPER:  Business Resource EMAIL:  72203.2004@compuserve.com Software, Inc.


This Year's Software Models:  Updated For Strategists

Compiled by Sunny Baker and Kim Baker

There is an abundance of companies offering software appropriate for improving
business analysis and increasing productivity.  Obviously, we cannot list all
the products here, but present instead a rich sampling to let you know what's
out there.


ANALYTICAL COMPUTER SOFTWARE

A family of packages for marketing, survey research, political polling, sales
analysis.

Platform:  Windows, DOS

Research Connections

434 Sandford Avenue

Westfield, NJ 07090

(908) 232-2723



ANALYST WORK STATION

Analyst Work Station and other MSA products provide analysis tools for market
researchers, analysts, and planners.

Platform:  Macintosh, Windows

Management Science Associates, Inc.

6565 Penn Avenue at Fifth

Pittsburgh, PA 15026

(412) 362-2000



ARC/INFO

A sophisticated geographic information system (GIS) with special-purpose
extensions for use by environmental researchers, government agencies, business
planners.

Platform:  Windows and others

Environmental Systems Research Institute, Inc.

380 New York Street

Redlands, CA 92373

(714) 793-2853

(714) 793-5953 (fax)



ARTEMIS PRESTIGE

Sophisticated project management software to facilitate decision making
through critical path planning, resource management, costs, and more.

Platform:  Windows, Macintosh

Lucas Management Systems

12701 Fair Lakes Circle, Suite 350

Fairfax, VA 22033-4914

(610) 770-1464



ATLAS GIS

Atlas GIS is a full-featured mapping program with a diverse range of data
products, both proprietary and from general government and commercial sources.

Platform:  DOS, Windows

Strategic Mapping, Inc.

4030 Moorpark Avenue, Suite 250

San Jose, CA 95117

(408) 985-7400

(408) 985-0859 (fax)



AUTOMATED CUSTOM RESEARCH SYSTEM

A complete, integrated research package designed by real researchers for
sophisticated analyses.

Platform:  Windows and others.

ACRS Division

M/A/R/C Inc.  P.O.  Box 650083

Dallas, TX 75265

(214) 506-3400



BEST PROFILER

A profiling application that can import many different data formats for
various segmentation and forecasting applications.

Platform:  Windows

Quantum Consulting

2030 Addison Street

Berkeley, CA 94709

(510) 540-7200



BUSINESSINSIGHT AND PLANWRITE

More powerful business analysis and planning software from the makers of Quick
Insight.

Platform:  Windows

Business Resource Software, Inc.

2013 Wells Branch Parkway, Suite #305

Austin, TX 78728

(800) 423-1228

(512) 251-4401 (fax)

72203.2004@compuserve.com



CHAID SEGMENTATION SYSTEM

Performs various market research functions for cross-industry use.

Platform:  Windows

Statistical Innovations, Inc.

375 Concord Avenue

Belmont, MA 02178

(617) 489-4492



CHECKMATE

Strategic planning software with customized industry applications.

Platform:  Windows, DOS

Strategic Planning Systems, Inc.

P.O.  Box 13065

Florence, SC 92504

(803) 669-6960

(803) 673-9460 (fax)



COMMANDER PRISM

Multidimensional spreadsheet forecasting program that uses English-language
formulas.

Platform:  Windows, DOS

Comshare, Inc.

Wolverine Tower, 3001 So.  State St.

Ann Arbor, MI 48108

(800) 922-7979

(313) 994-4800

(313) 994-7148 (fax)


CONJOINT DESIGNER AND RELATED PRODUCTS

Conjoint Designer develops designs for use in full-profile (concept-testing)
conjoint analysis studies for product development and pricing, which is
applicable to virtually all industries.

Platform:  Windows

Bretton-Clark

North Tower, 14th Floor

89 Headquarters Plaza

Morristown, NY 07960

(201) 993-3135

(201) 993-1757 (fax)



CONQUEST

A desktop marketing information system that provides visual display of a vast
array of databases.

Platform:  Windows

Strategic Mapping

70 Seaview Avenue

P.O.  Box 10250

Stamford, CT 06904

(800) 866-2255



DATAMAX

Completes exploratory data analysis with 3-D graphical user's interface for
market research, product comparison, and business and financial analysis.

Platform:  Windows

Echo Solutions

1010 North State Street

Orem, UT 84057

(801) 226-7800

(801) 226-6533 (fax)



DPL

A decision analysis application with easy-to-use graphics display options.

Platform:  Windows

DPL Sales Department

Applied Decision Analysis, Inc.

2710 San Hill Road

Menlo Park, CA 94025

(415) 926-9251

(415) 854-6233 fax

dpldep@adainc.com



FORECAST PRO

Forecast Pro allows analysts to forecast hundreds of items quickly and easily
for cross-industry use.

Platform:  Windows

Business Forecast Systems

68 Leonard Street

Belmont, MA 02178

(617) 484-5050



GAIN

Enables researchers to do customer and market trade area analyses using their
proprietary customer data, competitor information, and publicly available
information including demographics, census figures, and zip codes.

Platform:  Windows

Urban Science Applications, Inc.

200 Renaissance Center, 12th Floor

Detroit, MI 48243

(313) 259-6933

(313) 259-1362 (fax)



GOALWARE

Organizes and breaks down goals into elements needed to achieve them.

Platform:  Windows

Positive Change Unlimited

186 Beacon Street

Boston, MA 02116

(617) 247-0276



GEOQUERY

Mac-based analysis-level mapping program that is affordable and full-featured.

Platform:  Macintosh

GeoQuery Corp.

475 Alexis R.  Shuman Boulevard,

Suite 385E

Naperville, IL 60563-8453

(708) 357-0535

(708) 717-4254 (fax)


ITHINK

Maps out business and organizational processes for strategic and tactical
planning.

Platform:  DOS, Windows, Macintosh

High Performance Systems, Inc.

45 Lyme Road., Suite 300

Hanover, NH 03755

(603) 643-9636

(603) 643-9502 (fax)



MAPINFO

A leading mapping product that runs on a number of platforms.

Platform:  Windows, Macintosh, others

MapInfo Corp.

200 Broadway

Troy, NY 12180

(800) FAST-MAP

(518) 274-8673 (in New York)

(518) 274-0510 (fax)



MARKET MASTER

A sales contact management software package that tracks contacts and leads;
can monitor a sales program's success.

Platform:  Windows

Breakthrough Productions

210 Park Avenue

Nevada City, CA 95959

(916) 265-0911

(916) 265-8036 (fax)



METHODOLOGIST'S TOOL-CHEST & RELATED PRODUCTS

Programs designed for corporate research and strategic analysis.

Platform:  Windows

The Idea Works, Inc.

100 West Briarwood

Columbia, MO 65203

(800) 537-4866

(314) 445-4554



NEGOTIATOR PRO

Provides electronic performance support for sales, account management,
purchasing, labor management, and negotiation systems.

Platform:  Windows, Macintosh

Negotiator Pro Co.

35 Gardner Road

Brookline, MA 01246

(617) 738-9300

(617) 734-3308



OPTION FINDER

This software promotes participation in idea generation and evaluation of
critical options to produce insight and alignment.

Platform:  DOS, Windows

Option Technologies, Inc.

1275 Knollwood Lane Mendota Heights, MN 55118

(612) 450-1700

(612) 450-9413



PRIZM SEGMENTATION SOFTWARE

Software for customer/prospect profiling, targeted direct mail, new product
development, media planning, and site planning.

Platform:  Windows

Claritas, Inc.

53 Brown Road

Ithaca, NY 14850

(800) 876-6732



PROBE PC AND FORESTAT

Time series, advanced time series, and forecasting applications that also
provide a direct link to public databases such as Citibase and IPSHARP.

Platform:  Windows

Concurrent Technologies

One World Trade Center, Suite 7967

New York, NY 10048

(800) 345-3895

(212) 524-7760



P-STAT

Includes several software programs for data analysis and economic research.

Platform:  Windows

P-Stat, Inc.

230 Lambertville-Hopewell Road

Hopewell, NJ 08525

(609) 466-9200

(609) 466-1688 (fax)



QUALITYTEAM

A change management system that allows users to monitor the progress of a
project or product change process.

Platform:  Windows, Macintosh

Scopus Technology, Inc.

1900 Powell Street

Emeryville, CA 94608

(510) 428-0500

(510) 428-1027 (fax)



QUESTMAP

Maps questions, ideas, and information for group decisions.

Platform:  DOS, Windows

Corporate Memory Systems

11824 Jollyville Road

Austin, TX 78759

(512) 918-8000



QUIK-POLL

Creates surveys with up to 99 questions and tabulates up to 2,000 replies for
cross-industry use.

Platform:  DOS

Touch Base Computing

106 Woodcrest Drive

Rome, GA 30161

(706) 234-4260



RESEARCH MACHINE

Performs a variety of research functions for planning and survey research.

Platform:  Windows, UNIX, and others

Pulse Train Technology Ltd.

6232 North Pulaski Road

Chicago, IL 60646

(407) 842-4000



SAS SYSTEM

A family of information delivery products for analyzing and presenting data
integrated with an applications development environment for large end-user
organizations.

Platform:  Mainframes; Windows version

SAS Institute, Inc.

SAS Campus Drive

Cary, NC 27513

(919) 677-8000



SAWTOOTH SOFTWARE

A family of products for computer interviewing and market research.

Platform:  Windows

Sawtooth Software, Inc.

1007 Church Street, Suite 302

Evanston, IL 60201

(708) 866-0870



SCAN/US

An affordable, data-rich mapping product that combines decision support,
database management, and geographic information functions.

Platform:  Windows

Scan/US

2040 Armacost Avenue

Los Angeles, CA 90025

(800) 633-9568

(213) 820-8931

(213) 826-0933 (fax)



SICBASE AND POSTSEARCH

Software that enables you to look up SIC codes with ease and clean up your
database searches.

Platform:  Windows

Pastel Programming Co.

HC56, Box 6038

Sidney, MT 59270

(406) 482-4180



SMARTFORECASTS

A time-series forecasting program that doesn't require previous experience in
statistics.

Platform:  DOS, Windows

Smart Software, Inc.

4 Hill Road

Belmont, MA 02178

(800) SMART-99

(617) 489-2743

(617) 489-2748 (fax)



SPSS

Leading statistical analysis program and add-on modules for cross-industry
research, general data analysis, and statistical trend analyses.

Platform:  Windows, Mainframes

SPSS, Inc.

444 North Michigan Avenue

Chicago, IL 60611

(800) 543-9262

(312) 329-3500

(312) 329-3668 (fax)



STATGRAPHICS

A statistical analysis package with more than 50 types of graphs.

Platform:  Windows

Statistical Graphics Corp.

2115 East Jefferson Street

Rockville, MD 20852

(800) 592-0050 ext.  425

(301) 984-5123 (Maryland)



STATPAC GOLD

Program designed for survey and questionnaire analysis.

Platform:  Windows

Statpac, Inc.

3814 Lyndale Avenue South

Minneapolis, MN 55409

(612) 822-8252

(612) 822-1708 (fax)



SUPERTREE

A professional decision tree analysis package for marketing planning,
research, and corporate strategy.

Platform:  Windows

Decision Education Center

2440 Sand Hill Road

Menlo Park, CA 94025

(415) 854-9000



THE SURVEY

The Survey aids in setting up questionnaires or other research tools for
marketing and opinion research, human resources analysis, marketing
management, and cross-industry analysis.

Platform:  Windows

Cybernetic Solutions Co.

3479 West 7480 South

Salt Lake City, UT 84084

(800) 359-3386

(801) 568-1190



SURVEY PRO

Conducts surveys with professional results for market research, customer
satisfaction measurement, and training needs.

Platform:  Windows

Apian Software

P.O.  Box 1224

Menlo Park, CA 94026

(800) 237-4565 ext.  249

(415) 694-2900

(415) 694-2904 (fax)



SYNCHRONY

An information integration tool that facilitates information collection,
synthesis, and sharing throughout an organization.

Platform:  Windows

Sybase Software, Inc.

100 Fifth Avenue

Waltham, MA 02154

(617) 564 6100



SYSTAT

A capable, affordable powerhouse for performing a variety of statistical
analyses.

Platform:  Windows, Macintosh, DOS

Systat, Inc.

1800 Sherman Avenue

Evanston, IL 60201

(708) 864-5670

(708) 492-3567 (fax)



TABULYZER

Automates marketing research and analysis and social and political surveys.

Platform:  Windows

Business Research & Surveys

50 Greenwood Avenue

West Orange, NJ 07052

(201) 731-7800



TACTICIAN

A sophisticated mapping product with GIS-level features that integrates
database management, mainframe data access, decision support functions, and
more.

Platform:  Windows and Macintosh

Tactician Corp.

16 Havervill Street

P.O.  Box 4016 BV

Andover, MA 01810

(800) WAR-ROOM

(508) 475-4475

(508) 475-2136 (fax)



TELEFORM

Software that can send a customer an order form via fax, interpret the data on
the fax, and add it directly to a database.

Platform:  Windows

Cardiff Software, Inc.

531 Stevens Avenue, Building B

Solana Beach, CA 92075

(619) 259-6430

(619) 259-6450 (fax)



TELEMAGIC

A complete telemarketing call and client management package.

Platform:  Windows

Remote Control International

5928 Pascal Court

Carlsbad, CA 92008

(619) 431-4000

(619) 431-4006 (fax)



UPTRENDS

A contact management package that tracks, contacts, schedules projects, and
reports on program success.

Platform:  Windows

Uptrends

10555 Old Placerville Road

Sacramento, CA 95827

(916) 368-4484

(916) 368-4490





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

Special Focus:  Taking Technology In Hand


ON THE FIRST OF THE MONTH, LIKE CLOCKWORK, MIRIAM Wigdor arrives in the
kitchen of a Taco Bell outlet in Chicago.  She's on a mission-and it's not
stuffing hot peppers into burritos.  Instead, she pulls out an Apple Newton,
her small personal digital assistant computer, and sniffs around the
facilities.  A health inspector, her job is to spot sanitary hazards.  Aha!
Wigdor sights a potential problem and enters her observations into the
booksize, wireless Newton unit.  Next, she pulls from her carrying case a
small, compatible printer and, presto!  creates a report for the outlet
manager.  While this is taking place, her notes transfer automatically into a
file in a centralized system, enabling the company to monitor the situation in
real time.

One year ago, Taco Bell integrated personal digital assistant technology into
the food safety audit system in place at its 4,500 U.S.  outlets, says Joaquin
Palaez, senior vice president of technology and quality at the Irvine,
Calif.-based chain, a unit of PepsiCo.  The inspections are performed by an
outside firm, Audits International of Highland Park, Ill.  Previously, the
approximately 120 inspectors took notes by hand, then recopied them into the
main computer system.  Dozens of extra workers were required to transcribe the
records; up to a week passed before report copies reached outlet managers.

"We needed a system that would let managers make immediate changes," Palaez
says.  "We considered a PC-based system, but thought it would cost too much.
So we came up with the less expensive Newtons."

Personal digital assistant technology has been on the market just two years.
Yet already these portable, battery-powered computers-capable of converting
notes written by hand on their small screens into lettered text-have helped
speed up and streamline operations at a number of companies.

The technology has undergone several lifetimes of change.  The Apple Newton,
the industry leader, will enter its third generation this month when the
latest model, the 2.0, arrives in stores.  The newest Newton is three inches
by six inches, weighs one pound, and costs $699.  Apple executives say it
contains significant technical improvements over earlier versions-which some
users blasted for poor handwriting character recognition capability and
constant battery recharges.  The company says the latest model also boasts
stronger links to local and wide area phone networks for faxing and other
types of data transmission.

Next summer, Apple will launch yet another Newton-friendly innovation that
will unleash even more user functions.  A new variety of Internet Protocol
connective "stack" technology will grant Newton users access to the World Wide
Web.  Currently, Internet browsers are bound to their personal computers.  But
once the new equipment is available, Newton users will be able to enter the
Web from just about anywhere in the world where phone lines exist.

During the whirlwind development period of the last 24 months, several Newton
competitors have emerged, including the Zaurus from Sharp and Sony's Magic
Link.  "The Sharp and Sony products are not wireless, so they are not
high-powered enough for industrial operations," Robert Maire, a Morgan Stanley
technology analyst, says.  "But they can be used indoors as personal
organizers.  At this point, only the Newton is strong enough for outdoor
work."

A sub-industry of Newton-compatible products also has evolved.  The Marco and
the Envoy, both from Motorola, are hardware add-ons that enable the Newton to
take advantage of radio wave technology for wireless transmissions of data.
And new applications, designed expressly for the Newton, expand its
functionality.  Magic Cap software by General Magic in Sunnyvale, Calif., was
designed to help executives organize themselves.  AllPen Software in Los
Gatos, Calif., has written custom programs for more than 60 field users.

After a number of false starts, Apple finally seems to have positioned the
Newton shrewdly in the market.  At its 1994 debut, the diminutive computer was
pitched chiefly as a high-tech personal organizer-suitable for storing
Rolodex, scheduling, and memo information-for use by executives and
salespeople in their offices and on the road.  While the device has found some
acceptance among executives-including Walt Disney Co.  CEO Michael Eisner-many
potential users did not want to put up with the early models' poor character
recognition capability.

In fact, the early Newton's handwriting conversion problems became a running
joke on the Saturday Night Live comedy show and in the Doonesbury comic strip.
At the same time, the computer press took frequent pot shots at the memory
leaks, brief battery life, and poor desktop links that plagued the first
versions.

Gene Talsky, a technology consultant in Bedford, N.H., says the mini-computer
probably never was suited to the daily needs of most executives.  "I'm not
sure how well the product works out for a lot of the initial target audience,"
Talsky says.  "Many executives already carry a laptop when they travel and
also have a PC on their desk at work.  They don't need a personal digital
assistant, too."

After the Newton's positioning as an executive implement got a lukewarm
response from many quarters, Apple marketers began pitching it as a field
tool.

Talsky says that this set of applications appears promising:  "The devices
have a lot of interesting operational uses of interest to corporate
strategists."

Planting Cyber-Seeds

A Newton-based precision farming experiment at Monsanto Corp.  has
far-reaching possibilities.  The St.  Louis agricultural conglomerate
commissioned special mapping software from AllPen and currently is refining
the trial program at its U.S.  test farms.

"The key to precision farming is being able to make site-specific
observations," Marc Vanacht, who heads strategic planning for Monsanto's
Infield Division, explains.  "There was a time when farmers would just do
blanket spraying over vast land areas.  But fields are not homogeneous.  One
area could have a problem with infestation, while another might have
exceptional yields."

"Under the new program, we send our scouts into the fields, and they enter
observations about different land conditions into their Newtons.  Then we use
the mapping software, in conjunction with the military's global positioning
satellite program, to figure out exactly where a given area is on the map.
This allows us to make site-specific observations about where spraying is
needed."

Without the technology, the scouts would have to return from the fields,
compile their data, and key them into a computer before the company's
agronomists would be able to make a spraying recommendation.  Using the
Newton, the scouts can dispatch the data over phone lines directly to the
agricultural decision makers as the data are collected.

"The new system can produce savings of a half-day or more," Vanacht says.
"Often that's enough to save a vineyard or cotton field."

Monsanto has big plans for its new creation, beyond the agricultural
applications.  Vanacht says the company will market its hand-held mapping
technology to transportation logistics, construction, insurance, and law
enforcement organizations.  He thinks it could be sold to just about any other
type of company with a need to pinpoint the locations of delivery stations,
building sites, accident areas, and crime scenes.  If the mapping products
sell well, Monsanto probably will form a new division to develop and market
them, he says.

Making a Power Statement

For the past year, Janis Wheeler, a substation inspector at Idaho Power and
Light Co.  in Boise, Idaho, has experimented with a Newton.  She uses the
computer to make notes about the condition of the utility's equipment while
she moves around the 56 substations she oversees within a 100-mile area.

"After making inspections, I bring my Newton back to the office and hook it up
to a Macintosh," she explains.  "My notes are fed into a database and sent to
a server in our downtown office.  This allows anyone in the company to view
it.  Then they can make work orders or track the history of a piece of
equipment.  Work orders are generated automatically for pieces of equipment
that I have noted have problems."

Wheeler estimates that the technology enables her to do in three weeks the
same amount of work she used to perform in a month.  Before working with the
Newton, she brought her written notes back from the field.  Then, either she
or another worker would enter all her observations manually into the Macintosh
system.  After the data entry, the information would be analyzed, and,
finally, work orders would be issued.  These long waits were dangerous in
situations involving equipment on the verge of collapse.

Later this year, Idaho Power and Light will give Newtons to six other
substation inspectors.  The utility's management is pleased that the
technology reduces its labor requirements.  Wheeler says that since she no
longer needs to perform data-entry functions when she returns to her office,
she has been assigned additional duties.  Based on Wheeler's experience the
company expects to give new responsibilities to the other substation
inspectors after they receive their Newtons.

I Hear America Monitoring

The U.S.  federally sponsored Voice of America last year began using Newtons
to link its network of more than 150 contract workers in 47 nations who
monitor the sound quality of its educational radio programs about American
culture.  The freelancers are stationed in such far-flung places as Armenia,
Nigeria, and Myanmar.  The agency tracks broadcast caliber because it uses
short-wave radio technology, which has significant tonal variations from day
to day and place to place.

Bill Whitaker, director of monitoring resources, says the Voice of America has
devised a one-to-five scale numerical code, with five representing the highest
level of sound quality.  The monitors punch the digitized sound rankings into
their computers.  Then the numerical data is sent by telephone lines into
computers at the agency's Washington office.  Whitaker says all reports are
received within five days of broadcast.

Before adopting the new system, the Voice of America relied on the diplomatic
pouches at local U.S.  embassies-an antiquated and time-consuming method-to
convey handwritten reports back to Washington.  "It could take weeks, or even
months, to get all the reports back," Whitaker recalls.  "And then we had to
enter them in our system.  Now we have information about all our broadcasts
around the world at the end of each week."

Whitaker adds that the new digitized system also allowed the government to
further its downsizing goals by eliminating three data-entry positions.

Newton, the Next Generation

Many telephone companies use surprisingly low-tech methods to give their crews
the locations of equipment problems, assigning clerical workers to keep logs
of work orders.  Workers in repair units are forced to call in each hour or so
to receive updated job lists.

The Dracon Division of Harris Corp., a technology manufacturer in Melbourne,
Fla., is seeking to change all that with a new PDA-type device called the
Craft Digital Assistant, which would allow outdoor employees to receive
information about jobs from their computers.  These workers also could update
equipment files as they complete each task.  Printer capability would allow
them to create copies of bills and other documents on the spot to give to
customers.

The Dracon unit, based in Camarillo, Calif., received licensing rights from
Apple to create the Craft Digital Assistant, which in essence is a
water-proof, "ruggedized" version of the Newton.  The device can be dropped 10
feet without damage.

The technology is in trial stages.  Ken Selig, director of the division, says
Dracon is conducting extensive trial tests for Pacific Telephone Co., the
largest telecommunications lines provider in California.  He notes that
virtually all the other regional Bells, as well as GTE Corp.  of Stamford,
Conn., are experimenting with the Craft product.

The telephone companies are eager for this technology because it can boost
productivity while reducing labor.  In addition, the device's efficiencies
would allow these companies to reduce cycle times on many repair jobs.

In the Chips

One of the most intriguing things about PDA technology is that its ability to
gather information in real time allows companies and entrepreneurs to create
businesses that were not viable when data collection techniques were slower.
Last year Vicky Bradum, a Las Vegas entrepreneur, used Motorola's Envoy to
build a unique service for local hotels called CasinoLine.

Bradum dispatched employees to each of the town's largest casinos to keep
track of the constant changes in jackpot dollar totals.  The changes were
transmitted to Las Vegas' tourist hotels, which posted large signs advising
tourists of the locations of the biggest jackpots.  Although the operation was
discontinued this year, it remains a good example of the types of innovative
applications made possible by these devices.

The Future Is Wow

It is highly unlikely the PDA will challenge personal computers in the
business world.  But the units are carving out a healthy market share, Vadim
Zlotnikov, a technology analyst with Sanford C.  Bernstein & Co., says.  He
estimates approximately 500,000 personal digital assistants were sold in 1995,
making for a $300 million-a-year industry.  Of the 500,000 units, some 300,000
were earmarked for field operations; the remaining 200,000 were used as
personal organizers.

In Zlotnikov's view, the development of PDAs as a corporate operations tool
takes place in three stages.  The first is exemplified by the field uses being
employed by Taco Bell and Monsanto.

"The second stage will be when there is widespread use of cellular
communications to access the Internet or corporate local networks with Newtons
and similar devices," he says.  "Some of this technology is already in place.
But it has not become widely available yet.  I believe it will do so in 1996
and 1997.  It's a question of people becoming comfortable with this
technology.  When they do, we'll see many people use the Internet and company
networks routinely for their email.  People also will become just as
comfortable viewing the Internet from a PDA as from a personal computer."

The third stage will come when the use of high-band radio wave connective
technology, like Motorola's Envoy and Marco, becomes common.

"People know about these devices, but not that many companies have committed
to using them," Zlotnikov observes.  "This technology will allow massive data
transfers between PDAs and office computers.  When it becomes widespread, the
walls between being in the office and on the road will really break down.  It
will no longer matter much where one is located."

A few forward-looking companies already are in the second stage he describes.
When Apple releases its "stack" connector to the Internet this summer, a whole
new universe of business applications will open.  In creating Web sites, many
companies will want to appeal to mobile PDA-linked Net browsers-along with
users who log in from offices and homes.

With PDA and other small computer users in mind, American Airlines last year
began designing a Web site suited to miniature screens.  "You can't use as
much lettering when you have less display space," Joseph Crawley, Web Master
for American Airlines, explains.  "The idea is:  'more thought and less
text.'"

Currently, the American Airlines Web site runs 450 pages.  Among other
benefits, browsers may tap into the airline's massive SABRE computerized
reservation system to purchase tickets and access seating arrangements, or
they may learn if a certain flight is on time or has been delayed.  "This is
the type of up-to-date information that would interest Newton users, who are,
say, riding around in a car," Crawley points out.

A demonstration of the American Airlines' Web site was performed on a Newton
at the Comdex trade show in Las Vegas last November.  "I don't know if it was
the advertising of the future," recalls one attendee.  "But, that tiny site
definitely was the biggest 'wow' of the show."


THE NEWTON 2.0 AT A GLANCE

PRICE:  $699

WEIGHT:  One pound

MEMORY CAPACITY:  2 MB

BATTERY LIFE:  20 hours with rechargable batteries; 50 hours with alkaline
batteries

PERSONAL COMPUTER COMPATIBILITY:  Can be integrated into Windows and MAC
systems

SOFTWARE:  More than 50 programs available from indepdendent developers,
including AllPen, American Airlines, Dayna, Intuit, ON Technology, Socket
Communications

CONNECTIVITY:  Two-way wireless messaging capability allows users to send and
receive email, transmit graphic images to fax machines, get pages, and access
stock quotes and news.

NUMBER OF WORDS IN INTERNAL DICTIONARY:  90,000, up from 10,000





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

Special Focus:  A Tale Of Three Web Sites


Exponential figures are touted routinely for the growth in the number of
users, the number of information providers, the number of Web sites, and the
amount of money to be made on the Web.  Some of the numbers are realistic,
some are greatly exaggerated; yet, with almost 14 million unique Universal
Resource Locators (URLs)-more commonly known as home pages-currently
available, anyone can find virtually any kind of information on the Web, from
the ridiculous to the sublime.

So, is the proliferation of home pages merely a trend signal of slaves to
cyber-fashion?  Hardly.  Cottage industries have sprouted from less.  All
signs show that business is booming on the Web, across traditional and
nontraditional sectors.  Measuring success, well, that will vary from a
Fortune 100 company to an independent marketer of quality cigars.  It all
boils down to style and substance.  What is the strategy for designing,
developing, building, and operating a Web site?  Before you brush off the Web
as an electronic variation of the hula hoop, take a look at what three
different organizations-Chevron Corp.; Virtual Vineyards; and Amnesty
International-have accomplished on the Web, each with its own purpose and
individual strategy for achieving its goal.

These three Web sites stand out as examples of what can be done
on-line-marketing and selling a product; creating an image; and generating
awareness-through careful strategic planning and implementation.

CHEVRON:  Defining Corporate Image

Not everything about doing business on the Web is linked strategically to
product, sales, promotion, or marketing.  Sometimes, the information takes a
broader, corporate perspective, as Chevron Corp.  has done on its Web site
(http://www.chevron.com).  While a lot of companies developed Web sites just
for the sake of doing it, Chevron has adopted an overall corporate
communications strategy for its site.

"A lot of it has to do with positioning," Mike Libbey, Chevron's team leader
for media relations, explains.  By having a Web site, Chevron is positioned as
a leading-edge company technologically.  And by doing it well, Chevron is
positioned as a company that knows what it is doing.

"This image rubs off on people who may want to buy our products," Libbey says.
"While we're not selling fuel on our Web site, we are positioning ourselves as
experts in the area of fuel, and the Web site itself is positioning Chevron as
a company aware of the latest technology.  It provides an image of Chevron in
the minds of people that we think benefits our reputation, and, by extension,
our business."

Chevron's Web site came into being in November 1994, when Libbey started
defining content and how to propose the concept to management.  As his
exploration into the World Wide Web began, he discovered his idea was not
entirely new at Chevron.

"What we discovered was that Chevron already had an external Web site set up
for demonstration purposes developed by our information technology
subsidiary," Libbey recalls.  "They had had a conference on the Web and its
uses a few months earlier, and had set up the demonstration site with a
different URL.  But, nevertheless, it was available externally.  This actually
turned out to be a big help, since the hardware, software, URL address, and
the networking already were taken care of by our technical people.  All we
really had to do was to work with them to provide the professional content."

Libbey's department provides corporate communications services for print,
radio, and television journalists, so it was only natural for his department
also to provide the Web site content and product development.  Chevron's
information technology department provided the hardware, software, and
networking.

Chevron's Web site is developed on a Unix-based, Sun server, using Netscape
Communications software.

Internal and External Strategies

Chevron followed both an internal and external strategy in its Web site
development.  "Our internal strategy was to establish the corporate
communications department as having the responsibility and oversight for the
content," Libbey notes.  "In examining other early corporate Web sites, it was
apparent that a particular business unit within a corporation had the first
idea to put up a site, and that site reflected the business unit's views
without reflecting the overall corporation's views.  It looked like whomever
had the idea first established what they thought the site should be."

From Libbey's corporate viewpoint, these sites didn't project a wide-ranging
and complete corporate image for a broad audience.  "So our internal strategy
was from the perspective of getting our corporate flag out there, if you will,
because we are corporate professional comunicators, as opposed to marketers or
some other sector of our business."

The external strategy, according to Libbey, was to position Chevron in a
number of ways, each represented by one of the four original areas on its Web
site:  financials, operations, news and views, and what Chevron's Web site
calls the exploration zone.

Chevron's financials "page" provides comprehensive financial information for
investors, potential investors, analysts, shareholders, and anyone else who is
interested in the company's financial performance.  The operations "page"
provides information about Chevron's nearly two dozen operating companies in
the United States and overseas, in every aspect of the petroleum industry.  It
also focuses on the "human equation" behind the statistics, profiling the
people at Chevron and their work.  The news and views "page" offers current
information about Chevron, from press releases to speeches by top executives.

Chevron's fourth original "page," the exploration zone, is aimed at the wide
range of educational audiences looking for information about business,
particularly the oil industry.  The exploration zone contains articles on the
history of the oil industry, and explains the workings of various sectors of
the business, including refining and marketing.

"All of the stories in the exploration zone were already available in print
form," Libbey notes.  "We simply took articles, including art work, from our
stockholder magazine which had many interesting articles on the company, and
repackaged it for the Web.  This allows this information to have a much longer
life."

Libbey already is looking to future refinements in Chevron's Web site.  "My
regular job is manager of media relations," he notes, "so I want to provide as
much information as possible for the media.  What I would like to do in the
future, if I ever get the time, is to enhance our regular press release
material, available on PR Newswire, with additional information, such as maps,
charts, graphics, and background information that can't be put on the wire.
And when multimedia technology becomes more readily available, adding sound or
even video.  In that way, not only could you have a press release where we're
quoting our chairman's words, but you could also download the chairman's words
and watch him speaking them."

Chevron's recent addition of a products and services "page"-which provides
information on Chevron credit cards, its Techron fuel additive, and fuels
manufactured by Chevron-is another area Libbey targets for expansion.

"When you look at the credit card area, all they're doing now is explaining
the different types of credit cards Chevron offers and providing an 800 number
for people to call.  But we're looking ahead at the possibility of on-line
transactions-taking applications on-line, or even billing inquiries on-line.
We have something like 8 million Chevron credit card holders, of which 2
million to 3 million are active users.  Even a small percentage of those
coming on-line would represent thousands of people.  It's going to take a
while, but we're definitely looking at it."

Going On-Line Or Not

Chevron appears to have successfully avoided the pitfall of many Web
sites-sacrificing content for graphics.  "We evaluated several outside Web
page designers, who agreed with us that people don't want to sit there for
long downloads," Libbey recalls.  "We limited our graphics to cut download
time, and yet be attractive and informative at the same time, and our Netscape
software also provides us with much quicker downloads.  Our outside designer
also has a very good relationship with Netscape, for whom he also does work,
which keeps us extremely well informed on the leading-edge technology which we
are pursuing for our site."

Libbey's enthusiasm for the Web is laced with common-sense advice.

"If anyone else wants to develop a Web site, I would say, do it, but think
about who your audience is, what you want to say to your audience, and what
you hope to accomplish.  For example, on our products and services 'page,'
there are several things about our Techron fuel additive and answers to
questions about octane and reformulated gasoline.  These are very carefully
thought-out answers, and I think people who will read them will recognize we
have an expertise in this area, and that our fuel and other products reflect
our expertise."

VIRTUAL VINEYARDS:  A Megabyte, A Jug of Wine, And Thou

One of the earliest developers and practitioners of interactive marketing is a
small company based in Los Altos, Calif., called Virtual Vineyards
(http://www.virtualvin.com).  But don't look for any wine-tasting parties or
tours of its rustic wineries.  In fact, the only way to sample its vintages is
through the World Wide Web.

"Virtual Vineyards is strictly a Web-based company," Robert Olson, president
and co-founder, says.  "When we get the odd telephone or fax order, we put it
into the system by having a clerk use a Web browser, exactly as if the user
had put it in himself.  Older businesses translate Web-based orders into their
existing telephone or paper-based systems; we go the opposite way."

The company is an electronic direct marketing channel for more than 50
wineries and food producers.  Virtual Vineyards doesn't just create Web pages.
"We select the foods and wines, stock them in our warehouse, promote the
products, process orders, and manage fulfillment logistics," Olson explains.

Wine On-Line

Olson didn't start out in wine making or marketing.  In his case, the
technical skills came first, the marketing concept second, and the product
last.

"I got interested in the power of personalized, interactive marketing while
working on an Interactive Television project," he says.  "In many ways, the
Internet is a better vehicle for what we are doing than is Interactive TV,
since it is a more open architecture platform.  I decided that the time had
come for me to do something on my own."

In early 1994, Olson started talking to various retailers about investing in
interactive marketing and interactive stores, but he didn't make much
progress.  "They all just kind of looked at me and said, 'I've got about
$5,000 left in my advertising budget, what can you do with that?' and I said
'Frankly, not much.'"

It was during a conversation with his brother-in-law, Peter Granoff, about the
trials and tribulations of launching a venture that Olson decided he needed to
build a demonstration store "for people to be able to figure out what I was
talking about."

"What I was looking for was something that had three characteristics," he
recalls.  "First, it had to be an information-oriented product, something
where information at the point of sale had a major influence in the purchasing
decision.  I included wine in that category, even though at that time I didn't
know it was wine that would ultimately become our product line.  The second
thing is, it needed to be a product with a distribution problem-a specialty
oriented product as opposed to a commodity-because I didn't particularly want
to be in competition with Safeway, or WalMart, or any other large chain."

The third necessity was having a content expert.

"What I was talking about was in effect a distribution business, which can
live or die based upon both producer and consumer relationships," Olson notes.
"So I needed someone who understood those relationships, to give us a better
chance.  That pretty much described the wine business, and that's about the
way it worked.  Peter was ready for a change, I needed somebody who understood
the product, wine is certainly something that has a lot of appeal to a lot of
people, and thereby hangs the tale."

Granoff, a Master Sommelier, certainly had the background to be content
expert.  Granoff is only the thirteenth American admitted to the British Court
of Master Sommeliers and currently serves as an Examiner and Board of
Directors member for the Court's American Chapter.  In 1991, he received the
James Beard Foundation Sommelier of the Year Award.  Granoff serves as
consulting sommelier and wine director for San Francisco's Square One
restaurant and as visiting lecturer for The Sterling Vineyards School of
Service and Hospitality.

Coming from a computer background at Silicon Graphics, Olson had a pretty good
idea of most of the technical issues involved in setting up a Web site.  "So
Peter knows the products, knows the suppliers, and has a handle on why
customers buy what they do," Olson says.  "I know the computers and the Net."

The initial site was built on an Intel platform manufactured by Micron, using
a Unix operating system.  Virtual Vineyards utilizes the Netsite Commerce
Server from Netscape Communications, a Sybase database, and an ordering
software package called Open Orders from Custom Software.

Marketing The Marketing

"When we first started out, it wasn't too difficult to develop an interest in
our product," Olson notes.  "People were intrigued with what we were doing."

Virtual Vineyards was one of the first Internet-based marketers, and
consequently, the venture received a tremendous amount of publicity as
interest in the Internet and the World Wide Web was growing.

"We have discovered, in general, press coverage works better than
advertising," Olson observes.  "I don't know why that it is, but I think it
may be due to the current crop of users on the Internet.  They may, in fact,
be less susceptible to advertising than your average human being, but all that
may change."

Has Olson been able to turn the publicity into a successful operation?
Virtual Vineyards is privately held-investors include Applied Technology
Partners, Lexington, Mass.; Alpine Technology Ventures, Cupertino, Calif; and
four private individuals, including Olson-and Olson is reluctant to give out
financial data.  He says the company "has been meeting the expectations of its
backers, which is a very important objective."  Published reports have noted
that Virtual Vineyards processes orders for tens of thousands of dollars worth
of wine every month on the Web, with expectations for monthly sales to exceed
$100,000 for December.

It doesn't appear to be too difficult to generate awareness of the Web site.
Virtual Vineyards gets its message out through three different avenues.  The
company buys ads on other on-line service providers, such as America Online
and Prodigy, but Olson says this route "is only marginally effective."

The second avenue is through the traditional channels of the press and various
on-line conferences.  "We've been interviewed on CNN and National Public
Radio, and have had articles about us in USA Today and the New York Times, for
example.  And every time a story comes out, we see a pretty good hit in
on-line traffic, which convinces us it works."

The third way is via word-of-mouth.  "We currently are running a discount gift
promotion to stimulate additional holiday sales," Olson notes at the close of
1995, "because gifts get two people instead of one."

Keeping an Eye on Business

Virtual Vineyards' parent company, Net Contents, Inc., provides computer and
Internet services.  It also consults in the design and implementation of
electronic stores for other companies, including a number of wineries.  Olson
likens the process to working with an architect in the design of a new
building:  The first questions revolve around priorities.

"If you measure success in sales through the channel, you make one set of
choices about content, navigation, maintenance, back office support, and so
forth.  If your goal is to get lots of visitors and cultivate a 'cool' company
image, you make other choices.  Once you know how you are going to measure
your success, it becomes much easier to build a successful site," he observes.

"We specialize in transaction-oriented sites, building everything around
delivering products to customers.  'Cool' in our context means customer
service and value added.  I attribute our success to staying focused on this
business objective.  There is nothing wrong with the many other models on the
Net.  But success on the Web comes from knowing why you are doing the project,
and staying true to your vision."

AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL:  Freedom Through Information

It's often said that one person can't make a difference in this world.  Well,
one person can, if that person is hooked into the Internet, and, more
specifically, into Amnesty International's numerous international, national,
and local Web sites.  ("Official" Web site:
http://www.io.org/amnesty/overview.html; U.S.  sites
include:http://www.traveller.com/~hrweb/ai/ai.html and
http://www.gatech.edu/amnesty/international.html).

Amnesty International's mandate-to free all prisoners of conscience detained
for the nonviolent expression of their beliefs, fair and prompt trials for
political prisoners, and an end to torture and executions-is well suited to
the worldwide communications and information gathering and processing
capabilities of the Internet.  Since it first went on-line a little more than
a year ago, the World Wide Web has allowed more than 1.1 million Amnesty
International members, subscribers, and donors in more than 150 countries and
territories, and more than 8,000 Amnesty International volunteer groups in
more than 70 countries, to report on, monitor, and take action against human
rights violations worldwide almost instantaneously.

"The Internet has enabled us to mobilize our members and others around the
world, " Robin Bernard, director of information technology, says.  "It also
has allowed us to become aware of potential and actual human rights violations
that would not have gotten out otherwise, or would have taken a long time to
get out."

Human Rights Awareness

When Amnesty International first started looking at the Web as an information
and communications tool, the group saw a number of reasons.  "First, we
realized it would be an invaluable human rights tool, by providing human
rights information and education to a wide audience," Bernard says.  "We
wanted to enable people to get involved in saving lives and preventing human
rights abuses immediately with the click of a button.  It also provides us a
means to communicate and collaborate with our volunteers, staff, and members
across the Net in a cost-effective and timely manner."

Amnesty International also uses the Net to promote membership in the
organization, and distributes its publications through its Web sites, as well
as income-generating merchandise such as tee shirts and calendars.  Generating
income is an important strategy for Amnesty International.

"Our system now is set up through volunteers, and various organizations and
universities have given us computer space and time with which to operate on
the Net," Bernard explains.  "We would like to set up our Web site in-house,
to help us be even more effective, if the funding were available."

The Internet and the World Wide Web are especially well suited to non-profit
organizations like Amnesty International, given the lack of communications
networks and options, and government control over communications, in many of
the countries Amnesty International monitors for human rights violations.

"The Internet is virtually the only way to communicate globally in a number of
countries," Bernard says.  During the coup against then Pres-ident Gorbachev
in Russia, for example, most lines of communications in Russia, particularly
in and around Moscow, were cut off.  Initial reports and early confirmation of
the attempted coup were first learned worldwide through individuals and
organizations communicating through the Internet, Bernard notes.

Amnesty International programs such as the Regional Action Network and the
Urgent Action Network are greatly enhanced by use of the Internet.  The 21
Regional Action Networks concentrate their activities on any one of five
regions of the world to assist people subjected to any of the human rights
abuses that Amnesty International opposes in almost all of the world's
countries.

Human Rights Action

Amnesty International's Urgent Action Network consists of a streamlined
procedure for finding and responding to urgent information about threatened
individuals and quickly getting it to a pool of concerned people who agree to
be "on call" to send immediate letters, faxes, telegrams, and aerograms to
government authorities regarding torture, capital punishment, ill-treatment,
extrajudicial execution, disappearance, untreated health problems, death
threats, denial of legal counsel, unacknowledged detention, and forced
repatriation.

An Urgent Action includes specific details about the prisoner as well as
background information regarding relevant patterns of human rights violations
in the country, recommended actions, addresses of responsible governmental
authorities, and general guidelines to use when composing appeals.  Amnesty
International issues several Urgent Actions daily and delivers each one to a
portion of the Urgent Action Network.

Since the largest portion of the Urgent Action Network is made up of
individual letter-writers, the Web is an efficient, cost-effective way to
reach thousands of people simultaneously, Bernard acknowledges.  "The Web
gives us the opportunity to let people know what Amnesty International is,
what we do, and how to get involved," she says.

And like its organizational, educational, and commercial counterparts on the
Web, Amnesty International is carefully watching technological advances and
planning its future Web strategy accordingly.

Technology Assists Strategy

A longer term strategy can be difficult to pinpoint when dealing with the
World Wide Web.

"The way in which the Web is expanding and technology is advancing, we'll
probably be doing things on the Web and using it in ways we can't even imagine
today," Bernard believes.  Amnesty International already uses photographs
extensively on the Web and plans to increase its graphics use.  "It means much
more, and has a greater impact, if you can show the faces along with the
facts," Bernard says.

"And as the technology becomes more available, multimedia capabilities,
including not only words and pictures, but sound, film, and video, will also
become part of our Web strategy," Bernard observes.  "We hope that it will
help our members and other interested persons by giving them information, and
answers to their questions more quickly, and provide the kinds of services to
help us achieve our mandate.  In the commercial world, I guess you would call
that customer service.  In our area, I guess it would be service to humanity."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS STRATEGY via NewsNet
JANUARY/FEBRUARY, 1996

Special Focus:  Cyber-Strategy


A FEW MONTHS AGO, ALCOA ANNOUNCED THE LARGEST information technology project
in its history, an overhaul of its basic computer infrastructure.  The $150
million effort will span 26 countries and take several years to complete, and
is considered so strategic that Paul O'Neill, Alcoa's chairman, cites his
"personal involvement and commitment to the project."

The effort is ambitious and complicated, but the goal is elegantly simple and
clear:  Let employees around the globe communicate quickly and easily.  When
the new systems are in place, Keith Turnbull, Alcoa's executive vice president
of strategic analysis/planning and information, says, "The person who has an
opportunity and wants to share it can, and the person who has a problem can
find help."

Alcoa's initiative reflects a basic fact of life in the use of strategic
information technology (IT).  Today, IT is focused increasingly on creating
connections-between employees, across functions, with customers, and between
data and decision makers.

To forge those links, companies have rushed with great fanfare and urgency
into client-server technologies, global networking projects, and extensive
reengineering programs.  Many have succeeded and found competitive advantage
in their technology.  But many others haven't.  "When I talk to CEOs and
senior managers, they tell me information technology is much more important
today than it used to be," Larry DeJarnett, vice president of A.T.  Kearney in
Chicago, says.  "But it still takes too long and costs too much, and when it's
done it too often doesn't deliver what they thought they were going to get."

For example, client-server and distributed systems-in which some or all of the
computing load is moved off the mainframe and onto smaller computers-now are
central to most IT strategies.  But some 75% of client-server projects fail,
according to Cambridge Market Intelligence in England.

At times, those failures can reach epic proportions, Bill Carico, president of
the ACTS consulting firm based in Marble Falls, Texas, says.  He cites
published reports of National Westminster Bank's troubled $300 million branch
system that will take several years longer than expected to get up to speed; a
U.S.  Army National Guard system created for thousands of users that sometimes
takes two days to handle an email message; and an extensive EuropCar system
that turned out to be so complicated it "collapsed under its own weight" on
its first day in operation.

Faced with such sobering examples, many executives are approaching strategic
IT projects with a renewed sense of caution and realism, "moving from where
the rubber meets the sky to where the rubber meets the road," Carico says.

At the heart of this trend is a basic tenet:  The effective, strategic use of
information systems relies less on the latest and greatest technology, and
more on how the technology is managed.  And so companies are spending more
time up front, at higher levels in the organization, thinking about how
systems should be evaluated, deployed, maintained, and targeted to specific
business opportunities and problems.

What Kind of Systems?

Increasingly, such thinking revolves around the customer, and progressive
corporate IT departments are investing in technologies that aim to improve
product quality and variety, hone marketing efforts, and enhance customer
service.

These technologies include networks that give frontline employees the product
information they need to help customers on the spot; point-of-sale systems
that let retailers gather data on purchasing patterns and shorten checkout
lines; voice systems that let banks offer phone-based services; and
sophisticated databases that let companies develop detailed profiles of
customers' tastes.

In an age where virtually every company touts its love of the customer, that
hardly seems like leading-edge thinking.  But in fact, IT traditionally has
focused on administrative, backroom operations.  DeJarnett says executives
often are surprised at just how inwardly attuned their systems are.  For
example, when a Fortune 500 manufacturer he advises recently examined its IT
usage, it found only about 30% of its IT resources were oriented toward
external customers and 70% were focused on internal customers.  "That company,
and others I've talked to since, think it's important to shift that balance
pretty dramatically," DeJarnett says.

When companies do make that shift, they often find that some of the internal
systems they've been operating are unnecessary, according to DeJarnett.  When
considering a new system, he advises:  "Put yourself in the customer's chair
and see if you care.  That will tell you a whole lot about many control
systems and financial systems.  Customers could care less what kind of
internal exercises you go through.  They just want the product or service on
time at the right price."

There seems to be a clear payoff from using IT to reach customers.  Erik
Brynjolfsson, associate professor of management at MIT's Sloan School,
recently compared the performance of companies with customer-oriented IT
strategies and those that had more traditional cost-reduction strategies.  "We
found that the customer-oriented ones had substantially higher productivity
and profitability," he says.  "The information technology enables them to have
a richer level of information flow between the company and the customers, and
to give their line employees the information they need to make decisions.  The
companies that used the technology in that way showed a benefit beyond just
saving dollars."

Taking Control

While deploying those frontline systems, companies are developing strategies
to re-establish some degree of central control over them.  As companies moved
from mainframes to distributed systems, buying power shifted from central
information systems (IS) organizations to business units.  According to the
Gartner Group, Stamford, Conn., consultants, 60% to 70% of IT spending now is
done outside of the IS organization.

Too often, Kearney's DeJarnett says, "that creates a version of anarchy, with
everybody doing their own thing."  Departmental systems, bought with no
overall plan in place, often can't work with other departmental systems.
What's more, the variety of systems makes it difficult for technical experts
from centralized IS departments to provide maintenance and assistance, meaning
such tasks fall to "underground support" groups, nontechnical employees end up
spending a lot of time fixing and fine-tuning their computers, rather than
doing their jobs.

Dispersed control over PCs also makes it difficult to target and control
spending at a strategic level.  Gartner Group surveys show that companies
typically spend 5.8% of their total revenues on IT.  Of that, 2% is
centralized IS spending; 2.3% is done by business units, and 1.5% is
unaccounted for.  By 1999, companies indicate their IT spending will reach
8.9% of revenues; 1.6% will be controlled centrally, 5.6% decentrally, and
1.6% will be "lost in the sauce," William Kirwin, a vice president in
Gartner's management of information technology group, says.

Not surprisingly, many executives are rethinking their decentralized buying
strategies.  But that does not mean turning back the clock to return total
power to the technicians.  "IS departments are looking for ways to influence
purchases made by the business units," Kirwin says.  "It's not so much a
question of centralization versus decentralization as it is realizing that
there is going to be a hybrid split of responsibility."

In some companies, that influence is taking the form of standards that
business units must comply with in making purchases.  Typically, the IT
department will dictate what sort of underlying technologies to buy, such as
operating systems and network software.  As a result, maintenance is simpler,
and systems across the company can work together.  For their part, the
business units are then free to use a variety of application software, the
programs they really use to run their business.

Such standards provide an effective balance between central control and
decentralized flexibility and save money along the way.  "Companies that have
gone through these rigorous standardization programs report that their total
cost of PC ownership has gone down by 20% to 30%, which may translate to a
couple of thousand dollars per user per year," Kirwin says.

Handing It Off

At some organizations, the debate over who manages what part of the IT
function is taken to another level.

"We're seeing an increasing willingness on the part of executives to consider
outsourcing," Allie Young, a senior industry analyst at Dataquest in
Westborough, Mass., observes.  Her firm estimates that outsourcing, a $67
billion business worldwide in 1994, will grow to $141 billion by 1999, not
including various types of IT consulting.

More important than the dollar amounts, however, is the changing nature of
outsourcing, she says.  Traditionally, outsourcing has been a cost-cutting
tool; companies would turn their systems over to a vendor so they could get
assets off their books and downsize their staffs.  But a growing trend, Young
says, is to tie outsourcing to larger, longer-term initiatives and to look at
vendors as strategic partners.

The key:  selective outsourcing.  As its name implies, selective outsourcing
lets companies pick and choose what to outsource, rather than just handing
over the total management of systems to a vendor.  So a company might elect to
break off mundane, day-to-day data-center operations to allow its IS staff to
focus on new strategic technologies, and management to focus on core
competencies.  Or, conversely, it might bring a vendor in to help with a
specific transition to a new technology.  "There's whole host of new options,"
Young says.  "It's not a situation where you're in a contract and you're in it
for life.  Vendors are approaching customers with much more of a blank sheet
of paper."

All this flexibility makes it easier to use outsourcing as a strategic tool.
By partnering with a vendor, a firm no longer has to keep pace with rapidly
changing technology on its own-an increasingly difficult task, even for a
large corporation with a bright and able IT staff.

"Those people just don't have access to the same kinds of resources as does a
company that is 100% focused on information technology," according to Tim
Bourgeois, a research analyst at International Data Corp.  in Framingham,
Mass.  "They don't have the research and development, and they don't have the
access to the emerging tools and products that change every 18 months."

Outsourcing can be used to shorten the time to market for a critical new
system by giving a corporation a quick infusion of expertise.  "A company may
be looking at the strategic advantage they can gain by implementing a global
client-server customer-service solution, or perhaps a retailer wants to put in
a new system that links its retail operations with its distributors," Young
says of outsourcing.  "It gives you access to experts that have done this
before and know how to roll it out."

Young points out that several vendors are starting to extend their services
into areas beyond the IS department.  "We're seeing an emerging concept called
business process management, which is going to be real important going
forward," Young says.  In this approach, traditional vendors such as Andersen
Consulting or EDS take on and re-engineer an entire IT-intensive business
process, such as accounting, human resources, or customer service.  "These
areas are usually not core competencies for a company," she notes.  "But they
are important, and there is value in making sure they don't become stagnant."

Measuring Up

Without a doubt, the most fundamental question in strategic IT is whether it's
worth it.  And the evidence suggests that on a macro level, at least, the
answer is yes.  In a recent study, MIT's Brynjolfsson looked at overall
productivity and IT expenditures at several hundred major corporations.  "We
found that IT investment was very significantly correlated with large
increases in productivity," he says.  "The estimated return on information
technology investments was on the order of 60%, which was a lot higher than a
return on other types of capital investments."

But on a more detailed level, executives have been frustrated in attempts to
measure and justify specific systems.  Many experts believe that traditional
return-on-investment financial calculations are too narrow in scope.  "We're
seeing a reaction to the whole early 1990s school of IS strategy, which tended
to focus on very short-term payback projects- which meant in a lot of
companies that the basic IT infrastructure has gone to hell in a handbasket,"
Brian Jeffrey, managing director of the International Technology Group in
Mountain View, Calif., says.

That short-term view also tends to miss larger trends, Jeffrey notes.  For
example, in 1994 banks invested heavily in putting PCs into branch offices.
But at the same time, emerging alternatives such as phone and on-line
banking-as well as ATMs-were starting to make branches less and less popular.

"In 1994, there were 54,000 bank branches in the country; by the year 2000
there will be less than 20,000," he says.  "So they were focusing on putting a
PC on every desk, and rather missed the point that half the desks are going to
disappear."

The larger problem is that traditional financial methods simply don't measure
what IT does best-support innovation.  "When IT is used effectively, it
doesn't just do more of the same, it does things like improve product variety
and quality and customer service," Brynjolfsson says.  "These are things that
are not easy to measure."

It's clear that research and debate about how to measure IT's value will
continue for some time.  But overall, experts are moving toward a broader view
of what technology contributes to an organization, taking into account such
things as how it affects processes and customers.

John Scholes, president of Regent Associates International, an East Hartland,
Conn., firm that advises companies in the IT industry, believes executives
should not unravel IT from the rest of their businesses.  "What they ought to
be doing is stepping up a level, and asking, 'How do I best organize my
business?' And then ask how IT enables that," he says.

Thornton May, vice president of research and education at Cambridge Technology
Partners in Cambridge, Mass., cites a need for methods that recognize the
value of organizational knowledge and the ability to collaborate to leverage
that knowledge.

"What we are finding is progressive organizations are moving from the 'How
many clerks did I kill today?' view, to more of a bid-and-ask type negotiation
session, where they ask themselves, 'What is this chunk of functionality
worth?'" May says.  "For example, they might ask what it's worth to have email
that takes you point-to-point around the organization.  Then, they ask how
much it costs, and then they start negotiating.  So the new paradigm is
basically a case-by-case negotiation of whether a project makes sense."

Finally, many observers recommend that strategists resist the sense of urgency
that often surrounds new technology, and take time to look before they leap-to
weigh a system's value and test the concept.  And, as ITG's Jeffrey points
out, they should remember:  "None of it is quick, none of it is easy, and none
of it is cheap.  There aren't any simple answers."


Peter Haapaniemi is a freelance business journalist based in the Detroit area.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-16</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B048-86</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mt13.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033837 text/html 15051
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:36:45 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:45 GMT
Content-length: 14864
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mt13.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
LABOR TRENDS via NewsNet <BR>
January 15, 1994<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>LABOR LAW REFORM: GRASSROOTS GET THEIR SAY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1062 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>REVIVED IDEAS RUMBLE ALONG THE POTOMAC</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(347 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>NLRB CASELAW FORECAST LINING UP THE USUAL SUSPECTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(425 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>REPORTS AND STUDIES BENEFIT COSTS VS. SALARY HIKES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(154 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>STATISTICS MAVENS TAKE NOTE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(32 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
LABOR TRENDS via NewsNet
January 15, 1994

LABOR LAW REFORM: GRASSROOTS GET THEIR SAY

Much of the testimony so far before
the Commission on the Future of Worker-Management
Relations (aka Dunlop Commission) has come from superstars
in the labor-management community international union
presidents, corporate CEOs, heads of national trade
associations, and similar ilk. At a recent conference of
the Industrial Relations Research Association, however,
soldiers on the front lines got their chance to give the
view from the trenches.

The occasion was an invitation to IRRA chapters around the
country to debate issues involving the "high performance"
workplace and present their findings to the Commission at
IRRA's annual meeting in Boston. While membership varies
from chapter to chapter, most local groups are roughly
similar in composition to the Arizona Industrial Relations
Association at 40 percent each from management and labor,
and 20 percent neutrals. The chapters' heterogenous makeup
guaranteed there wouldn't be unanimity on every issue, but
most clearly made earnest efforts to respond to issues
posed as they appeared to them the organizers, contract
administrators, human resources staff, mediators and
arbitrators who make the labor relations system work.

Labor: "It Is Significant ..."

The chapters were asked the by-now standard set of
questions about whether amendments are necessary to
current labor law, especially with respect to employee
participation in the workplace. Labor law changes provoked
the sharpest differences between labor and management
representatives, prompting the AFL-CIO's Sheldon Friedman
from the Washington chapter to observe, "It is significant
that the NLRA, a law enacted to protect workers' rights
and organize, now has defenders in the management
community and nowhere else."

The reason for this, Friedman and other labor delegates
asserted, is that labor is getting killed by the NLRA as
currently interpreted and enforced. Friedman presented a
dismal series of research findings showing among other
things that in the past 20 to 30 years: (1) consent
elections (where the employer raises no barrier to a union
recognition ballot by employees) plummeted from 45% of all
elections to nearly zero; (2) reasonably quick (within 2
months of filing) union elections were cut almost in half;
(3) the percentage of recognition petitions filed and
subsequently withdrawn has jumped by over one-third; and
(4) there has been a nearly 60% rise in the number of
union election victories that don't result in a first
contract. Other findings by Friedman showed a direct
correlation between delay in holding elections and union
election losses.

Given management's success in utilizing the NLRA to
achieve these results, it's hardly surprising that, as the
Philadelphia chapter's report commented, "for the
management labor lawyers ... there is nothing proposed
[for NLRA changes] that would get their participation and
in general they are satisfied with the status quo."

Still, a number of chapters stressed dissatisfaction with
obstructive delays by both labor and management. "The
current system supports the party choosing to delay the
process, whether for organizing, bargaining, strikes,
grievances or arbitration," the Arizona IRRA chapter
pointed out. Several suggestions to speed up the process
and "make the playing field more level" kept reappearing
in a number of chapter reports (although not necessarily
agreed to by every chapter member). Some items on the wish
lists were:
* Unions should be able to be recognized without an
election based on 51 percent of the unit signing cards.
* Require binding arbitration where contract settlements
are not reached within a set period of time after initial
certification of a bargaining unit.
* Extend the election bar from one to three years after
certification.
* Expand the definition of "employee" to include such
groups as independent contractors.
* Enact the striker replacement bill.
* Union representation would improve if non-dues-paying
members of the bargaining unit were required to pay some
costs.
* Limit appeal rights. NLRB decisions should be self-
enforcing.
* Labor and management consultants should be held liable
along with their clients for labor law violations.

Worker Participation - The Pros Predominate

Although the Central Florida chapter noted its union
delegates "believed that workers gained more benefits by
being adversarial rather than cooperative," a majority of
chapter reports stressed members' "strong support for
cooperative relationships" including the sort of worker-
management cooperative committees now virtually outlawed
by the NLRB in its Electromation line of decisions. While
some chapters urged overturning Electromation, others,
like the Cincinnati chapter, said no change is necessary
since "in practice, the decision appears to have had
little effect on cooperative efforts because companies
tend to do whatever is in their best interests regardless
of case law."

Chapter reports contained a number of similar suggestions
for improving the process, many asking for more training
in problem-solving, communications skills, consensus
decision making (possibly organized through institutes,
the FMCS or area labor-management committees), and
networks of "best-practice" companies that could serve as
models.

Several chapters warned that good faith on both sides is
essential. "A project for improved productivity,"
commented the Iowa report, "should not mask a management
goal to ... coincidentally reduce the work force and/or
lower wages. This appears to be a major employee/union
concern." Iowa went on to note that, "Experience indicates
that success in cooperative efforts is diminished where
there is a lack of adequate resources, a lack of support
at the top level of management, a lack of initial and
continued focus on the objects of the cooperative effort,
a lack of continued monitoring...and a failure to
recognize accomplishments on a team basis."

Arizona, in a particularly thoughtful and comprehensive
report, pointed to the success of cooperative efforts at
Magma Copper, "which could not have continued operation at
its southern Arizona location if not for the contributions
of the union and its membership." Its summary of the
project noted: "...64 work teams were developed;
management levels reduced from seven to three. Fifteen
year contract ratified by 60 percent of the membership 9
months before expiration. Results: 1992 gainsharing $4,700
per employee, production costs decreased 7 percent, 15
percent total cost reduction per pound of copper,
productivity increased 61 percent over 3 1/2 years."

Unclassifiable Chapter Comments

*  The Cincinnati chapter suggested that collective
bargaining agents be "required to have some
training`driver's education'before they are permitted to
negotiate a contract or call a legal strike."
*  The Iowa chapter reached for the millennium and urged
that "the traditional adversarial relationship between
employees/unions and employers must be eliminated... This
obviously will require a significant change in the
existing labor laws [and] regulations."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
LABOR TRENDS via NewsNet
January 15, 1994

REVIVED IDEAS RUMBLE ALONG THE POTOMAC

That murmur of shock and dismay you hear coming
from Washington probably isn't from blue noses protesting
the latest scandal du jour, but from "free rider" federal
employees facing the possibility of having to pay for
union services in units where they have exclusive
representation. While this "agency shop" idea itself isn't
new it represents a dream of federal employee unions going
back to President Kennedy's executive order granting them
limited bargaining rights in the early 1960s up until now
no one ever gave it much of a chance.

What has changed things are details of a proposal leaked
this week from a working group of the National Partnership
Council, a committee of union representatives and
administration officials set up by President Clinton last
October to recommend changes in civil service laws.
Addressing dues and fees the working group proposes: "In
any unit in which voluntary membership has reached 60
percent, all bargaining unit employees shall elect either
to (a) join the union; or (b) pay a fair share service
fee...If a bargaining unit employee objects on religious
grounds to providing financial support to the union, the
employee shall pay an amount equal to a fair share service
fee to a designated charity." In units below 60%
membership, the report proposes a "fee for service"
arrangement, whereby nonunion employees could pay the
union to perform a specific service, such as filing a
grievance.

While a hard copy of the leaked proposals remains to be
seen, a source from a union with a seat on the Council
tells LT that the details of the agency shop proposal as
we've reported them are essentially correct. The
administration hopes to send legislation implementing a
new federal labor-management framework to Congress this
spring. The NPC report should be released by the end of
the month, we're told.

Latest figures show that about 59 percent of federal
workers some 1.27 million work in units where unions have
exclusive bargaining rights. If all of them are required
to pay dues, federal employee union coffers not to mention
clout should increase appreciably.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
LABOR TRENDS via NewsNet
January 15, 1994

NLRB CASELAW FORECAST LINING UP THE USUAL SUSPECTS

The bulk of the latest annual report from
the Labor Board General Counsel shows how the Lechmere and
Electromation precedents still bedevil the labor relations
scene. As readers of these pages know, in Lechmere the
U.S. Supreme Court gave employers virtually an unqualified
right to keep union organizers off their property, while
in Electromation the NLRB banned most types of employee
participation committees as unlawful employer domination
of a worker group.
The NLRB has never liked Lechmere, and in similar cases
that have come up it has found reasons to distinguish the
facts and arrive at a different result (LT 12/4/93). In
its report the GC looks at three cases where union
organizers were thrown off property by employers and
decides all are different enough from Lechmere to warrant
filing unfair labor practice charges. In one case the GC
says the union had a stronger right of access to the
property because it had represented the employees until
the employer withdrew recognition following contract
expiration and impasse. The second situation involved a
ban on union election activity by off-duty employees in
nonwork areas. In the third case the GC found that
nonemployee union agents had a right to distribute
handbills at the front entrance to a neutral employer's
store protesting use of a nonunion subcontractor. In its
brief to the Board the GC argued that "the union had
carried its `heavy' burden of proof that no other
reasonable means of communicating with the public
existed."

Several Electromation-type cases prompt pages of
discussion showing that the General Counsel is in
essential agreement with the Board's reservations against
activities of employee participation groups. In one case,
the GC says that while an employer was within its rights
to negotiate with a union over quality circles, it
couldn't bargain the subject to impasse and then implement
the circles unilaterally (in other words, it was a
permissive, not mandatory subject of bargaining). In
another case, the GC argued that a joint safety committee
was unlawful even though it was set up under a state law
requiring such committees be established. The NLRA
preempts state laws that interfere with the collective
bargaining process, the GC notes.

What it all means: No matter what the Supreme Court, Labor
Secretary Reich and the Dunlop Commission say, the NLRB
has its own ideas on labor policy. Expect more bites out
of Lechmere in 1994, and at least until the Commission
proposes and Congress passes explicit waivers under the
NLRA continued strong suspicion of any joint employer-
employee productivity efforts.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
LABOR TRENDS via NewsNet
January 15, 1994

REPORTS AND STUDIES BENEFIT COSTS VS. SALARY HIKES

Last week we reported government figures
showing how health care costs are eating into the total
benefits pie. Now the U.S. Chamber of Commerce releases
its latest annual survey that finds the cost of benefits
up 3.8 percent continues to outpace increases in salaries
up only 1.4 percent. As if that wasn't bad enough,
employees' disposable pay in effect went down. According
to CoC, "the average employer's share of medical and
medically related costs per employee remained virtually
unchanged at 10.3 percent of payroll, while the total cost
was up 1 percent....As a result, employees had to pay 9
percent more in 1992 for health care coverage, in addition
to increased deductibles in many firms." Overall benefit
costs varied widely by industry, the Chamber finds, from
slightly more than 30 percent for retailers, banks and
apparel manufacturers, to more than 40 percent for primary
and fabricated metals, machinery, transportation and
rubber industries.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
LABOR TRENDS via NewsNet
January 15, 1994

STATISTICS MAVENS TAKE NOTE

The Bureau of Labor Statistics is changing its method of
calculating unemployment as of this month. BLS
Commissioner Katherine Abraham says the new method will
inflate the reported numbers by 0.4 percent.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-17</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B048-125</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mt22.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033903 text/html 91397
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:36:56 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:35 GMT
Content-length: 91210
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mt22.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>C&L SPAIN MAY SUE E&Y OVER RAID</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(605 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>KPMG CONSULTING DRIVES 1995 GROWTH UP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(607 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>UNITED KINGDOM:  50 JOBS LOST AT TOUCHE DUE TO D&T MERGER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(345 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>AT&T HIRES THREE MORE TOP EXECUTIVES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(464 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>CANADA:  MCI BOOSTS PROFILE WITH SHL ACQUISITION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(416 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>IBM FOCUSES ON NETWORK-CENTRIC COMPUTING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(641 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>UNITED KINGDOM:  ARTHUR ANDERSEN ACQUIRES DOCTUS CONSULTANCY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(283 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>FEACO REPORTS FALL IN 1994 REVENUES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(534 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>THE NETHERLANDS:  C&L CONSIDERS MOVE TO LIMITED LIABILITY STATUS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(224 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS BRIEF</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>DEPARTURES FROM GEMINI CONSULTING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(82 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>RESTRUCTURING AT WILLIAM M MERCER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(175 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>RESULTS FROM DTTI AND E&Y</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(183 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>EDS WINS ROLLS-ROYCE CONTRACT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(96 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>IRISH CONSULTANTS' FOREIGN EARNINGS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(87 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>NORWEGIAN UNION FORMED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(61 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>PEOPLE ON THE MOVE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(115 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>BRANDING - THE ULTIMATE GOAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1059 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FEATURE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>HIGHLIGHTS OF 1995</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1895 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(957 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>SWITZERLAND: A SOPHISTICATED MARKET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(4318 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

C&L SPAIN MAY SUE E&Y OVER RAID

Coopers & Lybrand in Spain may sue Ernst & Young following E&Y's
surprise attack on C&L's consulting division. On November 16, six of
C&L's 12 consulting partners, including the division's managing partner
Jose Ramon Magarzo, and three senior consultants, announced their
decision to leave the firm and join Ernst & Young. Since then, a
further 70 consultants have jumped ship, bringing the total number of
departures, as MCI went to press, to about 80. In addition, some seven
to eight administrative staff have switched firms.

The defections, which took C&L completely by surprise, have struck a
severe blow to the firm's thriving consulting business which reported
turnover of Pta2.67 billion ($22 million) in 1995 - nearly three times
that of E&Y. According to C&L's spokesperson, the firm had just
returned to profitability after several difficult years during Spain's
recession.

Magarzo has already taken up his new position as managing director of
E&Y Consultores, replacing Michael McKay who becomes associate managing
director. In all, the first batch of nine people who left C&L have been
made partners at E&Y.

"From Ernst & Young's point of view, this was part of a plan we started
a couple of years ago when I came from the US, and that was to increase
the size of E&Y in Spain," McKay said. "It became clear to us that to
achieve the growth, we needed to become a competitive force. We
couldn't do it through internal growth, we needed external resources at
a senior level. That included bringing in as managing director a
Spaniard who would run the practice."

E&Y used an executive search firm to identify potential hires, but did
not specifically target C&L, McKay said. He said the ex- C&L partners
were attracted to E&Y in part because Ernst & Young Consultores is a
separate firm with its own profit pool.

The raid is by no means E&Y's first attempt to build a strong
consulting arm in Spain. Two previous efforts - the creation of a
consulting division when Ernst & Whinney and Arthur Young merged in
1990 and the 1993 establishment of E&Y Consultores with the financial
backing of E&Y in the US - have not been as successful as the firm
would have liked. In 1995, E&Y had consulting turnover of only Pta895
million and is reported to have suffered substantial losses.

Although head-hunting operations are not uncommon, the scale of E&Y's
raid is without precedent and has been perceived by C&L as a direct
attempt to steal a large slice of its business and seriously damage the
firm. C&L accuses E&Y of inducing its former partners to break their
legal commitments to the firm by offering financial compensation to
staff to leave C&L without giving the legally-required 15 days' notice.

This is denied by McKay."We believe we have acted in accordance with
the laws and contractual obligations of all the people. We have not
taken any projects from them, we have not taken any clients from them.
The people who have joined us have joined us of their own free will and
exercised their professional rights in the marketplace."

C&L believes E&Y's action infringes a number of fair trade rulings laid
down by Spain's competition laws and is considering legal action
against E&Y as well as individual proceedings against the former
partners. E&Y denies any attempt to steal C&L's current projects and
has offered to `lend' C&L its former consultants to finish projects
already in hand, an offer which C&L describes as cynical and not worthy
of consideration.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

KPMG CONSULTING DRIVES 1995 GROWTH UP

Consulting drove growth at KPMG during 1995 with consulting revenues up
by 28 percent to $1.5 billion. Overall revenues for the firm were $7.5
billion, up 13 percent over 1994.

The strong growth in consulting and elsewhere comes as KPMG repositions
itself as a professional services advisory firm. However, it should be
borne in mind that the figures reflect total billings to clients, not
net fee income as KPMG has reported in the past.

In 1994, KPMG reported net fee income of $990 million in consulting and
$6.1 billion in firm-wide revenues. Also in 1994, the firm redefined
consulting services to include compensation and benefits and tax
consulting services. MCI estimated KPMG's 1994 management consulting
revenues at $875 million (MCI 70).

In 1995, the US consulting practice performed best, posting growth of
37 percent to $830 million (MCI 73). Growth in Europe was
"substantially better" after a relatively flat year in 1994 due to
restructuring, according to Keith Fuller, international head of the
Management Consulting Services committee.

Asia Pacific also performed well although from a relatively small base.
Further expansion is planned there. While Fuller would not reveal
target markets, the likely candidates are Japan, Korea, Singapore, Hong
Kong and perhaps Malaysia.

As part of its shift to a professional services advisory firm, KPMG now
refers to consultative rather than consulting services. According to
Fuller, consultative services fall into five categories: strategy and
financial management (including value- based management); performance
improvement; package implementation like SAP; enabling technologies
such as mobile computing, networks, technology infrastructure and
client/server; and tax consulting services.

"One of our objectives worldwide is to substantially increase our rate
of penetration in our existing client base. We believe that we can
provide a substantial increased volume of service to clients . . . and
can provide better value to them as well."

The professional services advisory approach involves both an industry
and a specific functional focus. This is very different from
traditional cross-selling of consulting and audit services, Fuller
stressed. "Professional services advisory is where a traditional
service provider couples a better understanding of the client with
multi-disciplinary support to determine where the client has an
opportunity to improve profitability."

For example, two tax experts were involved in a recent business process
re-engineering and technology assignment for an insurance company and
produced savings for the client which would otherwise have been missed.

"Historically, I don't know if we would have found that. Or maybe the
client wouldn't have gone forward. But because we can approach this by
professional service, we can do it at a lower cost and higher value,"
Fuller said.

"We've not done away with functional specialities, we're just
approaching clients and the market differently," he added."I think this
is the model all clients will expect from their professional advisers
in future."

The multi-disciplinary industry-focused teams which KPMG has introduced
in the US and UK will continue to be rolled out around the globe with
the French, Dutch and German practices, among others, already moving in
that direction, he said.

KPMG also plans to continue expanding the types of services offered to
clients through alliances such as the one in 1995 with a US investment
firm to which KPMG licensed its name (KPMG BayMark). Other alliances
will be with academics and thought leaders - and in outsourcing, he
said.

In several countries, the firm is exploring outsourcing in the process
management area. But, Fuller said, there are no plans to follow EDS or
Andersen Consulting into the IT outsourcing arena.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

UNITED KINGDOM:  50 JOBS LOST AT TOUCHE DUE TO D&T MERGER

Fifty consultants, mostly seniors, have lost their jobs at Touche Ross
in the run-up to the merger of the UK consulting practice with Deloitte
& Touche Consulting Group in the US.

Most of the cuts were in the information technology side of the
practice. They involved 26 consultants who were made redundant and 24
who were either redeployed in other parts of the firm or found
positions with clients. Touche now has 542 consultants, a reduction of
nearly 9 percent.

Four partners are also leaving the consultancy practice. One is Andrew
Davis, head of Touche Ross's IT consulting practice and 1992 president
of the Management Consultancies Association, who is retiring due to ill-
health. Three others will move to other parts of the firm, according to
John Everett, head of the UK practice.

No further cuts are expected, he added.

The cuts reflect a market shift away from high-level IT strategy work
and towards implementation assignments which require fewer seniors but
utilise a larger number of junior staff, Everett said.

They follow a major reorganisation within the consulting practice
earlier this year which saw the establishment of dedicated sales and
marketing teams in key industry sectors, and the creation of a separate
management advisory service (MAS) unit to provide management
consulting, tax and accounting advice to small and medium clients. The
MAS unit is now part of the audit side of the firm (MCI 73).

The cuts also pave the way for the proposed US-UK-Canada alliance which
will form the first leg of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu International's
proposed global consulting firm (MCI 74). The practices have begun
working together at an operational level, although the legalities will
probably not be completed until June, Everett said.

A new management team comprising the heads of the UK, Canada and three
regional US consulting practices is being established to run the merged
operation, Everett said. Pat Laconto, head of the US consulting
practice, is expected to be the new chief executive.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

AT&T HIRES THREE MORE TOP EXECUTIVES

AT&T Solutions has hired three more executives with strong consulting
backgrounds to round out the top tier of its consulting team. This now
includes the managing partners of each of its three business units
(consulting, systems integration and outsourcing), a global practice
director and a vice-president in charge of worldwide marketing.

In November, the group announced that it had filled all those posts
with the hiring of the following:

- Dick Anderson, managing partner for the systems integration practice.
Formerly chief technology officer for Kwasha Lipton, a benefits
consulting firm, and before that a principal at McKinsey.

- John Corsiglia, managing partner and global practice director.
Formerly president of BDM Technologies, the IT consulting and systems
integration subsidiary of BDM International, and a partner at McKinsey.

- Fred Lawrence, market management vice-president, responsible for
growth in vertical industry and geographical markets. Formerly a
private investor and a consulting managing partner with Arthur Andersen
& Co.

The other managing partners on the team are James Corey who runs
consulting and Rick Roscitt, who is in charge of the outsourcing
practice. They all work out of the group's Washington, DC,
headquarters.

The team has been charged by Solutions's president and chief executive
Victor Millar with carrying the group's aggressive focus on "electronic
commerce" into the crowded services marketplace and into the group's
second year.

"We think of electronic commerce as not just offering [access to] the
Internet, electronic invoices or a page on the World Wide Web, but
changing the rules of competition for our clients," Corey said. "All
industries will go through major strategic change enabled by electronic
commerce. That's really the scope of our Solutions business. . . Our
differentiator is to be bold and innovative in our thinking."

The new executives are not the group's only new hires. Despite the
recently-announced split of AT&T into three new companies and top-to-
bottom lay-offs and buy-outs, AT&T Solutions continues to grow. A
spokesman said the only impact the buy-outs might have on Solutions
would be in outsourcing, the largest practice within Solutions. A small
portion of this practice might be affected, he said.

At the end of 1995, AT&T Solutions had about 350 consultants on board
and anticipates hiring another 2,500 in 1996. The "business thinkers"
will come from outside the parent company but some of the technology
skills are already available within AT&T, Corey said. "The market
demand for this type of service is very powerful right now. We are
clearly resource-constrained, not demand-constrained," Corey said.

It is that combination of AT&T's technological and innovation skills
combined with the consultants' business expertise that will make AT&T
Solutions stand out in the market, he said.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CANADA:  MCI BOOSTS PROFILE WITH SHL ACQUISITION

With its acquisition of the Canadian information technology services
company, SHL Systemhouse, MCI Communications Corporation has boosted
its profile in the network management and outsourcing business, and
given the newly-combined organisation the tools to compete in the
booming services market.

The $1 billion deal, which was wrapped up in November, combines SHL
with MCI's Professional Services Organization in a new group called
"Enterprise Management Services". This will offer a single source for
communications, computing and consulting services. Details are still
being worked out, but essentially, EMS will design, operate and manage
communications and computing networks. MCI estimates the US market for
such services at $40 billion and growing at 20 percent per year.

"The whole idea is the single source provider for the ongoing
management of the computer network," said SHL spokesman Rick Gray.

SHL will continue to operate as a stand-alone company with its own
corporate identity within MCI, Gray said. It has 4,500 "consultants"
and had about $1 billion in revenue in 1995, Gray said. In addition to
joint offerings with MCI, SHL will continue to develop and manage
client/server solutions for companies moving away from centralised
mainframe systems.

SHL saw the deal as a good way to give it the size and scale needed to
grow in the IT services market. "It gives us further global reach,
because MCI is more expansive on a global basis," Gray said.

"It also gives us the marketing prowess and power of the MCI company.
They are a very savvy marketing company and certainly that will help to
push the services into the marketplace. And third, with a much larger
company like MCI, a company that has a lot of money in the bank, you
are fortifying your whole financial position. You make yourself a well-
heeled competitor with the deep pockets that help in this kind of
business."

MCI, one of the world's largest communications companies, reports $13
billion in annual revenue and a broad array of services, from long
distance to Internet access to outsourcing. Revenues for its
professional services unit were not available.

"As far as what MCI brings to this partnership, it is our data
capabilities which complement what SHL brings to the partnership in
terms of computing solutions," said MCI spokesman Jim Monroe. "The
expertise of our Professional Services Organization and the computing
expertise of SHL enables MCI and SHL to offer a desktop-to-desktop
management."

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

IBM FOCUSES ON NETWORK-CENTRIC COMPUTING

The new buzz word at International Business Machines is "network-
centric computing" and the struggling computer giant's consulting group
has become an integral part of that focus, according to the firm.

IBM chairman Louis Gerstner said in November that IBM is "betting its
future" on the popularity of network-based computer systems. He
believes IBM has the technological and consulting talent needed to help
it regain its stature in a rapidly-changing technological world.

IBM Consulting Group has been playing a key role in supporting the
execution of that strategy, said Joseph Movizzo, the group's general
manager.

"There were pieces of it that we had started, like business recovery
and the systems management business," he said. "So we had some
initiatives in place that now have to be expanded because they have
taken on a more critical role. The network- centric environment is
going to have a profound impact on the business. Any consulting firm
could say, `We've been doing some of that.' But now it becomes a
different way of thinking about [our] business."

The consulting group was formed in 1992 when IBM recruited Robert Howe
from Booz-Allen & Hamilton and Stephen Mucchetti from Coopers & Lybrand
to develop the new business (MCI 41). But the group has struggled as it
tried to find focus and collaborate with a broad spectrum of products-
oriented divisions.

Since then, it has become more integrated into the IBM framework and
now operates as part of IBM's complex matrix of products and services
divisions. In 1994, Mucchetti and Howe were named heads of industry
groups and Movizzo took over as general manager but in a redefined role
with diminished responsibilities (MCI 66).

Shifting these early founders into running businesses was not a matter
of sidelining them, but of putting them into "major roles
said.

"What people don't realize is what a dramatic change that was in our go-
to-market model," Movizzo said. "Part of this is getting people to
think in a non-hierarchical sense. What is a big job today? It is
defined by content and breadth, scope and size, rather than where it is
in an organisational chart. You can't see that any more in a matrixed
network organisation."

The consulting group is working closely with Lotus Development
Corporation, the software company that makes Notes and which IBM
acquired in July for $3.5 billion. Lotus' consulting capability
complements what the IBM Consulting Group is doing, Movizzo said. "For
us and their people on the consulting side it was a comfortable
relationship to begin with and now we are going to build on that."

In addition, some of IBM's consulting practices are deployed in ISSC,
an IBM subsidiary that does systems integration and outsourcing. "We
are also tightly linked from a development point of view in that the
consulting group was given responsibilities for developing and rolling
out common methodologies and tools across IBM, including ISSC," Movizzo
said.

By the end of 1995, the consulting group expected to have 2,800
professionals in 33 countries, including new offices in India and South
Africa. About 40 percent of the consultants are involved in industry
transformation/general business consulting, 30 percent do IT/networking
systems and the other 30 percent do object technology and data
modelling, he said.

And all three areas are reportedly growing, although IBM will not
release consulting-specific numbers. In 1993 and 1994, the group
claimed 35 percent growth, and Movizzo said the group continued to grow
at 25 percent to 35 percent in 1995. "Of course, the bigger we get, the
harder it is to maintain that percentage," he said."But . . . on an
ongoing basis, I'd like to keep it there. I don't see any limits to
that, interestingly enough, as I look forward."

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

UNITED KINGDOM:  ARTHUR ANDERSEN ACQUIRES DOCTUS CONSULTANCY

Arthur Andersen has acquired Chester-based management consultancy,
Doctus, in a deal which sees Denis Mahoney, Doctus' managing director,
join the Andersen practice as a partner.

The acquisition is part of a growing shift by accountants Arthur
Andersen into the management consulting arena usually associated with
its sister firm, Andersen Consulting.

Doctus is a small multi-disciplinary consultancy with around 15
consultants specialising in strategy, change management and
implementing improved working practices and business processes.
Clients include British Airways and British Nuclear Fuels.

Founded in 1976, the firm has had a chequered history.  It became a
publicly quoted company in 1986 and was subsequently acquired by a
larger public limited company which retained the Doctus name for its
marketing and business services activities.  When that group collapsed
in 1991, Doctus' management consulting operation was bought by CRT, the
training and recruitment group.

In 1993, however, CRT decided to pull out of management consulting
after a substantial decline in the market for Doctus' services, with
the business losing #0.7 million ($1.09 million) in the first half of
1993.  Mahoney led a magement buy-out and Doctus Consulting Europe, as
it was then known, began scaling back its European activities (MCI 54).

Both AA and Doctus declined to discuss details of the acquisition, but
Andersen said it involved a small payment for the tangible assets of
the business, plus partnership for Mahoney.  Nothing was paid for
goodwill.

"Doctus has an established track record in securing long-term profit
performance improvements with clients throughout the UK utilities,
aerospace and airlines industries.  Andersen's extensive worldwide
reach will provide Docuts with a vital edge," Mahoney said.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

FEACO REPORTS FALL IN 1994 REVENUES

Management consulting revenues fell by more than 9 percent in 1994
among members of FEACO, the European federation of management
consulting associations. Revenue per consultant also decreased although
the firms appeared to have hired more consultants.

The information is contained in FEACO's annual survey released in
December 1995. It is based on responses from 17 of the 25 national
associations which comprise the federation. The 17 associations
represent 1,088 consulting firms employing 31,257 consultants. FEACO
members have an estimated 34 percent share of the total consulting
market in Europe.

Combined income for these firms was ECU4.55 billion ($5.9 billion) in
1994, almost the same as in 1993. Management consulting fees, however,
fell to ECU3.89 billion from ECU4.28 billion, the previous year.

At the same time, revenues from other sources such as software sales
and interim management increased. In some countries, notably the
Netherlands, these account for more than half of consulting firms'
revenues.

The number of consultants employed by the firms grew by 9.4 percent but
average revenue per consultant fell by 17 percent to ECU124,867,
possibly reflecting the departure of senior consultants and their
replacement by inexperienced graduates.

It should be borne in mind, however, that the members of the national
associations vary considerably, ranging in size from firms of less than
ten consultants to those employing several hundred. Also, many
international consultancies do not join national associations and are
therefore not reflected in the figures.

Despite widespread discussion of globalisation, it would seem - based
on FEACO's data - that management consulting is becoming an
increasingly national activity. Domestic business accounted for 88.5
percent of FEACO members' turnover, a slight increase over the previous
year. But this is a somewhat misleading statistic, reflecting in part
which office sends out the invoice on a cross-border assignment, not
who is doing the actual work.

Countries with the highest share of management consulting relative to
gross national product are Switzerland (0.35 percent), Germany (0.32
percent) and the Netherlands (0.30 percent).

Overall, information technology and systems work increased by 51.7
percent, finance and administration grew by 15 percent and human
resources jumped by 16 percent. Demand for other types of consulting
work declined.

FEACO SURVEY 1995

                      Total
                      Turnover of  Share of
             No. of   Member       the Market  Management
             Member   Firms        % (by       Consulting  Other
Country      Firms    (ECU/m)      turnover)   Fees        Revenues

Belgium            27   200.19     60%           153.00     47.19
Denmark            40    62.00     30%            56.75      5.25
Finland            26     9.83     30%             8.73      1.10
France             53   503.00     50%           503.00      0.00
Germany           437   900.00     15%           900.00      0.00
Hungary            19    14.25     n/a             6.04      8.21
Italy              47   162.10     n/a           151.70     10.40
Netherlands        32   560.16     60%           270.64    289.52
Poland             39    36.00     30%            21.57     14.43
Portugal           16    25.00     n/a            19.85      5.15
Russia            173    31.00     60%            25.44      5.56
Slovakia           22     8.00     30%             6.86      1.14
Slovenia            9    11.30     n/a             7.81      3.49
Spain              21   305.00     40%           286.20     18.80
Sweden              9    75.37     n/a            45.87     29.50
Switzerland        86   200.00     25%           121.72     78.28
United
 Kingdom           32 1,450.00     60%         1,305.30    144.70
Total        1,088.00 4,553.20     34.42%      3,890.48    662.72
% Change                 -0.41%                   -9.21%   131.27%

Source: Feaco [Data was gathered in 1994 but published in 1995]

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

THE NETHERLANDS:  C&L CONSIDERS MOVE TO LIMITED LIABILITY STATUS

Coopers & Lybrand, the third-largest firm in the Netherlands, is
considering a move to limited liability status as a way of protecting
itself against litigation.

A decision to draw up a plan for incorporation was taken at a partners
meeting in September, but the final proposal is unlikely to be put to a
partnership vote before next summer, said Louk Stumpel, C&L's head of
marketing and communications. The firm is looking at incorporating all
of its operations in the Netherlands - consulting, accounting and tax,
he added.

If the plan goes ahead, C&L would be the second Big Six firm in the
Netherlands to become a limited liability company or NV. KPMG Klynveld
adopted NV status on January 1 1995, although two of its Dutch member
firms, actuarial consultancy Brans & Co and tax law firm KPMG Meijburg,
opted out of the move (MCI 65). The other Big Six have seemed reluctant
to consider incorporation.

Turnover in C&L's management consulting operations was relatively flat
in 1994, growing by less than 3 percent to DFLl84.3 million ($52.6
million). Firm-wide, revenues slipped by 2.1 percent to DFL659 million
although C&L recorded a profit of DFL26.9 million, an increase of 18.5
percent over 1993. The firm employed an average of 255 consultants in
1994.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

DEPARTURES FROM GEMINI CONSULTING

Gemini Consulting has revised the number of US consultants let go in
two rounds of job cuts earlier this year (MCI 74,71). The firm now says
only 150 were fired, not the 270 previously announced. However, the
firm acknowledged that the total number of consultants for 1995 will
average 1,400, compared with 1,700 in 1994. The difference is due to
attrition and some terminations in Europe over performance issues, a
spokesperson explained.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

RESTRUCTURING AT WILLIAM M MERCER

Employee benefits firm William M Mercer has streamlined its US
operations and revamped its senior management. Effective January 1, the
number of geographic locations has been cut from ten to five and two
vice-presidents have been promoted. Tim Lynch becomes chairman and
chief executive, while Vikesh Mahendroo is the new president of the US
firm. Peter Coster remains president of the William M Mercer companies
and its parent, Mercer Consulting Group.

William M Mercer has also sold its CHAMP database unit to HCIA for
$17.5 million in cash. HCIA will retain the 60 Mercer staff who work on
the database service which is used by more than 80 employers to analyse
and track health care costs.

As part of the transaction, HCIA and Mercer will form a strategic
alliance to further develop CHAMP. HCIA is a $50 million Baltimore-
based health care information company whose software and systems are
used by health care providers to manage the cost and delivery of health
care.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

RESULTS FROM DTTI AND E&Y

Consulting drove growth at both Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu International
and Ernst & Young in 1995. Worldwide fee income at DTTI rose 14.4
percent to $5.95 billion in the year to August 30. The firm did not
provide a fee split but said an expansion into emerging markets and the
acquisition of information technology firm ICS were among the factors
behind a record increase in revenues in fiscal 1995.

Ernst & Young reported record worldwide revenues of $6.87 billion for
the fiscal year ended September 30. This was a 14 percent increase over
the prior year and higher than its worldwide growth rate for the
previous four years combined. The firm reported"strong momentum" in
management consulting but did not provide worldwide consulting
revenues.

In the US, E&Y's revenues were up 16.9 percent to $2.97 billion, more
than double the increase in fiscal 1994. Management consulting grew by
48.2 percent in the US, and health care consulting by 42.2 percent, US
chairman Philip Laskawy said. Total US consulting revenues increased by
36 percent.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

EDS WINS ROLLS-ROYCE CONTRACT

EDS has won a ten-year #600 million ($938 million) outsourcing contract
from Rolls-Royce to run all its computer services. Some 750 information
technology staff from Rolls-Royce will move to EDS which will also open
an aerospace centre of excellence in the UK. Additionally, AT Kearney,
bought by EDS in 1995, will help Rolls-Royce's aerospace division to
improve its manufacturing and other processes.

EDS has also won a nine-year $500 million outsourcing contract from the
South Australian Government to provide IT services to 140 government
agencies.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

IRISH CONSULTANTS' FOREIGN EARNINGS

Consultants in Ireland are increasingly looking to overseas projects to
boost fee income. According to the Institute of Management Consultants
in Ireland (IMCI), foreign earnings of member firms trebled to Ir#38.21
million ($61.53 million) in the last six years. A large portion of that
was earned by the international consulting arms of the two leading
banks and the state-owned electricity company. Total revenue earned by
Irish consultants in 1993 was estimated at Ir#75 million by the IMCI.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

NORWEGIAN UNION FORMED

An association to represent the consulting profession has been formed
in Norway. Norges Bedriftsradgiverforening NBF was created in November.
Some 60 consulting firms and 200 individuals have so far applied to
join. NBF and the other three Nordic associations are also working
together to introduce a certification system for consulting firms.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

PEOPLE ON THE MOVE

Bossard has rejigged its senior management in France. Alain Donzeaud is
the new head of Bossard Consultants France, replacing Philippe Peyre
who takes over Bossard's operations in Spain and Italy and is also
charged with building the firm's activities in South America. Donzeaud
was formerly in charge of European Community projects and business
development in eastern Europe.

David Gill has resigned as finance director of Proudfoot to become
finance director of First Choice, a #1 billion ($1.56 billion) UK
company. He has been replaced by Robert Cara, currently Proudfoot's
regional vice-president of finance for Asia Pacific. Cara has been with
Proudfoot for 16 years.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BRANDING - THE ULTIMATE GOAL

From the old-fashioned Coca-Cola bottle to American Express' "Accepted
Worldwide" message, every company wants a consistent image that builds
brand loyalty and consumer confidence. So, too, do consultants, as
Karin Ronnow finds out

Branding, as it is dubbed by the marketing gurus, has taken on
increasing importance in the hyper-competitive, global consulting
marketplace. Many of the international consulting firms have invested
in branding over the years, but those that ignored it are now finding
that it has merit.

Branding takes two forms - the "message" about what the firm is, and
how that plays out in a physical "look" and "feel". For consulting
firms, the message has always been the primary emphasis. But, as firms
become more global, they are finding that a universal "look" is equally
important.

"Branding is something that creates loyalty, premium pricing potential
and better distribution and market acceptance," said Allan Steinmetz,
Arthur D Little's senior vice-president and corporate director of
marketing.

"That's why companies invest so much in it. Setting standards with
regard to corporate identity, the look and feel, from business cards to
brochures to presentation styles . . . It is a common denominator that
creates an asset value for a corporation."

Bain, for example, is taking a new look at branding. The firm has
relied heavily on its 23-year history on face-to-face contact to
communicate its message of "results". Bain doesn't advertise, so client
contacts are the only opportunity to "describe what we do, how we do it
and how it is a different product or process than our major
competitors", Bain director David Bechoffer said.

But in the past year it has become clear that while Bain is consistent
in "cross-office" delivery, the firm has not always looked like it
delivered that consistency, Bechoffer said. "We have grown incredibly
quickly over the past three or four years and we didn't all `look' the
same," Bechoffer said. "So we went through a major exercise to develop
a standards log and we will now have material that will be top-to-
bottom consistent to reinforce the strength of what we say, from
letterhead to business cards. So when we have people from five offices
working on a project, the clients see one firm and not five offices.
And that does mean something in the long run."

Brand is "a very deep discussion for a firm", said Kathleen Reichert,
vice-president of marketing and communication for AT Kearney.

The recent acquisition of AT Kearney by Electronic Data Systems - two
markedly different firms - creates a challenge for Reichert, who must
define how the expanded Kearney looks and communicates.

In its former incarnation, AT Kearney had a definite, conservative
look, best defined by the "Kearney grey", which permeated the firm,
from literature to the walls of its downtown Chicago headquarters. EDS
has presented a more outgoing, innovative image.

"We are still in the process of looking at how we want to brand the new
AT Kearney," she said. "At this point, we want to retain the AT Kearney
logo, which we think provides continuity and allows us to draw from
some of AT Kearney's strengths and traditions.

"We are reviewing the introduction of colour, the use of visuals that
express the excitement, change and some of the important strategic
thrusts we hope to be undertaking over the next three- year period."

Brand defines the firm to the outside world but also helps build a
culture internally. Arthur D Little sees its brand largely as its
"personality", which the firm defines as "confident, aggressive, easy
to work with, learning with clients side by side, in conjunction with
deep knowledge and experience in three distinct lines of business",
ADL's Steinmetz said. Consultants are charged with conveying that
message in any client contact.

But visually conveying the message is important too, and ADL has a
three-ring binder of "Corporate Graphic Standards", which details the
size, shape and look of all corporate brochures, biography sheets, fact
and office lists, corporate statements, letterhead, business cards and
mailing labels. The colour and placement of the ADL logo on a page, the
size of the font, and full-length and abbreviated versions of ADL's
identity statements are all spelled out to ensure continuity around the
world.

"We went through an exhaustive brand identity review about eight years
ago and it was designed to give us a global, more contemporary feel
about who we were," Steinmetz said. "We hired an outside identity
consulting firm that specialises in this area and this is what they
recommended. We conducted client research and this is the one theme
most reflective of what we wanted to be known for."

A distinct personality has added importance for Andersen Consulting.
Along with selling itself, AC must also distinguish its services from
those of its sister firm, Arthur Andersen, which sells some consulting
services as well as tax and auditing. AC stresses that it offers
different services and that its clients are dissimilar.

"The biggest problem is perception," AC partner Jim Murphy said.
"Andersen Consulting is only six years old . . . so we continue to work
on setting up separate brands. There are parts of it that are the same -
 integrity, professionalism. But in the audit and tax business, you
need a heavy emphasis on conservative steadiness. In our business, you
need an emphasis on creativity, innovation, sharing risks. It's a whole
different personality, a whole different brand."

For itself, AC stresses its commitment to being a global firm. And,
while it has invested in consistent visual messages, the idea of "the
message" is emphasised to new hires from their first day on the job.

"Most important is something that we don't own, our clients own, it's
in their head, and that is our promise to them as an organisation,"
Murphy said."It comes to life not only in advertising, literature and
signage, but how people act on the job, how we sell, what kind of
clients we have, what we do. All of this has to be part of the built-in
culture. It comes out of our training, the acculturation process. The
idea of what Andersen Consulting stands for as a brand is put in front
of all our employees."

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

HIGHLIGHTS OF 1995

Mergers, acquisitions and lawsuits characterised the consulting
industry in 1995. The year saw the biggest ever acquisition of one
consulting firm by another, as well as the largest legal action to be
mounted against a consultant. William Gleeson looks back at the major
news stories

JANUARY

The year started with the theme "out with the old and in with the new".
KPMG Switzerland swept away its old management team, replacing it with
new faces in the boardroom. The changes came after two years of flat
growth at the firm. Jacob Baer took over as head of a four-person
management committee following the departure of Hugh Mathews, who was
formerly joint managing partner with Baer.

Ernst & Young found itself on the wrong end of the first writ of the
year over a claim for several million pounds from North West Thames
Regional Health Authority in the UK. The dispute centred on E&Y's
alleged failure to meet a deadline for the completion of a consultancy
project to give the authority a new payroll system and financial
systems mainframe.

FEBRUARY

The year was punctuated by job loss announcements. One of the earliest
was Ernst & Young's disclosure of changes to its US actuarial and
special services practices.

The actuarial, benefits and compensation unit was renamed "human
resources" and reorganised into 11 locations, down from 20. At the same
time, E&Y's mergers, acquisitions, reorganisations and insolvency
practice was renamed "financial advisory services" and concentrated at
19 locations. As a result of the changes, around 100 people left the
firm.

CSC continued its expansion in Europe with the acquisition of German
information technology consulting firm, Ploenzke. At the same time, CSC
acquired SODI, the small international consulting arm of Groupe
Ouroumoff in France. This followed the acquisition of Ouroumoff
Consultants in 1994.

George Cox, former chairman of P-E International, became the UK chief
executive of Unisys. His hiring was the latest in a line of about 70
high flying consultants taken on at the systems firm.

MARCH

Another major theme during the year was the shift to "global"
consulting practices. Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu International led the
pack with its announced plans for a global practice, but DTTI denied it
would split consulting from audit and tax as Arthur Andersen and
Andersen Consulting had done in 1989. (Further details emerged as the
year progressed).

The century old names of "Peat" and "Marwick" officially disappeared
when KPMG Peat Marwick in the UK announced that as part of its
incorporation plans, the firm was renaming itself KPMG. In the US,
Deloitte and Touche acquired the Canadian firm, International
Consulting Solutions, a SAP software implementation company. The new
business was called ICS Deloitte, employing 700 professionals.

Victor Millar resigned as head of Unisys Worldwide Information Services
to run a new consulting unit at AT&T, the US telecommunications
company. The move by the communications giant into the crowded
consulting market created yet another consulting, systems integration
and outsourcing competitor for the big international consulting firms -
and pointed up the value of consulting in selling other information
technology services.

The consultancy profession in the UK voiced its disapproval of a
government scheme to set up a register of consultants to assist
companies in choosing suitable advisers. The consultants argued that
the scheme was too expensive and bureaucratic and would jeopardise
client confidentiality.

APRIL

Ernst & Young and mid-tier US accounting and consulting firm Kenneth
Leventhal, which specialises in real estate work, announced a merger.
Leventhal was formerly the US member firm of CKL International, the
15th-largest international accounting and consulting network.

Rumours emerged that EDS was set to make a bid for AT Kearney but this
was strongly denied by both firms. "We have no need or desire to sell
the firm," said Kearney's chief executive Fred Steingraber. Meanwhile,
it emerged that EDS's fledgling management consulting arm had a $22
million loss in 1994 on revenues estimated by MCI at $180 million. The
firm attributed the losses to start-up costs.

Andersen Consulting, on the other hand, reported worldwide revenue up
20 percent to $3.45 billion.

MAY

In what appeared to be the largest lawsuit to date against a consulting
firm, UOP, an Illinois-based engineering company, filed a $100 million
suit against Andersen Consulting, alleging fraud, incompetence and
negligence.

It was the latest in a string of lawsuits against consultants and
underscored that consultancies are as much at risk from legal actions
for negligence as the accounting firms. UOP, which licenses petroleum
and gas processing technologies, claimed that Andersen bungled the
development of two computer systems intended to streamline the
preparation of engineering specifications and project cost estimates.

Ernst & Young's London practice announced plans for a radical
restructuring of part of its operations along multi-disciplinary lines.
Consultants, auditors and tax advisers were grouped together to serve
specific market sectors: financial services, media and resources,
industrial and consumer services and owner- managed businesses. About
90 of the 400 UK consultants were deployed in the new groups.

Proudfoot also announced plans to change the way it does things. The
firm said it would revamp its product, improve its internal operations
and launch its first ever global marketing drive. It also announced
results showing the severest drop in revenues in its history for its
core productivity services in Europe. Overall, turnover plummeted 24
percent to #106 million ($165.6 million). Some 150 jobs had been shed
in the year to March, bringing the total workforce to 700.

Mercer Management Consulting expanded its presence in Europe by
acquiring MID, a mid-sized French strategy firm, and announcing plans
to open an office in Madrid. The acquisition boosted the number of
Mercer consultants in Europe to 250, up from 70 two years ago.

JUNE

More writs, this time in Australia where Price Waterhouse Urwick was
sued for the largest claim for damages brought against a firm of
management consultants in that country. The firm was sued for $A13
million ($9.8 million) by a failed museum venture and its developer,
for engaging in alleged misleading and deceptive conduct and for breach
of contract. The claim centred on a report predicting the likely number
of visitors to the museum.

The month saw also more bad news for PW, this time in Canada. The firm
announced the closure of its Quebec IT office due to major cutbacks in
consulting work from the Quebec Government.

OC&C, the former strategic consulting arm of Coopers & Lybrand, said it
planned to establish a base in North America and Germany within a year
as part of an international growth strategy. The firm, which has
offices in London, Paris and Rotterdam, left C&L in April.

JULY

After a series of on-again, off-again talks, EDS acquired AT Kearney to
create a $550 million business with more than 2,300 consultants. It was
the first significant move by an IT firm into the upper echelon of
consulting leagues.

The deal signalled the growing polarisation between the so-called super
providers of integrated consulting services and the rest of the pack.
EDS paid $300 million in cash. Additionally, to retain key staff, some
200 Kearney executives received about 7 million shares of class E
General Motors stock, vested over ten years. The GME stock tracks EDS
business and was valued at $296 million.

There was bad news at Gemini Consulting which laid off some 170 staff -
8 percent of its worldwide employees (since revised, see page 6). Most
of the lay-offs were in the US. The cuts came amid rumours of senior
level disagreements within the firm and the abrupt departure of the
former chairman and chief executive David Teiger.

AUGUST/SEPTEMBER

Andersen Consulting started litigation proceedings against rival
consulting firm, American Management Systems, alleging copyright
infringement, breach of contract and intentional interference with
Andersen's business opportunities. Andersen contended that AMS copied
AC's proprietary tax administration system design and demanded $20
million in lost profits and damages.

Another firm revealed some of its globalisation plans. Ernst & Young
replaced its European Consulting Group with a new legal entity, Global
Client Consulting, in a move towards developing a global consulting
practice. The new group will service major clients in large-scale,
multi-year contracts.

General Motors announced plans to spin off EDS in a move designed to
allow EDS to pursue its strategic objectives more effectively. CSC
Index pulled out of Korea just months after closing its Japan operation
acknowledging a "substantial" loss on its Asia venture. And Coopers &
Lybrand agreed to pay the state of Arizona $750,000 after a long-
running investigation into alleged bidding improprieties in the award
of a consulting contract. C&L denied any wrongdoing.

Most of KPMG's consultants in Adelaide defected to Coopers & Lybrand.
The three partners who defected said KPMG's federated organisational
structure in Australia - where each state has its own management
structure and reporting lines - was an obstacle to building a national
practice in Australia.

OCTOBER

American Management Systems struck back in the copyright dispute with
Andersen Consulting. AMS filed a counter lawsuit, charging defamation
and accusing Andersen of trying to damage AMS's business prospects and
reputation. According to AMS, Andersen contacted AMS clients claiming
ownership of the tax system design which AMS was using. A New York
district court denied Andersen's request for an injunction to prevent
AMS from using the disputed tax system design.

NOVEMBER

More job losses. Gemini Consulting laid-off 100 employees in the second
round of redundancies at the firm in the year. The cuts followed months
of turmoil at the firm, including the sudden departure of new chief
executive, Dan Valentino, and a slide in US revenues.

Yet another in a long line of reorganisations at Proudfoot, the
publicly-quoted consultancy which has seen its revenues and share price
dwindle in recent years. This time, the company announced plans to
revamp its management structure in the US, dramatically scale back its
Mexico operations and centralise control over its business development
and operational activities. Malcolm Hughes, the chief executive
appointed in October 1994, said"this is my one and only restructuring.
It is what I was brought in to do. I think it will result in a
turnaround fairly quickly."

Deloitte and Touche in the US and Touche Ross in the UK said they were
on the brink of forming a transatlantic alliance of their consulting
practices. The move follows the creation of Deloitte & Touche
Consulting Group in the US as a separate division of the US firm.

Andersen Consulting announced plans to make a physical break with
Arthur Andersen by leaving the worldwide headquarters of the firm in
Chicago. The firms legally split in 1989. Some observers say the move
was inspired by Andersen Consulting's desire to distance itself from
Arthur Andersen, the accounting part of the firm, as AA attempts to
develop its own consulting practice.

DECEMBER

Amdahl came out as victor in the battle for Canadian technology
services company, DMR, after outbidding its two rivals, IBM Canada and
BDM International of the US. The deal created another giant in the
growing services and solutions marketplace, which is increasingly
posing a threat to the traditional management consultancies.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE

Managing change may be the core activity of a consultant's work, but
observing change is also part of the job. Ed Hendricks, who retires as
president of ACME, the US-based association of management consulting
firms, at the end of December, looks back on his years with the
association

In the nearly 17 years that I have been on the staff of ACME, I have
had the benefit of an unparalleled overview of the worldwide consulting
marketplace. To say that there have been significant changes in the
profession over those years would be a gross understatement. And, any
attempt to capture all of those changes would be futile. However, as I
prepare to leave the association at the end of 1995, I did want to
share some of my observations.

The late 1970s and early 1980s were the end of the era of the big name
owner/founder firms. These were the days of the Dick Pagets and Carl
Sloanes (among others) who, by force of their personalities, maintained
the image of consulting as a "gentlemen's club".

There was a desire among the firms to share information and to help
each other out. As Carl Sloane put it at an ACME meeting, "You do good
work we all benefit, you do bad work we all suffer." There was also a
strong belief in professionalism, translated into standards of
practice, which had the effect of limiting competition while fostering
the development of personal relationships and even friendships among
the heads of firms.

By the 1980s, different types of organisations began to enter the
consulting arena. Driven by the "Big Eight" accounting firms' move into
consulting in a concerted way, marketing activities were increased, and
some practitioners even began to use the word "sell" in the same
sentence as "consulting services", much to the chagrin of the purists.

Bigness and one-stop shopping came into vogue and acquisitions and
mergers became the norm. Many of the founders/owners took this
opportunity to capitalise on their investments, and their firms were
acquired by larger entities. The resulting mega-firms required a
different type of management structure, and a"revolving door" in the
chief executive's position was not unusual.

Relationships became more professional than personal in nature,
resulting in some hesitancy in sharing information.

A slowdown in overall growth in the early 1990s caused many consulting
firms to increase their marketing efforts and to experiment with the
use of advertising and other ways to differentiate themselves from the
competition. And, firms began to look for other services to provide, in
addition to consulting advice.

Training programmes, software and outsourcing activities became common
ancillary services offered by consulting firms. As clients began to
increasingly demand experienced consultants to work on their projects,
consulting firms found themselves caught in a price compression
situation. In many cases, profits suffered and competition increased.

Throughout the early and mid-1990s, consulting firms found themselves
under increasing pressure from a variety of sources. Outplaced
executives from client companies formed their own consulting firms and
competed for the work they had previously contracted out. Clients began
to demand that consulting firms share the risk of change with them, and
contingency fees, value added bonus plans, and other billing
arrangements based on the successful implementation of the consultant's
recommendations became more common.

Technology became an important part of almost every consulting
assignment. As a result, consulting firms either began or increased
spending on their own technological infrastructure. No longer was the
capital of a consulting firm to be found only in its people.

Running a consulting firm became a very expensive proposition. Big
corporations like IBM and EDS saw consulting as a way of expanding
their product and service offerings and explored different ways of
entering the field. Competition for senior level staff accelerated and
executive search firms were kept busy by consulting firms.

Experimentation with management structures and delivery mechanisms were
additional challenges confronting consulting firms in the 1990s. Some
firms chose to centralise consulting services under one key executive.
Others chose to segment by industry, service offering or geography, and
yet more developed a hybrid of styles.

Despite the challenges of the mid-1990s, it has been a boom time for
most firms. Record revenues have been reported by many firms, and the
short-term future seems to be bright. But if history is any predictor,
the pendulum will shift again!

So what do I see for the future?

For one thing, I foresee additional mergers between some quite large
firms with others being acquired by so-called non- traditional
competitors. I would not be surprised to see consulting operations
being spun-off to become publicly-held companies through stock
offerings.

Traditional partnerships are going to find it increasingly difficult to
derive the financing for very large outsourcing opportunities and
technological requirements.

Lawsuits against consulting firms can also not be far off as clients
demand higher levels of success in project implementation.

And, consulting firms are going to have to devise new ways of dealing
with a diverse workforce that is more concerned with lifestyle issues
and may not be willing to accept the heavy travel schedules and
workload pressures of their predecessors.

Although I am leaving ACME, I do so with a great deal of respect for
our profession. Consultants are truly agents of change. As such, they
carry a great burden to operate at the very highest standards of
integrity. Almost without exception, the consultants I have met have
borne that burden with dignity.

Editor's Note: Ed plans to become a professional speaker and consultant
to consulting firms. He can be contacted through ACME at 1-212-697
9693.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SWITZERLAND: A SOPHISTICATED MARKET

The competitive Swiss consulting market is attracting international
firms while local consultancies are starting to work outside
Switzerland. Sandra Burke reports

For its size, the Swiss consulting market is highly sophisticated.
Switzerland has more consultants per head of population than any other
country, reflecting in part the large number of Swiss multinational
corporations and the foreign multinationals with European headquarters
in Switzerland, all seeking top class advice.

As a result, many of the international consultancies and IT providers
have opened offices. They share the market with a number of independent
mid-sized local firms and a large collection of sole practitioners. The
latest arrivals in 1995 included Bossard Consultants and American
Management Systems. Gemini Consulting established a presence in 1994.

Despite the attractions, however, the Swiss market has some inherent
problems. Fee rates are up to 20 percent higher than in neighbouring
countries. This, together with a strong Swiss franc, has caused
problems for some consultants as clients turn to cheaper German
consultancies, or seek to pay in deutschmarks or dollars.

Other constraints have been the lingering effects of the recession, a
small hiring pool, and the moves by many Swiss firms to relocate in
cheaper countries, thus obviating the need for consultants. Foreign
consultants with lower pricing structures are also entering the Swiss
market, forcing local players to discount their rates. This is
especially true in delivery areas such as SAP, according to consultants
interviewed by MCI.

Not all consultancies, however, have been affected by these trends. The
strategy houses are doing well, reflecting the desire of major Swiss
multinationals for international know-how, regardless of price.

Altogether, the size of the Swiss consulting market is estimated at
SKr500 million ($439 million) to SKr600 million. But the market is
highly fragmented. Turnover among the top 25 firms totalled SKr344.2
million in 1994. But the three leading firms - McKinsey, Coopers &
Lybrand and CSC - held about 20 percent of the market.

Consultants interviewed estimated overall market growth in 1995 at
between 5 percent and 10 percent.

Performance in 1994 varied widely among the firms. The strategy houses,
in particular, did well, reflecting the desire of major Swiss
multinationals for international know-how, regardless of price.

Switzerland is an "extremely attractive" market for Bain, said managing
director Janet Voute-Allen. "I think what's unique to Switzerland is
that the top companies are highly international. The top 20 make a very
small percentage of their sales in Switzerland. So, they require [a
consultancy] with an international office network," she said.

Bain has 30 consultants working in Switzerland, of which 13 are based
there. The firm plans to double its local staff so assignments can be
staffed locally. The office was established in 1990 and has seen 100
percent growth per annum in the last three years, Voute-Allen said.

In Switzerland, Bain is working in the retail, pharmaceutical, high
tech, construction and consumer goods sectors, but not, surprisingly,
in financial services although the firm is in discussions on some
assignments now.

"We see a shift away from looking inside at costs and organisation and
looking out at growth strategies. That's good for companies and good
for us," Voute-Allen said. "Cost optimisation is essential and must
continue. But it's not everything."

At Coopers & Lybrand, consulting turnover doubled over the last four
years and the firm expects growth of 18 percent to 20 percent in 1995,
said Tony Haas, managing partner. Cross-border work is still a small
portion of C&L's consulting business in Switzerland but will form a
larger part in future, especially on big projects, Haas said.
Currently, the Swiss firm is working closely with its sister firm in
Germany.

The firm is well placed in the telecommunications, public sector and
health care sector, but less strong in financial services in part
because C&L was owned by Swiss Bank Corporation until 1991, Haas said.
"We are still a little bit behind [in financial services] but growing,"
Haas said.

KPMG reorganised its operations in 1994 after two years of flat growth
(MCI 65). As a result, there was a "reduction in volume" in 1994 over
1993, said Bruce Mathers, partner in charge of management consulting.
Demand was higher in 1995 and the firm was hoping for a 15 percent
growth in the consulting practice, Mathers said.

As part of the reorganisation, KPMG created separate consulting groups
in banking, insurance, consulting to central and eastern Europe,
standard software implementation (predominantly SAP), IT consulting
(which offers advice on hardware and software selection) and corporate
finance.

"We are organised into smallish groups with a very clear focus on each.
That was a conscious change. We used to have everyone in one management
consulting pot. We have split it down to make sure development and
marketing activities are more focused," Mathers said.

Plans to create a banking industry group which would combine audit, tax
and consulting had to be shelved after the Federal Banking Commission
expressed reservations, he said.

The firm has also postponed plans to create other industry specific
groups like those in the UK and US. "They are large enough to split
into industry specific groups. For us, that is still a couple of years
down the road in terms of allocating consultants to particular
industries," Mathers said.

In Switzerland, KPMG is doing particularly well in corporate finance
and corporate recovery work as well as in SAP and business process re-
engineering, Mathers said. "What is limiting our growth is the
availability of qualified personnel," he added.

Deloitte & Touche, which has the smallest consulting practice of any of
the Big Six firms in Switzerland, reported record growth in 1994
following a relaunch of the consulting operation. This was achieved in
part by hiring a team from a rival Big Six firm.

"Consulting firms in Switzerland have always had cyclic expansion and
contraction," said Daniel Meister, head of D&T's Swiss consulting
practice. "The Swiss firm made a decision [to expand consulting]
because they felt and still feel that besides the audit potential to
grow - and they see less opportunity in that area - they realise they
need a well- managed consulting group to support them in keeping
clients and adding value to clients."

The 1995 acquisition of Canadian SAP specialists ICS - which had an
operation in Basel - also contributed to growth, Meister said. D&T has
targeted the health care, pharmaceuticals, financial services and
logistics/distribution sectors, he said. With ICS primarily involved in
pharmaceuticals in Switzerland, "this has been a boost to our
opportunities from a re-engineering perspective", Meister said.

D&T is also considering supplementing its SAP services with Oracle
business application skills. It is likely to retain its niche training
services in Word, Excel and other packages. "In Switzerland, PC
training has always been important. It's never grown a lot but it has
added some volume. I don't see it as strategic, but it is profitable,"
Meister said.

Among the Swiss firms, revenues were flat at ICME in 1994 compared with
1993, according to partner Gian Saratz, although the firm showed a 7
percent increase when its international revenue was taken into account.
ICME offers a range of general consulting services and has subsidiaries
in France and Germany. About half the clients are in banking, insurance
and telecommunications with the rest in the manufacturing, chemical and
pharmaceutical sectors.

Saratz blamed the recession and the firm's international focus for its
lack-lustre performance in Switzerland. "The market has become much
tougher. Also, we put our strength quite a bit abroad to support our
other companies so we neglected Switzerland a bit."

Helbling Management Consulting reported revenues of SKr11 million in
1994 and expects to increase that to SKr13 million in 1995, according
to Reto Muller, managing director. In addition, the firm will have SKr3
million from its German operation.

Muller attributed the increase to a gain in market share at the expense
of smaller Swiss consultancies. "Firms with less than SKr10 million
face difficulties," he noted. His firm, which provides strategy
consulting and counts McKinsey and The Boston Consulting Group among
its competitors, also benefits from its lower fee structure compared to
the bigger strategy firms.

"We have lower rates. Our daily fees are on average SKr2,700 [compared
to SKr4,000 to SKr5,000 per day at other strategy firms]. So we are
still very competitive compared to the big ones. We won three contracts
against McKinsey and BCG in Germany and Switzerland this year. We
compete in certain areas such as corporate restructuring, time-based
management . . . We do not compete in international market studies."

Helbling's target clients are companies with annual turnover of SKr20
million to SKr1 billion, Muller added. In addition to the management
consulting business, the Helbling Group has four other subsidiaries: a
mergers and acquisitions unit; a product design and automation unit
comprising 120 professionals, mainly engineers; an EDP company
specialising in computer-aided design software for engineers; and an
environmental unit, Muller said.

"We expect next year a lot of assignments in financial and corporate
restructuring and also a lot of profit improvement and turnaround
assignments. Also, new public management. There is an increasing demand
for those types of services," he said.

SCG St. Gallen Consulting Group estimates 1995 Swiss revenues at
SKr10.8 million, up 20 percent over 1994. Founded in 1984, the firm has
retained its close ties with the University of St. Gallen. In addition
to its headquarters in the town of St. Gallen near the German border,
the firm has an office near Geneva in the French- speaking part of
Switzerland along with offices in Frankfurt, Leipzig and London. Total
revenue was SKr25.7 million in 1994, nearly half of which was derived
in Switzerland. SCG is fully independent and partner-owned.

"We've been international from the beginning because the founders had
worked internationally. Switzerland being a small country, for growth
to be obtained, it is necessary to grow internationally. If you were
only working in Switzerland, growth would be limited," said consultant
Peter Fanconi.

The firm specialises in strategy but also in organisation and corporate
development, management systems, marketing and sales, business re-
engineering and human resources (especially management and leadership).

SCG's clients are primarily in the financial services and retail
sectors but the firm is increasingly working in the public sector and
industry (especially energy, IT and telecommunications).

At TC Team Consult, revenues were flat in 1994. The firm specialises in
four sectors: police and security, family-owned companies, the public
sector and the postal services. The Swiss holding company owns all of
the Swiss practice plus a 5 percent to 10 percent stake in Team
Consult's subsidiaries in the Netherlands, Belgium and Austria.

Nearly three years ago, Bossard Consultants of France took a 20 percent
stake in Team Consult (MCI 45) with plans to boost that to 51 percent
and use TC to build a Swiss business. That appears not to have
progressed. Bossard retains the 20 percent ownership but the firms do
not work closely together and Bossard has recently opened its own
office in Zurich. Currently, Bossard has two people in Switzerland,
although up to 20 consultants from Bossard's French office have been
working in the French-speaking part of the country. The firm is seeking
a Swiss partner, said Hans-Joachim Diedenhofen, partner in charge of
the Swiss operation.

Other Swiss firms include Hayek Engineering with estimated revenues of
SKr12.5 million; Gherzi which specialises in the textiles sector and
has estimated income of SKr18.6 million; APP Informatik which is
primarily involved in information technology; BSG in St. Gallen which
offers strategy, organisational and IT consulting; Abegglen & Partners
which provides general management consulting to the services sector
including retail and telecommunications; and Management Zentrum, also
in St. Gallen.

Trends elsewhere are also manifest in Switzerland but with some
differences. Recruitment, for example, can be tougher in Switzerland
than elsewhere due to the country's small population and relatively
large consulting market resulting in a much smaller pool of potential
recruits. Tough laws on foreign workers also make hiring consultants
from elsewhere a challenge.

Globalisation has not hit the local Swiss firms, but many are already
working outside Switzerland, primarily in Germany.

"On a Swiss base, we are a large company. On a European scale, we are
in the problem field," said Saratz of ICME. "We are trying to grow
either by ourselves or by alliances." Besides Switzerland, ICME is
concentrating on the French, German and Austrian markets. The firm is
also doing work in Spain and Italy through a local partner, albeit
mainly for Swiss, French and German clients, he said.

Helbling opened its first German office four years ago and now has
small bases in Dusseldorf, Stuttgart and Munich. After building up the
German practice, the firm plans to expand into other countries, Muller
said.

Looking ahead, consultants anticipate increased fee pressure and a
shake-out among the mid-sized firms. "Fees are always a topic,"
observed KPMG's Mathers. "You certainly have to be very competitive."

One company, Stiftung BWI, which was associated with the technical
university in Zurich, announced in November that it would cease its
consulting operations. The firm's 1994 turnover was SKr8.1 million,
down 4.7 percent over the previous year, according to Klaus Wernihk,
the interim director who is overseeing BWI's wind-up.

The institute had 40 consultants and offered a range of general
services. Fee rates were reportedly lower than at competing small and
medium Swiss firms in part because BWI could draw on students to
conduct some of its economic studies.

But BWI, which was created before the advent of specialty consulting
and international competition, had outlived its time, Wernihk said.
Some of its core activities may be spun off through management buy-
outs, he added.

Perhaps the greatest challenge facing consulting firms in Switzerland
is to get their transaction costs down. Some firms, like Coopers &
Lybrand, have reduced their rates and in certain cases are proposing
fixed fees rather than daily rates.

"We have to prove we offer more value for money," said C&L's Haas.
While firms can command high fees for strategy advice, delivery or
implementation work is priced at a much lower level.

"We are between the two," Haas said. "If we work on a project finding a
solution, then fees are not a problem. But on implementation, which can
take months or years, [the return is] lower."

"It's up to the whole consulting industry to improve its productivity,"
he added. "If we have the right mix between high and medium level
consulting and implementation work, profitability will be sustained.
It's also a function of the size of the firm. With 20, 30 or 40 people,
that's dangerous. But with 100 and more, you can survive."

"Clients are looking for more commodity-type support," observed D&T's
Meister. "One of the ways out is to specialise and leverage, add value
in more intense proportions. In the past, it was not unheard of that
consulting firms customised software programmes for clients at prime
rates. Today, we are using objects, modules etc to bring the cost
down."

Others are looking beyond the current focus on implementation. "In
Switzerland, McKinsey has a very strong position on the strategic side.
We don't intend to leave that area to them forever," said KPMG's
Mathers."We must get closer to the decision-making area as well as
implementation, we must be able to offer the entire range. At the
moment, our services tend to be more on [the] implementation end."

LEADING SWISS CONSULTANCIES OFFICES OPENED AND CLOSED

Firm                         Offices opened      Offices closed
                             in 1994             in 1994

AMS Management Systems       Bern(1)             None
Bossard Consultants          Zurich(1)           n/a
Gemini Consulting            Zurich              n/a
Mummert + Partner            Bern(2)             None

(1) 1995
(2) 1996

Source: Management Consultant International

NEW PARTNERS(1) APPOINTED IN 1994(2)

Firm                         Number of partners

Abegglen & Partners          2
ICME Management Consultants  4
STG-Coopers & Lybrand        3

(1) Or partner equivalent
(2) Or equivalent fiscal year

Source: Management Consultant International

LEADING SWISS CONSULTANCIES - RANKED BY REVENUE

                           Most         Previous
                           recent       year's       Growth   Effec-
                           revenue      revenue      rate     tive
                           (SFr/m)      (SFr/m)      (%)      date

McKinsey & Co              55.0(1)      48.0(1)       15.0(1) Dec 94
STG-Coopers & Lybrand
 Consulting                36.0         28.0          28.6    Dec 94
CSC/CSC Ploenzke           28.0(2)      24.0          16.7(2) Dec 95
Andersen Consulting        21.8          n/a           n/a    Dec 94
AMS Management Systems     20.0(2,3,4)   n/a           n/a    Dec 95
ATAG Ernst & Young         20.0(1)      19.5(1)        2.6(1) Dec 94
Price Waterhouse
 Management Consultants    15.0         12.0          25.0    Jun 95
The Boston Consulting
 Group                     14.1(1)      11.4(1)       23.7(1) Dec 94
KPMG Fides                 13.05         n/a           n/a    Dec 94
Visura(6)                  12.5(2)      12.5(2)        0.0(2) Dec 94
Knight Wendling            12.0         10.5          14.3    Dec 94
Helbling Management
 Consulting                11.0          9.4          17.0    Dec 94
SCG St Gallen Consulting
 Group                     10.8          9.0(1)       20.0    Dec 95
Arthur D Little            10.5          2.5(7)        n/a    Dec 94
ICME Management
 Consultants               10.0(2)      10.0(2)        0.0(2) Dec 94
BSG                         8.6          8.6           0.0    Dec 94
Bain & Company              8.5(1)       n/a           n/a    Dec 94
IBM Consulting Group        8.0(1)       n/a           n/a    Dec 95
Deloitte & Touche           6.3          2.5         152.0    Aug 95
Abegglen & Partners         5.1          5.3          -3.8    Dec 94
TC Team Consult             4.5          4.0           1.3    Dec 95
Kurt Salmon Associates      4.1          3.4          20.6    Dec 94
PRASA Hewitt International  3.8(1)       n/a           n/a    Dec 94
Mummert + Partner           3.6          1.5         140.0    Dec 94
Kepner Tregoe               2.0(9)       1.5(9)       33.3    Dec 94

                                                        Revenue
                       Number      Number               per
                       of          of          Total    consultant
Firm                   consultants partners(1) staff    (SFr)

McKinsey & Co          100(1)      n/a         125(1)     550,000(1)
STG-Coopers & Lybrand
 Consulting            130          14         150        276,900
CSC/CSC Ploenzke        83           5         112        337,300(2)
Andersen Consulting     77         n/a          93        283,100
AMS Management Systems  13         n/a          14            n/a
ATAG Ernst & Young     n/a         n/a         n/a            n/a
Price Waterhouse
 Management Consultants 53           2          62        283,000
The Boston Consulting
 Group                  32         n/a         n/a        440,600(1)
KPMG Fides              40(5)        5         n/a        325,000
Visura(6)               65(2)        7          80(2)     192,300(2)
Knight Wendling         22         n/a          30        545,500
Helbling Management
 Consulting             28           2          36        392,900
SCG St Gallen Consulting
 Group                  55         n/a         n/a        196,400
Arthur D Little          8         n/a          13      1,312,500
ICME Management
 Consultants            30          12          50        333,300(2)
BSG                     19          12          24        452,600
Bain & Company          25(8)        1         302        340,000(1)
IBM Consulting Group    25         n/a          28        320,000(1)
Deloitte & Touche       25         n/a          27        252,000
Abegglen & Partners     17           7          20        300,000
TC Team Consult         15           5          20(2)     300,000
Kurt Salmon Associates   8           2          10        512,500
PRASA Hewitt
 International          25         n/a          90        152,000(1)
Mummert + Partner       10         n/a          13        360,000
Kepner Tregoe            4         n/a           6        500,000

(1) Estimated by MCI
(2) Estimated by firm
(3) Includes revenue earned from services and products delivered to
Swiss clients regardless of the AMS office providing services
(4) Office opened in March 1995
(5) Figures include corporate finance
(6) Visura is the Swiss member of BDO Binder
(7) Office opened in August 1993
(8) Includes 15 consultants from other Bain offices working in
Switzerland
(9) Gross revenue

NOTE: This list is not intended to be exhaustive. Other firms were
contacted but did not respond.

n/a = not available

Source:  Management Consultant International

LEADING SWISS CONSULTANCIES - FEE SPLIT (%)

Firm            IT    Str  Fncl  FM  HR  Ex S  CM  Mktg  Ops  Other

Abegglen &
 Partners        -    32    -    19   24  -    11   -     -   14(1)
Arthur D Little  -    60    -     -    -  -     -   -    20   20(2)
BSG             15    25    5     5    - 15     5   5     5   20(3)
CSC/
 CSC Ploenzke   65    30    -     5    -  -     -   -     -    -
Deloitte &
 Touche         25(4)  8   20     -    -  -     -   -     -   47(5)
Helbling
 Management
 Consulting      -    25    -     5    -  -    10  10    20   30(1)
IBM Consulting
 Group          35    15    -     -    -  -    20   -     -   30(1)
Kepner Tregoe    -    85    -     -   15  -     -   -     -    -
Knight Wendling  -    30    -     -   20 20     -   -     -   30(1)
KPMG Fides      24    14   19     -    -  -     -   -    26   17(1)
Mummert +
 Partner        30    20    -     -    -  -     -   -     -   50(1)
PRASA Hewitt
 International   -     -    -     -  100  -     -   -     -    -
Price Waterhouse
 Management
 Consultants    35     5   15     -    5  -    20   -     -   20(1)
STG-Coopers &
 Lybrand        35    15    -     -    -  -     -   -     -   50(6)
Visura          30    20   30     -    -  -     -   -     -   20(1)

IT   = Information Technology
Str  = Strategy and Organisation
Fncl = Financial
FM   = Facilities and Project Management
HR   = Human Resources
Ex S = Executive Search
CM   = Change Management
Mktg = Marketing
Ops  = Operations Management

(1) Includes business process re-engineering
(2) Information management
(3) Includes technology and business process re-engineering
(4) Technology
(5) Includes 25 percent business process re-engineering and 22
percent PC training
(6) Performance improvement

Source: Management Consultant International

LEADING SWISS CONSULTANCIES - INDUSTRY SPLIT (%)

Firm                  Fin   Prod   Utilities   Dist   Trans   Health

Abegglen & Partners    -     -     -           31      -       7
AMS Management
 Systems              35     -     -            -      -       -
Arthur D Little        -     -     -            -      -       -
BSG                    -     -     -            -      -       -
CSC/CSC Ploenzke      40     -     -           15(4)   -       -
Deloitte & Touche     20    20     -           10      -      30
Helbling Management
 Consulting           10     -     -            -     10       -
IBM Consulting Group  30    10     -           15      -       -
Knight Wendling       25     -     -           25      -       -
KPMG Fides            32     -     -            -      -       5
Mummert + Partner     30     -     -            -      -       -
Price Waterhouse
 Management
 Consultants          40     -     5           15      -      10

Firm                       Manu   Tech   Tele   Gov   Energy   Other

Abegglen & Partners         9      -     38     12     3(1)     -
AMS Management Systems      -      -     65     -      -        -
Arthur D Little            40      -     30     -     30(1)     -
BSG                         -      -      -     31(2)  -       69(3)
CSC/CSC Ploenzke           25      -     10     10     -        -
Deloitte & Touche          20      -      -      -     -        -
Helbling Management
 Consulting                60     10      5      -     5(1)     -
IBM Consulting Group       15      -      -     15     -       15
Knight Wendling            30      -      -     20     -        -
KPMG Fides                 51      -      -      5     7(1)     -
Mummert + Partner          15      -      -     55     -        -
Price Waterhouse
 Management Consultants    10      -      5     15     -        -

Fin   = Financial services
Prod  = Products
Dist  = Distribution
Trans = Transport
Manu  = Manufacturing
Tech  = Technology
Tele  = Telecommunications
Gov   = Government

(1) Includes environment
(2) Includes non-profit organisations
(3) Industries and service companies
(4) Includes transport

Source: Management Consultant International

LEADING SWISS CONSULTANCIES - WHO'S WHO

Abegglen & Partners
Industriestrasse 28
8604 Volketswil/Zurich
Tel: 41-1-945 2929
Fax: 41-1-945 2919
Head of Swiss operations:  Peter Naegeli

AMS Management Systems
Laubenstrasse 19
3008 Bern
Tel: 41-31-390 4444
Fax: 41-31-390 4455
Head of Swiss operations:  James Sheaffer(1)

Andersen Consulting
Binzmuhlestrasse 14
8050 Zurich
Tel: 41-1-308 1555
Fax: 41-1-308 1850
Head of Swiss operations:  Gunther Conrad

Arthur D Little
Seestrasse 185
8800 Thalwil/Zurich
Tel: 41-1-722 8989
Fax: 41-1-722 8999
Head of Swiss operations:  Peter Amacher

ATAG Ernst & Young
Belpstrasse 23
3001 Berne
Tel: 41-31-382 1621
Fax: 41-31-320 6829
Head of Swiss operations:  Carlo Imboden

Bain & Company
rue du Rhone 30
1204 Geneva
Tel: 41-22-818 2727
Fax: 41-22-818 2700
Head of Swiss operations:  Janet Voute-Allen

The Boston Consulting Group
Zollikerstrasse 226
8008 Zurich
Tel: 41-1-388 8666
Fax: 41-1-388 8686
Head of Swiss operations:  SJ Felix Barber

BSG
Rorschacherstrasse 150
9006 St Gallen
Tel: 41-71-250 111
Fax: 41-71-254 315
Head of Swiss operations:  Andreas Menzl

CSC/CSC Ploenzke
Binzmuhlestrasse 14
8050 Zurich
Tel: 41-1-308 2323
Fax: 41-1-303 1180
Head of Swiss operations:  Daniel Werren

Deloitte & Touche
Seestrasse 59
PO Box 530
8703 Erlenbach/Zurich
Tel: 41-1-914 2222
Fax: 41-1-914 2233
Head of Swiss operations:  Daniel Meister

Helbling Management Consulting
Bernstrasse 88
8953 Dierikon
Tel: 41-1-740 4038
Fax: 41-1-740 8403
Head of Swiss operations:  Reto Muller

IBM Consulting Group
Bandliweg 21
8010 Zurich
Tel: 41-1-643 4343
Fax: 41-1-643 4040
Head of Swiss operations:  Christoph Moret

ICME International
Restelbergstrasse 49
8044 Zurich
Tel: 41-1-366 5511
Fax: 41-1-366 5500
Head of Swiss operations:  Bruno Simma

Kepner Tregoe
rue de la Porcelaine 13
PO Box 90
1260 Nyon 1
Tel: 41-22-361 2131
Fax: 41-22-362 1281
Head of Swiss operations:  Michael Freedman

Knight Wendling
Forrlibuckstrasse 66
PO Box 490
8037 Zurich
Tel: 41-1-272 2922
Fax: 41-1-272 7411
Head of Swiss operations:  Erhard Wendling

KPMG Fides
Badenerstrasse 172
8004 Zurich
Tel: 41-1-249 3131
Fax: 41-1-249 2319
Head of Swiss operations:  Bruce Mathers

McKinsey & Co
Unterwerkstrasse 3
8065 Zurich
Tel: 41-1-874 7474
Fax: 41-1-874 7777
Head of Swiss operations:  Thomas Knecht

Mummert + Partner
World Trade Centre
Leutschenbachstrasse 95
8050 Zurich
Tel: 41-1-309 1220
Fax: 41-1-309 1222
Head of Swiss operations:  Jurg Frick

PRASA Hewitt International
rue du Chasselas 1
2034 Peseux/Neuchatel
Tel: 41-38-323 311
Fax: 41-38-323 100
Head of Swiss operations:  Vitus Schonenberger

Price Waterhouse Management Consultants
Stampfenbachstrasse 109
8035 Zurich
Tel: 41-1-365 6565
Fax: 41-1-365 6240
Head of Swiss operations:  Peter Ehrensperger

Kurt Salmon Associates
Tirolweg 6
6300 Zug
Tel: 41-42-215 119
Fax: 41-42-216 949
Head of Swiss operations:  Peter Amrein

SCG St Gallen Consulting Group
Rosenbergstrasse 32
9001 St Gallen
Tel: 41-71-225 444
Fax: 41-71-220 027
Head of Swiss operations:  Leonard Fopp

STG-Coopers & Lybrand Consulting
St Jakobs-Strasse 25
PO Box 4152
4002 Basel
Tel: 41-61-277 5460
Fax: 41-71-277 5780
Head of Swiss operations:  Tony Haas

TC Team Consult
Blumlisalpstrasse 56
8006 Zurich
Tel: 41-1-363 7050
Fax: 41-1-363 8863
Head of Swiss operations:  Albert Frieder

Visura
Fabrikstrasse 50
8031 Zurich
Tel: 41-1-444 3555
Fax: 41-1-444 3535
Head of Swiss operations:  Josef Ingold

(1) European managing director

Source: Management Consultant International

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-18</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B048-156</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mt11.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033924 text/html 45757
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:37:26 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:46 GMT
Content-length: 45570
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mt11.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>** REVIEWS **</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES OF A NEW MANAGEMENT PARADIGM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(204 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>DELAYERING THE MANAGEMENT HIERARCHY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(165 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>FUTURE CAREER MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES IN ORGANIZATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(89 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>ORGANIZATIONAL REENGINEERING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(203 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>INFORMATION RESOURCES MANAGEMENT GUIDE FOR EVALUATING&nbsp;PROPOSALS AND BIDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(74 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>OVERHEAD COSTS ON GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(120 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>SCHEDULING OF JOBS THAT ARRIVE OVER TIME</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(139 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>THE ISO-9000 SERIES OF QUALITY STANDARDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(184 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>SOFTWARE MEASUREMENT GUIDEBOOK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(171 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>SURVEY OF SOFTWARE METRICS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(133 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>INFORMATION RESOURCES MANAGEMENT (IRM)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(88 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>BETTER OUTCOMES THROUGH INFORMATION MANAGEMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(74 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>EXISTING SOFTWARE APPLICABLE TO MANUFACTURING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(85 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>APPLYING TECHNOLOGY TO RECORD MAINTENANCE SYSTEMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(110 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>EFFECTIVE FILES MAINTENANCE POLICIES AND PRACTICES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(75 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>THE ADVANTAGES AND LIMITATIONS OF DECENTRALIZING&nbsp;INFRASTRUCTURE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(182 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><LI>STRATEGY FOR AFFORDABLE LEADING-EDGE DUAL-USE&nbsp;TECHNOLOGY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(200 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>U.S. INDUSTRY ACCESS TO JAPAN'S DEFENSE MARKET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(197 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><A HREF = "#19"><LI>DEVELOPMENT OF TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER IN THE JAPANESE&nbsp;PETROCHEMICAL INDUSTRY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(133 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><A HREF = "#20"><LI>TRENDS AND MEASURES TO PROMOTE DIRECT FOREIGN&nbsp;INVESTMENT IN JAPAN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(118 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><A HREF = "#21"><LI>GLOBALIZATION OF TECHNOLOGY AND THE&nbsp;INTERNATIONALIZATION OF R&D</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(174 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>THE ROLE OF CONSORTIA IN TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(111 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><A HREF = "#23"><LI>STUDY OF R&D CONSORTIA IN JAPAN'S SUPERCONDUCTIVITY AND&nbsp;ENGINEERING CERAMICS INDUSTRY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(150 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><A HREF = "#24"><LI>STRENGTHENING THE U.S. MICROELECTRONICS INDUSTRY&nbsp;THROUGH FEDERAL CONSORTIA POLICY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(318 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><A HREF = "#25"><LI>DIRECTORY OF INDUSTRY-UNIVERSITY SOFTWARE ENGINEERING&nbsp;COLLABORATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(78 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><A HREF = "#26"><LI>THE BENEFITS OF GOVERNMENT AND INDUSTRY COOPERATIVE R&D&nbsp;AGREEMENTS (CRADAs)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(171 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>SMALL BUSINESS ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN THE 21ST CENTURY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(112 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><A HREF = "#28"><LI>THE STATE OF SMALL BUSINESS IN THE U.S.: AN ECONOMIC&nbsp;STATISTICAL REPORT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(56 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><A HREF = "#29"><LI>THE IMPACT OF CONTRACT BUNDLING ON SMALL BUSINESS&nbsp;CONCERNS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(84 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><A HREF = "#30"><LI>DIRECTORY OF OPERATING SMALL BUSINESS INVESTMENT&nbsp;COMPANIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(80 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><A HREF = "#31"><LI>THE EFFECTS OF SMALL BUSINESS LENDING ON BANK PROFITS&nbsp;AND RISK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(129 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><A HREF = "#32"><LI>FLEXIBLE MANUFACTURING SYSTEMS: THEORY, ECONOMICS, AND&nbsp;APPLICATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(136 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><A HREF = "#33"><LI>STUDY OF THE INCIDENCE, IMPACTS, IMPLICATIONS, AND&nbsp;STRATEGIES OF FLEXIBLE MANUFACTURING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(191 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#34"><LI>HUMAN ISSUES IN TECHNOLOGY IMPLEMENTATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(122 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#35"><LI>COMPUTER USE VERSUS FIRM SIZE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(136 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES OF A NEW MANAGEMENT PARADIGM

Over the past 20 years, a new management paradigm has
emerged that is the antithesis of mass production.
Firms employing this new paradigm rely on an integrated
set of principles and implementing practices.  First,
to get new products to market quickly they integrate
marketing, research and development, engineering,
design, production, and distribution.  Second, to
respond quickly to shifting demand they aim at
producing small lot sizes with minimal setup times -- a
practice known as lean production.  Third, to make
every aspect of production more visible they work with
fewer more qualified suppliers and involve them in
every phase of production, from product development on.
Finally, they delegate much greater operational
responsibility to those who design and manufacture the
product.

This (RAND Corp.) report uses an intensive survey of
the literature to describe and analyze this new
management paradigm.  By providing a framework for
understanding a very complicated subject, the report
serves as a resource for managers interested in those
practices that are shaping manufacturing and service
industries throughout the world.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960101; 1994,
137 pp.  Price: $159.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

DELAYERING THE MANAGEMENT HIERARCHY

Central to the new model of organization in the 1990s
is a flatter structure achieved by a reduction in the
number of layers of management hierarchy.  Despite
popular appeal, the fundamental claims made in the
literature remain largely unchallenged.  Like many
organizational design concepts, there is some confusion
as to what delayering means in practice, how such a
change should be implemented, and what support a
shorter management hierarchy requires.  This study from
England (Sussex University) examines the experience of
a sample of employing organizations who are or were in
the process of delayering their management structure.
Eight case study organizations were visited during the
course of the study.  The study uses the findings of
discussions to present an overall picture of the
issues.  Case study examples are used illustratively
throughout the report.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960102; 1995,
69 pp.  Price: $109.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

FUTURE CAREER MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES IN ORGANIZATIONS

This report from England (Sussex University) reviews
the career issues that organizations are currently
facing and provides a perspective on how organizations
can develop their career management strategies for the
future.  It covers many issues, such as: how careers
are changing as organizations change; and what the
pressures are on individuals and organizations as large
organizations restructure.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960103; 1995,
64 pp. Price: $109.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

ORGANIZATIONAL REENGINEERING

This (GAO) document presents the results from a July
1994 symposium dealing with the reengineering of
organizations.  Five principles for effective
reengineering emerged from this GAO-sponsored
symposium.  While these principles are not intended to
be an all-inclusive list on how to effectively
implement reengineering, they form the basis of a
framework for bringing about the radical change
required to reengineer business processes in a large
organization: (1) top management must be supportive of,
and engaged in, reengineering efforts to remove
barriers and drive success; (2) an organization's
culture must be receptive to reengineering goals and
principles; (3) major improvements and savings are
realized by focusing on the business from a process
rather than a functional perspective; (4) processes
should be selected for reengineering based on a clear
notion of customer needs, anticipated benefits, and
potential for success; and (5) process owners should:
manage reengineering projects with teams that are
cross-functional, maintain a proper scope, focus on
customer metrics, and enforce implementation
timeliness.  Each of these principles is covered in
detail.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. MD511AA; Dec. 1994,
21 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

INFORMATION RESOURCES MANAGEMENT GUIDE FOR EVALUATING
PROPOSALS AND BIDS

This (General Services Administration) guide provides
an introduction to evaluating proposals and bids.  The
information, advice, and techniques provided in the
guide will help in conducting successful evaluations of
proposals and bids by laying the groundwork for sound
contract award decisions.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960105; Aug. 1994,
182 pp.  Price: $209.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

OVERHEAD COSTS ON GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS

This (GAO) paper focuses on overhead costs.  Overhead
cost submissions are used to establish final overhead
rates that determine reimbursements under cost-type
contracts and to provide the historical cost basis for
overhead rates used to negotiate fixed-price contracts.
The Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) cost
principles require government contractors to identify
and exclude unallowable costs from overhead
submissions.  The report presents an illustrative
example of what is and is not allowable with respect to
Rocketdyne Corp., where about 80% of Rocketdyne's sales
are under government cost reimbursable-type contracts.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960106; Dec. 1994,
11 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

SCHEDULING OF JOBS THAT ARRIVE OVER TIME

A natural and basic problem in scheduling theory is to
provide good average-quality service to a stream of
jobs that arrive over time.  This (Sandia National
Laboratories) paper considers the problem of scheduling
jobs that are received over time, in order to minimize
the average completion time of the set of jobs.  The
paper presents the first constant-factor approximation
algorithms for several variants of a single and
parallel machine model.  Many of the algorithms are
based on interesting algorithmic and structural
relationships between preemptive and nonpreemptive
schedules and linear programming relaxations of both,
and many generalize to the minimization or average
weighted completion time as well.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960107; Apr. 1993,
14 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

THE ISO-9000 SERIES OF QUALITY STANDARDS

This report (from the Ei Compendex Plus Database)
covers about everything you may want to know about the
international ISO-9000 quality standards.  It covers
information and details of, for example: documentation
written by the Geneva-based International Standards
Organization; ISO implementation and registration
requirements adopted by the 12 European Economic
Community (EC) countries; certification of quality
systems on the basis of the ISO international standard;
internal and external auditing processes required for
registration; the benefits and competitive advantages
of receiving IS0-9000 certification; present case
studies of companies that have received certification;
and much more.  The report consists of a collection of
abstracts of available reports, papers, studies, and
other documentation, with references for their
acquisition and extensive indexing to make it easy to
find exactly what you want.  It will be updated to
include the most current information available at the
time you place your order.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. MD510H; latest 250
citations, updated to the date of your order.  Price:
$319.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

SOFTWARE MEASUREMENT GUIDEBOOK

This software measurement guidebook (by the Software
Productivity Consortium) provides practical
quantitative support guidance for managing a software
project.  It shows how to apply the
goal-question-metric (GQM) paradigm in order to
systematically select metrics for purposes of project
control and/or process improvement.  The guidebook:
presents methods for estimating software size, cost,
and development schedule; presents methods for
monitoring and evaluating the status of a software
project; describes the role of software metrics in
raising the capability maturity level of a software
development organization; presents guidance on how to
collect and validate metrics data and how to feed back
experience data to developers as part of statistical
process control; presents measures of software quality;
describes models for estimating and predicting software
defects; gives methods for estimating the impact of
code reuse on software cost, schedule, and quality; and
more.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960109; Aug. 1993,
273 pp.  Price: $299.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

SURVEY OF SOFTWARE METRICS

This (Institute for Defense Analysis) report presents a
survey of computer software measurement practices and
technology in commercial and DOD organizations.  The
report: (1) provides summaries of 11 DOD and 14
industry programs with respect to metrics goals,
metrics program implementation, and metrics sets; (2)
reports on tools and repositories; and (3) presents
best practices.  The study concludes that industry has
more mature and vigorous practices and technology than
DOD organizations, largely because industry is applying
metrics for clear market-driven reasons while DOD
acquisition lacks comparable motivations.  The report
develops recommendations to improve software
measurement and software measurement research goals.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960110; Apr. 1994,
191 pp.  Price: $219.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

INFORMATION RESOURCES MANAGEMENT (IRM)

This (General Services Administration) pamphlet is
designed to assist executives who have responsibility
for managing information resources.  It: briefly
describes the role of IRM; provides important
information for managers; and reviews major areas where
managers can make an impact.  The pamphlet can also
help those with high-level responsibilities to
understand the complex environment of information
systems.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960111; 1994,
20 pp.  Price: $69.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

BETTER OUTCOMES THROUGH INFORMATION MANAGEMENT

This (General Services Administration) document
demonstrates the actual and potential benefits of
information management, by highlighting many
successfully implemented initiatives.  The successful
initiatives covered in the report range from
computer-based treatment for psychiatric patients to
improved wartime communications during Desert Storm.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960112; Aug. 1993,
43 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

EXISTING SOFTWARE APPLICABLE TO MANUFACTURING

This (NIST) monograph surveys existing software
applicable to manufacturing enterprises.  It identifies
the gaps and the opportunities for software developers
to close these gaps.  Information technology is
constantly growing and adapting, and the monograph
proposes directions for this growth.  It is a snapshot
of current conditions, for use as a starting guide.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. MD512P; Aug. 1994,
194 pp.  Price: $219.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

APPLYING TECHNOLOGY TO RECORD MAINTENANCE SYSTEMS

This (General Services Administration) publication is
designed to help managers choose the best mix of media
for maintaining records that will best suit the needs
of both the organization and the nature of the
information.  There are no easy answers.  Just as there
are no generic organizations, there are no `one-size
fits all' solutions.  The publication provides:
information about the available alternatives; a
framework for analyzing needs; and an approach for
matching needs with a suitable technology.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960114; May 1993,
136 pp.  Price: $159.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

EFFECTIVE FILES MAINTENANCE POLICIES AND PRACTICES

This (General Services Administration) handbook
promotes effective files maintenance policies and
practices.  It reflects the regulatory requirements of
the Federal Information Resources Management Regulation
(FIRMR).  The principles and techniques presented
should lead to improved, more effective, and economical
maintenance of current records.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960115; Dec. 1993,
38 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

THE ADVANTAGES AND LIMITATIONS OF DECENTRALIZING
INFRASTRUCTURE

This (International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development) collection of papers disseminates some of
the lessons of the World Bank's experience and research
efforts on the linkages between decentralization and
infrastructure service delivery.  It shows that
decentralization is not a panacea, and unless some
demanding requirements are met, performance gains will
not materialize.  More specifically, the papers
provide: (1) a summary of the lessons from World Bank
experience on decentralization as a way of providing a
general context to the importance of infrastructure
decentralization; (2) a review of the more
institutional aspects and their implications for policy
design; (3) an empirical assessment of the consequences
of decentralization on expenditure levels and on
performance in infrastructure, and some indications of
the possible handles available to policymakers to
improve the odds of successful decentralization; and
(4) a research agenda on decentralization, relying more
systematically on recent developments involving the
theory of the firm.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960116;  1995,
130 pp.  Price: $169.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

STRATEGY FOR AFFORDABLE LEADING-EDGE DUAL-USE
TECHNOLOGY

This (DOD) report focuses on the use of dual-use
technology in defense-related private industries.
Rapid advances in commercial technology, combined with
declining budgets, have in many cases rendered
traditional approaches to technology development and
procurement less affordable and less effective than in
the past.  It is critical that organizations take
advantage of cost-conscious market-driven commercial
production, and that they leverage the huge investments
in leading-edge process technologies made by private
industry.  It is also important that technologies and
systems keep pace with the rapid product development
cycles.  Dual use technology policies are a key
component of investment strategies for maintaining
performance superiority and affordability in this new
technological and economic defense-industry
environment.  Elements of the dual-use technology
investment strategy serve to: (1) ensure that key
elements of the technology-base that are critical for
national security remain at the leading edge; (2)
support the transitioning of defense-sponsored
technology and the integration of military production
with the commercial base; and (3) facilitate insertion
of commercial technologies into military systems.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960117; Feb. 1995,
36 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

U.S. INDUSTRY ACCESS TO JAPAN'S DEFENSE MARKET

This study (from the Logistics Management Institute)
deals with U.S. industry access to Japan's defense
market.  Historically, the U.S. has been Japan's
principal foreign source of defense material and
technology, with annual purchases averaging
approximately $1 billion during the 1980s.  This figure
could reach $2 billion if current agreements are
executed.  While Japan's defense procurement policies
are less explicit and organized than those of the U.S.,
they have generally favored U.S. industry over other
foreign competitors.  The decline of the Soviet threat,
combined with a rise in U.S.-Japanese trade friction,
could result in a diminution of U.S. industry access to
Japan's defense market.  There is a perception that
Japan has exploited U.S. defense technologies to build
competitive civilian industries, while enjoying U.S.
military protection.  Despite these problems, the study
concludes that U.S. industry's participation in Japan's
defense market is in DOD's interest and worth
continuing.  Pressuring the Japanese to accept a
reciprocal defense procurement agreement, or to adopt
DOD-style procurement practices, could be
counterproductive.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. MD510GC; Aug. 1992,
91 pp.  Price: $119.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

DEVELOPMENT OF TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER IN THE JAPANESE
PETROCHEMICAL INDUSTRY

This (Massachusetts Institute of Technology) report
deals with the development of the Japanese
petrochemical industry from the 1950s through the
1960s, solely from the standpoint of the process of
technology transfer.  The technology transfer of the
Japanese petrochemical industry in this period is
interesting, because: (1) it was an industry at the
core of the heavy and chemical industries, which were
an important pillar of Japan's industrial policy; (2)
it was a new technical field with no past history; and
(3) unraveling of technology was successfully pursued,
with the result that Japan became a petrochemical
technology exporting country in the 1960s.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. MD510GD; 1994,
32 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

TRENDS AND MEASURES TO PROMOTE DIRECT FOREIGN
INVESTMENT IN JAPAN

This translation from Japan (from MITI) addresses
trends in foreign direct investment in Japan, including
several measures taken by the Japanese government to
promote such investment.  These measures include: the
establishment of the Japan Investment Council; the
relaxing of investment regulations; supporting the
enactment of laws and tax schemes; providing supports
for foreign investments in the Japan Development
Corporation; providing low-interest loans to foreign
affiliates; and having JETRO (Japan External Trade
Organization -- an arm of MITI) become active in
promoting foreign direct investments in Japan.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. MD513AC; 1994,
51 pp.  Price: $109.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

GLOBALIZATION OF TECHNOLOGY AND THE
INTERNATIONALIZATION OF R&D

This (Massachusetts Institute of Technology) report
deals with the globalization of technology and the
internationalization of R&D.  Technology globalization
is being driven by four kinds of factors: (1) those
directly concerned with science and technology; (2)
market factors; (3) regulatory and government-related
factors; and (4) competitive factors.  The latter two
operate primarily at the level of the firm; the first
two affect the growing interdependence of national
systems  directly, as well as through the
border-spanning activities of firms that can take three
forms: (1) international technology scanning and
acquisition; (2) strategic alliances with foreign
partners; and (3) setting up R&D facilities abroad.
The paper surveys the major drivers of the
globalization of technology and the organizational
issues involved in the three modes of extending a
firm's technology reach beyond its home country, with
particular focus on Western firms' penetration of
foreign markets.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. MD509JB; 1992,
29 pp.  Price: $99.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

THE ROLE OF CONSORTIA IN TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT

Technology consortia are technology alliances among
business firms, universities, and governments.  They
are formed to share the increasingly rising costs and
risks associated with undertaking basic or
precompetitive research and development (R&D).  This
study from Canada (by Industry Canada) analyzes the
role of R&D consortia in technology development.  The
study focuses on the growth of technology consortia in
the U.S., the participation of Canadian companies in
those consortia, and the institutional barriers to
Canadian membership in American R&D consortia.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960122; 1995,
188 pp.  Price: $239.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

STUDY OF R&D CONSORTIA IN JAPAN'S SUPERCONDUCTIVITY AND
ENGINEERING CERAMICS INDUSTRY

For the past three decades, R&D consortia have been an
extensively used tool of industrial science and
technology policy in Japan; however, detailed analysis
of Japan's R&D consortia is still very limited, with
most discussions focusing on one project: the VLSI
(very large-scale integrated) circuits project of the
late 1970s.  This (Massachusetts Institute of
Technology) dissertation adds to our understanding of
cooperative R&D by examining the performance and impact
of several R&D consortia in the areas of
superconductivity and engineering ceramics.  The text
addresses: (1) project formation; (2) the nature of
technological advance; (3) organization for
collaboration; (4) the impact of consortia programs on
the technology and the industry; and (5) the existence
of general norms of collaboration.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. MD510GB; 1994,
37 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

STRENGTHENING THE U.S. MICROELECTRONICS INDUSTRY
THROUGH FEDERAL CONSORTIA POLICY

This (Sandia National Laboratories) report deals with
the use of federal technology policy to strengthen the
U.S. microelectronics industry.  A review of U.S. and
Japanese experiences with using microelectronics
consortia as a tool for strengthening their respective
industries reveals major differences.  Japan has
established catch-up consortia with focused goals.
These consortia have a finite life targeted from the
beginning, and emphasis is on work that supports or
leads to product and process-improvement-driven
commercialization.  Japan's government has played a key
role in facilitating the development of consortia and
has used consortia to promote domestic competition.

U.S. consortia, on the other hand, have often
emphasized long-range research with considerably less
focus than those in Japan.  The U.S. consortia have
searched for, and often made, revolutionary technology
advancements; however, technology transfer to their
members has been difficult.  Only SEMATECH has assisted
its members with continuous improvements involving:
compressed product cycles; established relationships;
and strengthened core competencies.  The U.S.
government has not been a catalyst, nor has it provided
leadership, in consortia creation and operation.

The study proposes that, in order to regain world
leadership in areas where U.S. companies lag foreign
competition, the U.S. should create industry-wide,
horizontal-vertical, catch-up consortia, or continue
existing consortia in the six areas where the U.S. lags
behind Japan: optoelectronics; displays; memories;
materials; packaging; and manufacturing equipment.  It
also recommends that consortia be established for
special government microelectronics and for
microelectronics research integration and application;
that these consortia be managed by an industry-led
Microelectronics Alliance whose establishment would be
coordinated by the Department of Commerce; and that the
Semiconductor Research Corporation, the National
Science Foundation Engineering Research Centers, and
relevant elements of other federal programs be
integrated into this consortia complex.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. MD511L; July 1994,
128 pp.  Price: $169.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

DIRECTORY OF INDUSTRY-UNIVERSITY SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
COLLABORATIONS

This (Carnegie-Mellon University) directory describes
collaborative efforts among businesses and universities
in the U.S. and Canada to promote software engineering
education.  The groups vary in their maturity and the
services provided.  The directory is designed to point
organizations toward collaborations within their own
geographic area.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960125; Mar. 1995,
36 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

THE BENEFITS OF GOVERNMENT AND INDUSTRY COOPERATIVE R&D
AGREEMENTS (CRADAs)

This (GAO) report to Congress deals with cooperative
R&D agreements and the transfer of technology between
federal laboratories and industry, which is
increasingly viewed as a significant factor in the
economic growth and well-being of the U.S.  Cooperative
R&D Agreements (CRADAs) are one of several mechanisms
whereby federal laboratories and private industry
collaborate on R&D.  CRADAs define the terms and
conditions of the collaboration.  The report reviews
the role of CRADAs in successfully transferring
technology to the private sector, and develops and
presents a series of case studies that highlight the
benefits of engaging in such collaborations at the
Departments of Agriculture, Army, Commerce, and Health
and Human Services.  While all CRADAs may not achieve
the same level of benefits, both the federal agencies
and private companies that are reviewed in the report
have benefited from these collaborations.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. MD511AB; Dec. 1994,
27 pp.  Price: $69.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

SMALL BUSINESS ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN THE 21ST CENTURY

As we enter the 21st century, will the social and
economic environment in the U.S. be favorable for small
business?  To answer the question, this (Small Business
Administration) report presents: (1) an executive
summary of the researchers' findings; (2) a report on
the insights garnered from a series of 15 focus groups
held in late 1994 and early 1995; and (3) a
presentation of the economic and demographic changes
that will affect small businesses in the next 10 years.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960127; June 1995,
70 pp.  Price: $99.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

THE STATE OF SMALL BUSINESS IN THE U.S.: AN ECONOMIC
STATISTICAL REPORT

This (Small Business Administration) economic report
focuses on the current economic climate for small
businesses, and includes numerous reference tables
containing small business statistics

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960128; 1994,
457 pp.  Price: $479.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

THE IMPACT OF CONTRACT BUNDLING ON SMALL BUSINESS
CONCERNS

This (Small Business Administration) report documents
the results of a study regarding the impact of contract
bundling on small business concerns.  The study
utilizes data from a survey of SBA personnel,
17 directors of federal Offices of Small and
Disadvantaged Business Utilization, 127 trade
associations, and 370 randomly selected small
businesses.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960129; May 1993,
98 pp.  Price: $119.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

DIRECTORY OF OPERATING SMALL BUSINESS INVESTMENT
COMPANIES

This (Small Business Administration) directory is an
alphabetical listing by state of over 250 small
business investment companies (SBICs).  These privately
owned and operated companies receive licenses from the
U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) to supply
equity capital, long-term loans, and management
assistance to qualifying small businesses.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960130; June 1994,
69 pp.  Price: $99.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

THE EFFECTS OF SMALL BUSINESS LENDING ON BANK PROFITS
AND RISK

Drawing on data from the `call reports' that banks file
with federal regulators, this (Texas A&M University)
study compares the profitability of more active small
business lenders to that of less active banks.  The
analysis shows that, on average, banks earn higher
profit rates on small business loans than on other
assets.  These higher-than-average rates of return are
earned by increasing the bank's risk, including capital
risk, credit risk, liquidity risk, and funding risk.
Importantly, multiple regression analyses indicate that
small business loans do not affect bank profit after
adjusting for these and other risk factors.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960131; Aug. 1995,
38 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

FLEXIBLE MANUFACTURING SYSTEMS: THEORY, ECONOMICS, AND
APPLICATIONS

This report (from the NTIS Bibliographic Database)
concerns the theory, economics, and applications of
flexible manufacturing systems, including for example:
fundamental principles; development assessment;
manufacturing computer control; robotics technology;
prospects; development trends; product inspection
techniques; applications for the aerospace, automotive,
and precision machining industries; specific examples
of flexible manufacturing systems used in Japan,
Europe, and the U.S.; and more.  The report contains a
collection of up to 250 abstracts of the latest
available reports, papers, studies, and other
documentation, with references for their acquisition
and extensive indexing to make it easy to find exactly
what you want.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. MD511KA, latest
50-250 abstracts, updated to the date of your order.
Price: $279.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

STUDY OF THE INCIDENCE, IMPACTS, IMPLICATIONS, AND
STRATEGIES OF FLEXIBLE MANUFACTURING

This (University of Rhode Island) study examines a
set of hypotheses regarding flexible manufacturing:
(1) manufacturing firms are increasingly relying on
flexible strategies; (2) manufacturing flexibility
coincides with vertical disintegration and
specialization in core areas of expertise; (3) flexible
manufacturing firms gain competitive advantage through
economies of scope rather than scale; (4) these firms
achieve such economies via networks of collaborative
firms; (5) such firms and their networks tend to
agglomerate geographically; and (6) such firms'
flexibility requires a broadly-skilled labor force.
The study uses national data on changes in industrial
flexibility, vertical disintegration, and
agglomeration, to rank manufacturing industries by
their apparent degree of flexibility and vertical
disintegration.  Using this ranking, three top
industries are selected based on their heavy presence
in New England and their dissimilarity: aircraft
equipment; medical instruments; and textile finishing.
The bulk of the report focuses on these three
industries.  The findings indicate diverse strategies
and patterns of inter-firm relations in the three
industries.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. MD511KB; 1994,
250 pp.  Price: $279.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

HUMAN ISSUES IN TECHNOLOGY IMPLEMENTATION

This (University of Pittsburgh) report addresses the
human issues associated with implementation of new
technology in manufacturing environments.  The research
participants are two airframers and a major electronics
firm.  The objectives of the research are attained by:
(1) executing a comprehensive literature search and
evaluation; (2) developing a data collection package;
(3) administering the package to the major electronics
firms; (4) improving the data collection package
through feedback from the electronics firms;
(5) administering the revised version to the
airframers; and (6) analyzing the findings and
presenting the results.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960134; Dec. 1994,
103 pp.  Price: $129.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT MATTERS via NewsNet
January 1996

COMPUTER USE VERSUS FIRM SIZE

This (Popkin and Co.) paper provides new evidence on
the use of information-processing technologies by firm
size.  It does so by detailing the extent to which
computers are used by workers in firms of different
sizes.  The paper also provides estimates of the
returns by firm size to employees using computers on
their job.  Computer use leads to productivity gains
which benefit both employees that use them and firms
that invest in them.  Determining the size of those
gains by firm size is important for an understanding of
the competitive outlook for small firms in the emerging
information-based economy, and for related policy
purposes.

(Order this MANAGEMENT MATTERS reviewed report from
InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL
33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax
(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. M960135; Dec. 1994,
114 pp.  Price: $139.00, prepaid.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-19</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B048-190</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mt18.html 205.156.212.5 19970122033957 text/html 43155
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:37:45 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:41 GMT
Content-length: 42968
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mt18.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet <BR>
April 15, 1994<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>MANDATORY ARBITRATION: TEMPTING LEGAL FATES?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(494 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>MANDATORY ARBITRATION&nbsp;(CONTINUED)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(642 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>OSHA PROPOSES SMOKING BAN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(475 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>WHAT OSHA'S SMOKING RULE REQUIRES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(209 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>TIMELY PERSONNEL CASES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>IS IT AGE BIAS TO DISCHARGE A  SECRETARY WHEN&nbsp;HER BOSS RETIRES?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(267 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>WHAT ARE THE PITFALLS OF  OVERSELLING A JOB?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(345 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>WHEN IS A JOB TERMINATED?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(336 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>CAN A COMPANY MAKE IT A POLICY  TO GIVE EX-&nbsp;EMPLOYEES A BAD RAP?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(272 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>MUST EMPLOYEES BE REIMBURSED FOR A PAY CUT IF&nbsp;BUSINESS IMPROVES?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(314 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PERSONNEL POLICIES BRIEFS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>PROBLEM RESOLUTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(236 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>FUNERAL/BEREAVEMENT POLICY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(305 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>MEDICAL SELF-CARE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(229 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>POLITICAL ACTIVITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(168 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>ADOPTIVE PARENT LEAVE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(121 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>HIRING OF RELATIVES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(277 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>MENTAL AND PHYSICAL APTITUDE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(201 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>FLSA APPLIED TO PUBLIC SECTOR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(79 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>CANNOT LAY OFF SENIOR WORKER FOR YOUNGER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(92 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>WOMAN WITH MUSTACHE WINS JOB BACK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(83 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>MORE CORPORATIONS USE DEFINED BENEFIT PLANS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(78 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>MENTAL DISCRIMINATION  #2 ADA COMPLAINT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(193 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>HOW MUCH DOES AN EMPLOYEE COST?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(43 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>INTENT DOESN'T MATTER WHEN IT COMES TO OSHA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(142 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

MANDATORY ARBITRATION: TEMPTING LEGAL FATES?

Ever since the Supreme Court ruled that
mandatory arbitration of all employment
disputes is legal in the securities industry,
many other companies have required applicants
to accept similar provisions as a condition for
being hired. This may be tempting the legal
fates.

Congressional staffers, lawyers and researchers
who study employment and human resource issues
say those mandatory agreements may not be legal
outside the security field, and could raise a
host of potential legal liabilities, including
violation of legislative intent, obstruction of
justice or contempt of court charges, and civil
rights violations. The agreements also raise
the specter of new federal legislation
regulating employment.

In addition, mandatory arbitration may not even
reduce the cost of litigation.  An extensive
study shows that--when compared to juries--
arbitrators actually favor employees more, and
award higher settlements.

ARE THEY LEGAL?

In Gilmer v. Interstate/Johnson Lane Corp., the
Supreme Court upheld pre-employment arbitration
agreements required by the National Association
of Securities Dealers. Left unaddressed is
whether those provisions are legal in any other
industry.

Currently, cases dealing with such agreements
in nonsecurities corporations are working their
way through the courts.

Critics of the corporate rush to lower
litigation costs by having all applicants sign
away their right to sue say those clauses may
be illegal. At least one prominent arbitrator
agrees.

 "You can drawn an analogy to workers'
compensation laws," he says. "Under those
statutes, an employee cannot waive his
litigation rights -- even if he wants to do
so."

The critics also charge that the agreements go
against the intent of Congress when it enacted
anti-discrimination laws and statutes barring
sexual harassment. Courts look to legislative
intent when ruling on legality. The General
Accounting Office --at the request of two
lawmakers--is studying whether pre-employment
arbitration provisions "affect the enforcement
of federal [employment discrimination] laws."

THE INTENT ISSUE

Speaking of the issue of subverting
congressional intent, the arbitrator says,
"There may be something to that." The
agreements "may constitute either willful or
inadvertent subversion of civil rights." That
is because such laws as the Civil Rights Act of
1991, the Age Discrimination in Employment Act
and the American with Disabilities Act all
contain provisions allowing aggrieved workers
to file civil suits against their employers.

"If we didn't want those cases to go to court,
we wouldn't have included those provisions,"
says a key congressional aide who helped draft
some of the statutes.

The GAO study may be an omen of future laws,
says Christine Keen, a principal in the Domani
Group, a Washington research organization. By
relying on the agreements, "corporations could
be tempting federal legislation."

 Keen, who previously handled legislative
issues for the Society for Human Resource
Management, says some state may enact
legislation banning the contracts.

OBSTRUCTION OF JUSTICE?

A former senior Justice Department official
tells us that corporations that use pre-
employment arbitration contracts may be--at
best--risking contempt citations, or
obstruction of justice charges in a worst-case
scenario.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

MANDATORY ARBITRATION
(CONTINUED)

The official, whose views are in the minority,
explains that Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission guidelines require corporations to
investigate all sexual harassment charges.

 He also says that some civil rights laws
contain an "affirmative obligation" on the part
of employers to report discrimination charges
to investigators.  "By burying those charges in
an arbitration panel," he says, employers could
be obstructing justice.

Another Justice Department alumni disagrees. "I
could see civil contempt proceedings, but
obstruction of justice is creative thinking,"
says the attorney who has prosecuted people for
that charge.

Others note that federal agencies--including
Congress, the EEOC and the National Labor
Relations Board--have said it is good public
policy to arbitrate rather than litigate
disputes. The prominent arbitrator agrees, but
adds that those statutes and rules "aren't
analogous to a corporation saying that--prior
to employment--you have to arbitrate all future
[legal] claims" and give up your right to sue.

HOW ABOUT DIVERSITY?

Yet another issue is diversity -- or rather the
lack of it -- on securities industry panels --
and its effect on discrimination claims.
According to a GAO audit, 89 percent of the 726
arbitrators used were white males over the age
of 60 with little employment law experience.

The industry is "asking these people to deal
with problems they have never encountered and
have no experience with," says an employment
attorney. The lawyer, who currently has a
client before one of those panels, believes
that the arbitrators may not be qualified to
handle complex employment litigation.

Also, this attorney says the lack of diversity
could "raise potential civil rights problems."
She says that employees could argue in court or
before federal agencies that the panels do not
use the EEOC's "reasonable woman" standard when
hearing sexual harassment claims. Those
guidelines require that investigators and/or
corporate officials see the charges from the
female point of view.

DOES ARBITRATION WORK?

Most corporations see arbitration as a way to
reduce the burgeoning cost of employment
litigation. But it may just be a placebo.

"Arbitration is not the Shangri-La that many
think it is," says the Domani Group's Keen. She
cites a GAO report issued earlier this month,
finding that securities industry arbitrators
resolved 34 discrimination claims between 1990
and 1992. Of the 18 cases looked at in depth,
10 resulted in financial awards to employees;
eight were decided in favor of the brokerage
houses.

A study by the California State Automobile
Association had similar findings. While that
study only examined personal injury lawsuits,
it came to the same conclusion: arbitrators may
not save companies money. In 45 cases where the
arbitrator's award was rejected, juries
returned lower damages 73 percent of the time.
That study confirms an earlier nonpublished
examination of a California law mandating pre-
trial arbitration of suits seeking less than
$50,000.

BROADER ISSUES

"The broader issue is whether employers and
employees can buy and sell individual rights.
If you make arbitration a condition of
employment, you're asking someone to sell off
their right to a jury trial," Keen says. "In
that respect, it's no different than the
yellow-dog contracts of the 1930s."

 Before the enactment of the National Labor
Relations Act, corporations required applicants
to agree never to join a union. Those so-called
"yellow-dog" contracts are now illegal. "I
would advise clients [wanting to implement
arbitration agreements] to go slowly," says one
labor lawyer. "After all, if they are found to
be legal, you can always have employees sign
them. If they're not [legal], why risk the
potential litigation?"

The attorney may have a point. In anticipation
of the upcoming GAO study, some members of
Congress are said to be drafting legislation
that would limit the use of mandatory pre-
employment arbitration agreements.

The following are actual cases that have been
heard by national and state courts, the NLRB or
senior arbitration panels.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

OSHA PROPOSES SMOKING BAN

As expected, regulations proposed by the
Occupational Safety & Health Administration
would effectively ban smoking at every
workplace in the country. The rule, which
applies to all indoor or enclosed worksites
under OSHA's jurisdictions, is seen as part of
the Clinton administration's continuing anti-
smoking campaign.

President and Mrs. Clinton have banned smoking
inside the White House. Recently the Defense
Department announced a no-smoking policy at all
military bases and offices. The same day OSHA
released its proposal, the head of the Food and
Drug Administration asked Congress for guidance
over whether to regulate nicotine as a drug.
Meanwhile, the House is set to vote on a bill
that would codify OSHA's proposed anti-smoking
regulations into law.

WHAT THE RULES SAY


The OSHA proposals, expected to take effect in
1995 at the earliest, would require employers--
including building owners--to either outrightly
prohibit tobacco usage or to establish
designated smoking areas and only permit
smoking there.

Smoking areas must be "enclosed and exhausted
directly to the outside" and contain all smoke
within the room. Essentially, building owners
or employers would have to install separate
ventilation systems for the smoking areas. That
would make permitting smoking a prohibitively
expense proposition in many workplaces. The
legislation currently making its way through
Congress contains a similar provision.

Employees who do not smoke must not "be
required to enter [the] designated smoking
areas in the performance of [their] normal work
activities." In addition, smoking would be
barred from the rooms while the ventilation
system was being repaired.

In addition to the Tobacco Institute, the
biggest opposition to the proposals is expected
to come from restaurant and bar owners, and
hotel associations. The proposed regulations
would cover eateries and could force them to
ban smoking, according to some OSHA officials.
Restaurant owners maintain that would cost them
smokers' patronage, at a time when the industry
is just beginning to recover from the effects
of the recession.

While the anti-smoking provisions have gotten
the most press, the indoor air quality rule
goes much further. Joseph Dear, OSHA's
administrator, acknowledges that it "is one of
the most extensive ever proposed."

It covers what OSHA calls "building-related
illness" (including sensory irritation,
allergies, infections, humidifier fever,
certain types of pneumonitis, Legionnaires'
disease and chemical exposures). Employers
under the rule would keep written records of
employment complaints, as well as "signs or
symptoms that may be related to building-
related illness."

The regulation--technically an indoor air
quality standard--would require building owners
or corporations to submit written compliance
plans, including a written maintenance program
for heating, ventilation and air-conditioning
systems.

In addition, employers would be forced to
conduct inspections, ventilate all fumes that
"could reasonably be expected to result" in
hazardous or particulate exposures to workers,
keep relative humidity below 60%, and maintain
rooms that have windows that open.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

WHAT OSHA'S SMOKING RULE REQUIRES

Listed below is the full text of the proposed
OSHA regulation, which would ban smoking in all
workplaces. The regulation, included in the
Indoor Air Quality Standard, covers "offices,
educational facilities, commercial
establishments, healthcare facilities, and
office areas, cafeterias, and break rooms
located [or] used by employees."

In workplaces where the smoking of tobacco
products is not prohibited, the employer shall
establish designated smoking areas and permit
smoking only in such areas.

The employer shall assure that designated
smoking areas are enclosed and exhausted
directly to the outside, and are maintained
under negative pressure (with respect to
surrounding spaces) sufficient to contain
tobacco smoke within the designated area.

The employer shall assure that cleaning and
maintenance work in designated smoking areas is
conducted only when no smoking is taking place.

The employer shall assure that employees are
not required to enter designated smoking areas
in the performance of normal work activities.

The employer shall post signs clearly
indicating areas that are designated smoking
areas, and the employer shall post signs that
will clearly inform anyone entering the
workplace that smoking is restricted to
designated areas.

The employer shall prohibit smoking in
designated smoking areas during any period that
the exhaust ventilation system servicing that
area is not properly operating.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

IS IT AGE BIAS TO DISCHARGE A  SECRETARY WHEN
HER BOSS RETIRES?

The following are actual cases that have been
heard by national and state courts, the NLRB or
senior arbitration panels.
THE PROBLEM: Betty Moses had been Joseph
Griesedieck's secretary for 22 years when he
retired as chairman of the board of the
Falstaff Brewing Corporation. Following her
boss's retirement, she was told that she was
being let go.

Moses then sued Falstaff for violating the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act. At the trial,
Moses's attorney argued that it was age that
led to Betty Moses's dismissal. She's 48. An
employee with her seniority, experience and
know-how could easily have been absorbed by one
of the company's departments.

Falstaff countered:

  *   We do not practice age discrimination. We
employ men and women of all ages.

  *   However, we have long had a consistent
policy of eliminating the job of secretary when
an officer's functions with the company are
terminated.

THE ANSWER: Case dismissed. Falstaff had a
long-standing policy that secretaries to
officers remained with those persons when the
officers changed positions in the organization.
The secretaries lost their jobs when their
bosses were eliminated or retired, the U.S.
Court of Appeals, 8th Circuit, found.  Neither
young nor old secretaries were spared when the
sad day came. Betty Moses's age had nothing to
do with her fate (550 F.2df 1113).

COMMENT: Betty Moses would have had a stronger
case if she had been able to show:

  *   She was replaced by a younger person.

  *   A company officer told her that age was a
factor in her firing.

  *   Statistical evidence showed a pattern of
age discrimination by the employer.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

WHAT ARE THE PITFALLS OF  OVERSELLING A JOB?

THE PROBLEM:  The sudden resignation of John
Lund forced Ed Tutwiler Cadillac, Inc. to find
a quick replacement. President E.M.Tutwiler III
sought out Tim Snodgrass, who worked for a
rival company, and guaranteed him a substantial
jump in compensation plus a bonus based on his
department's profit.

The division was a "money maker," Tutwiler
promised, saying that Lund had been employed on
the same basis and had done quite well. Shortly
afterward, Snodgrass quit his job and joined
Tutwiler.

Snodgrass soon regretted the job switch. The
Tutwiler division was a money loser, not a
money maker. Not only did it lose money during
Snodgrass's brief tenure, but it also had been
heavily in the red during John Lund's
incumbency.

Within three months, Snodgrass became
disillusioned and was terminated after several
bitter quarrels with Tutwiler. Snodgrass then
struck back at Tutwiler with a lawsuit for
fraud, alleging he had been lured away from a
safe job with lies about the profitability of
the Tutweiler division and the prospect of
future earnings. Because of the
misrepresentation, he lost income and was
unemployed for a considerable time, Snodgrass
said.

The employer responded that all it was guilty
of was making optimistic predictions about
Snodgrass's future with the company. It's no
crime to build up a job's potential, Tutweiler
asserted.

THE ANSWER: Snodgrass wins his case. Tutwiler's
effusions about the job were more than mere
optimism, the Indiana Court of Appeals found.
Tutwiler deceived Snodgrass about his
predecessor's earnings and the financial
condition of the department. Said the court:

"We agree with Snodgrass that his claim for
fraud is not based upon any predictions or
promises by Tutwiler as to what Snodgrass could
expect to earn as used car manager. Rather it
is based on misrepresentations regarding the
used car department's financial status" (428
N.E.2d 1291).

COMMENT: A company does not commit fraud when
it merely paints a job with glowing colors to a
prospective employee and suggests that a great
future may await him. But a company should be
careful about getting into specifics.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

WHEN IS A JOB TERMINATED?

THE PROBLEM: Pat Linz was data processing
manager at the Hoerner Waldorf Corporation when
the firm merged with the Champion International
Corporation. Linz was offered a data processing
managership with Champion, but a study of the
proposed job convinced him that, although his
title would be unchanged, his functions would
be diminished.

At this point, Linz informed Champion that he
regarded his job as "terminated" and he
requested severance pay. When Champion rejected
the request, Linz brought suit for the
severance pay, pointing out that under the
merger agreement, all Hoerner Waldorf employees
were entitled to severance pay if terminated.
His job entailed computer programming, systems
design, analysis, implementation, user service
and data processing. The Champion job would
require less systems design, implementation,
and programming, Linz told the court.

A Champion spokesman rebutted:

  *   The job it offered Linz was substantially
similar to the one he held at Hoerner Waldorf.
The trouble is that he's too finicky.

  *   Linz was not terminated; he quit of his
own accord. He doesn't merit severance pay.

THE ANSWER: No severance pay for Linz; he quit
of his own free will. The Montana Supreme Court
pointed to Webster's definition that
"terminate" means "to put an end to; make to
cease; to end." This had not been the fate of
Linz's position. The court stated:

"Champion offered Linz a comparable position in
his city of residence. His salary was equal to
that he received from his position with Hoerner
Waldorf, with an increase scheduled soon
thereafter. From these facts, we cannot find
that Linz's position was terminated" (675 P.2d
979).

COMMENT: An employee's right to consider a
position to be "terminated" often depends on
how a change in position is effected. Thus, an
employee's contention that his job was
terminated was upheld when he was stripped of
his title of branch manager while his pay and
duties remained unchanged. A Colorado court
found that, without the title, the employee had
lost the respect of co-workers and clients (657
P.2d 457).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

CAN A COMPANY MAKE IT A POLICY  TO GIVE EX-
EMPLOYEES A BAD RAP?

THE PROBLEM: As long as employees worked for
William Brown's publishing company, they were
treated as friends and confidants. But any
employee who left Brown's employ soon found
that Brown's benevolence had changed to
implacable hostility.

Thus, the wrath of William Brown descended upon
Patricia Marshall who left his company after
years of service. Marshall was on the verge of
receiving a well-paying job with Jill Boxley
until Boxley telephoned Marshall's ex-boss
about a reference.

"Patricia Marshall was erratic in her work
habits," Brown began. "She brought her personal
problems to the office. Of course, if this the
kind of employee you want..."

Patricia Marshall immediately retaliated with a
lawsuit against the publishing company and its
chief for "wrongful interference with
prospective employment."

At the trial, Marshall had little difficulty
proving that the words attributed to Brown were
unmitigated lies. Brown took the stand and
swore he had never made those comments to Jill
Boxley, but Boxley reaffirmed that Brown had
made the offending remarks.

THE ANSWER: Patricia Marshall wins her case;
and she'll get heavy damages, too. In comparing
the differing versions of the telephone
conversation, the California Court of Appeal
found Jill Boxley's to be more credible. What
made a strong impact on the court was testimony
by George Ryan, a one-time company supervisor
who asserted that Brown "...told me to make it
a policy to give bad references to former
employees. He'd say, 'Shoot them down in
flames'"(190 Cal.Rptr.392).

COMMENT: An employer who intentionally
dispenses untruthful references about an ex-
employee in some instances may even face
criminal charges, depending on state law.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

MUST EMPLOYEES BE REIMBURSED FOR A PAY CUT IF
BUSINESS IMPROVES?

The Problem: When a series of reverses put Bob
Adams Motors, Inc., in the red, president Bob
Adams called his personnel to a meeting where
he said: "We can either fire a number of you--
or we can cut everyone's pay 20 percent. Which
will it be?"

The assembled employees agreed to accept a pay
cut. Bob Adams thanked his employees and then
exclaimed: "If business improves by the end of
the year, you'll be reimbursed--if possible."

By the following year, business had improved
sufficiently for the company to restore
salaries to their former level, but then Bob
Adams sold the  business to new owners. At this
point, the staff sued Bob Adams for
"defrauding" them out of the money he had
deducted from their salaries, asserting:

  * Bob Adams made us believe that the pay cut
would be reimbursed to us if business improved.
He reneged on that promise. Business did
improve - but he never gave us back our money.
That was fraud!

Not so, countered Bob Adams. All he promised
was that "if possible" he would repay the
wages.

The Answer: No reimbursement for the employees.
To the Missouri Court of Appeals, Bob Adams's
remarks at the pay cut gathering were "a mere
promise or expression of opinion--neither of
which are enforceable" (550 S.W.2d 850).

COMMENT: It must be borne in mind, however,
that an employer will not escape unscathed from
pay restitution demands where the reductions
violate the minimum-wage law, deny employees
overtime pay due them under the wage-hour law,
or are tainted by violations of the anti-
discrimination laws.

At this point, the staff banded together and
sued Bob Adams for "defrauding" them out of the
money he had deducted from their salaries. In
court, the employees inveighed:

The following policies are currently in use in
the companies named. Requests for anonymity
have been respected.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

PROBLEM RESOLUTION

The following policies are currently in use in
the companies named. Requests for anonymity
have been respected.
When employees believe they have been treated
unfairly in relation to established corporate
policies, where do they turn? Formal problem
resolution procedures can help protect the
rights of both employees and employers. A not-
for-profit rehabilitation firm uses these
procedures as a guide for administering its
policies fairly.

1.  The employee will file a statement with the
supervisor on a form to be provided by the
Corporation. The Supervisor will meet with the
employee and attempt to resolve the problem or
situation.

2.  In the event the problem or situation
cannot be resolved in Step 1, the employee and
supervisor will submit separate written
statements regarding the problem to the
appropriate administrative staff person. This
individual will meet with both parties and
review any relevant materials. Then a written
statement of resolution will be issued by this
reviewer.

3.  If the employee remains dissatisfied, an
appeal using the same process may be made to
the Executive Director. The Executive Director
will issue a written statement of the
resolution after meeting with the involved
parties and reviewing the written materials.
The Board of Directors will be informed by the
Executive Director of all problems handled
under this procedure regardless of the level at
which they are resolved. The Board of Directors
may choose to undertake further review or
action.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

FUNERAL/BEREAVEMENT POLICY

A company without clear guidelines for funeral
or bereavement leave may find itself in a
squeeze--leaving the employee feeling
distraught as well as harassed, while the
company questions its reimbursement obligation
for attendance at the wakes of distance
relatives. Mount St. Mary's Hospital of Niagara
Falls, N.Y., avoids such problems with the
following.

An excused absence from work with straight time
pay to attend the funeral and make burial
arrangements will be allowed for full-time
employees who have completed their probationary
period and have furnished the Hospital with
reasonable proof of relationship with the
deceased relative as follows:

A.  In the event of death of spouse, child
(stepchildren, foster children and adopted
children), parent (stepparent), brother,
sister, mother-in-law or father-in-law, up to
three (3) work days with pay. The employee is
not entitled to the benefits if the employee
was not scheduled to work these days. If the
deceased family member resided over 500 miles
from Niagara Falls, up to five (5) days with
straight pay is allowed.

B.  In the event of death of grandparent, up to
one (1) day.

C. In the event of death of any other relative
who resided at the time of death in the
employee's household, up to one (1) day.

D. Part-time employees regularly scheduled to
work fifteen (15) or more hours per week are
allowed up to one (1) work day off with
straight time pay in the event of death in the
immediate family, as stated in Section A.

E. Should such death occur during an employee's
vacation, the vacation days involved are to be
converted to funeral leave on the payroll and
vacation days extended or rescheduled.

The above funeral allowance will not be paid
for "ex in-laws" after a legal divorce has been
in force.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

MEDICAL SELF-CARE

Mitsubishi Caterpillar Forklift America, Inc.
(MCFA) believes that promoting healthy
lifestyles among employees in the short run
can--in the long run--reduce medical costs and
improve worker productivity. The following
appears in the company's 44-page summary of
benefits, which every new employees receives.

A special feature of Travelers health care
program is the Wellness program called "Taking
Care." As part of this program each employee
will receive a special package during
enrollment. This kit includes an informational
book for use at home whenever a medical
question arises.

In addition, you will receive monthly health
care newsletters with lots of tips and ideas on
how to live healthier and avoid the need for
large amounts of medical care.

Your health and well being are important.
Taking responsibility for your health offers
the best opportunity to reduce the increasing
cost of preventable illnesses and unnecessary
medical care. That is why the MCFA health care
plan covers physicals, well baby care and
mammographies at 100% in-network.

In addition, employees will receive the best-
selling medical self-care book, Take Care of
Yourself, to make it easier to become a wise
consumer of health care.

The Taking Care program is designed to help
employees become healthier individuals through
lifestyle changes and preventative care,
realize the benefits of practicing prevention
and self-care and have fewer unnecessary tests,
procedures and treatments.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

POLITICAL ACTIVITY

Some government agencies or departments have
strict rules about who may or may not run for
political office. The State Education
Department of the University of the State of
New York clearly spells out its stipulations.

Department employees are free to engage in any
political activity which is not precluded by
New York State Law or by Department policy
concerning Department employees who run for
public office. The provisions of the State
Civil Service Law prohibit requiring employees
to contribute to any political fund or perform
any political service, nor can you be promoted,
demoted, or dismissed for compliance or refusal
to do so. No one is permitted to use his or her
influence to force the political activity of
any person or group or to interfere with any
election. Employees with questions concerning
this matter may wish to read Section 107 of the
Civil Service Law available in the Division of
Personnel. Employees who are considering
running for office should check with their
supervisors concerning Department policy.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

ADOPTIVE PARENT LEAVE

Since passage of the Family Medical Leave Act,
which mandates employers to offer up to 12
weeks of unpaid leave to care for a family
member, many organizations are adding adoption
leave to their policies. This East Coast
personnel and labor relations office outlines
its guidelines.

Any employee who adopts a child may request
child care leave for up to seven months. This
leave may start any time from the data the
adoptive child is placed with the family to the
effective date of the adoption. An employee is
not required to exhaust all appropriate leave
credits before being granted leave without pay,
but may choose to do so. No sick leave or sick
leave with half pay will be approved.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

HIRING OF RELATIVES

Nepotism is a sensitive issue at many
companies. The following is the policy at Parma
Community General Hospital in Ohio.

The employment of relatives in the same work
area of an organization may cause serious
conflicts and problems with favoritism and
employee morale. In addition to claims of
partiality in treatment at work, personal
conflicts from outside the work environment can
be carried into day-to-day working
relationships.

Relatives of persons currently employed by the
Hospital may be hired only if they will not be
working directly for or supervising a relative
or will not occupy a position in the same line
of authority within the organization. This
policy applies to any relative, higher or lower
in the organization, who has the authority to
review employment decisions. Hospital employees
cannot be transferred into such a reporting
relationship.

If the relative relationship is established
after employment, the individuals concerned
will decide who is to be transferred. If that
decision is not made within 30 calendar days,
management will decide, taking into
consideration various factors, including but
not limited to the needs of the Hospital, the
employee's respective skills, qualifications,
length of service, etc.

In other cases where a conflict or the
potential for conflict arises, even if there is
no supervisory relationship involved, the
parties may be separated by reassignment or
terminated from employment.

For the purposes of this policy, relatives are
defined to include spouses, parents, children,
brothers, sisters, brothers- and sisters-in-
law, fathers- and
mothers-in-law, grandparents, aunts, uncles,
first cousins, stepparents, stepbrothers,
stepsisters, and stepchildren. This policy also
applies to individuals who are not legally
related but who reside with another employee.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

MENTAL AND PHYSICAL APTITUDE

The Jay Packaging Group, Inc., of Warwick,
R.I., states in its employment policies manual
that new people coming on board are considered
additions to the Jay family. At the same time,
the company specifies that certain expectations
must be met to fit into this "family."

  *   Successful applicants will, as a
condition of employment, be required to
complete a Wonderlic Comprehension and
Mechanical Aptitude Test. This test is intended
to gauge the candidate's ability to learn and
apply instructions received and the candidate's
ability to recognize spatial relationships.

  *   All non-English-speaking candidates will
be advised by the Human Resources Director or
Employment Representative that in order to
progress within the company, the candidate must
be able to communicate, read and write in
English. No candidate will enter a progression
program unless they are able to communicate in
the basic company language, which is English.
English-speaking classes are provided by the
company on a voluntary basis.

  *   All new hires will undergo a post-
employment-offer physical examination and drug
test. These examinations must be conducted
after the employment offer is made, but before
the employee begins work. The employment offer
is conditional upon passing the physical
examination and drug test.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

FLSA APPLIED TO PUBLIC SECTOR

In a major action affecting public-sector
employers, the Supreme Court lets stand,
without comment, a district court ruling that
California violated the Fair Labor Standards
Act when it paid workers with IOUs during a
1992 budget impasse lasting 63 days. During
that time, state employees received "registered
warrants"--effectively chits--in lieu of
paychecks. A group of workers sued the state,
charging that it violated a FLSA provision
requiring employers to pay wages in cash or
"its equivalent."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

CANNOT LAY OFF SENIOR WORKER FOR YOUNGER

The California Supreme Court says a school
cannot lay off a qualified senior employee and
retain a junior worker. The case involved
Judith Menagh, who was hired by the Montebello
Unified School District in 1977 as a nurse.
Fifteen years later, in the middle of a budget
crisis, she was slated to be terminated while
the district retained a nurse hired after
Menagh. Citing the state's Education Code, the
court holds that a permanent worker cannot be
dismissed while an employee with less seniority
is retained to do the former worker's job.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

WOMAN WITH MUSTACHE WINS JOB BACK

The Ritz-Carlton agrees to rehire a woman the
Tysons Corner, Va., hotel fired because she
violated rules barring facial hair on women.
"We are profoundly sorry that this incident
ever happened," says general manager Larry
Sternberg. "We realize now that we were not as
sensitive in this matter as we should have
been." Following her dismissal, Licia Joy
Galinsky had filed a complaint with the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission. It still is
unclear what law or rule Galinsky alleged the
hotel violated.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

MORE CORPORATIONS USE DEFINED BENEFIT PLANS

Defined contribution pension plans--mostly 401
plans--grew by 15 percent a year over the last
five years, reports The Conference Board.
According to the survey of chief financial
officers, 82 percent of eligible employees use
defined contribution pension programs, in which
workers choose how their monies are invested.
The report also says that defined benefit
plans--in which employers contribute to a fund
providing fixed pension payments--grew by eight
percent a year over the same period.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

MENTAL DISCRIMINATION  #2 ADA COMPLAINT

Discrimination on the basis of mental
disability is the second most commonly filed
complaint under the Americans with Disabilities
Act, finds a report by the Office of Technology
Assessment. The large number of 1,710
complaints received hints at the importance of
discrimination against people with psychiatric
disabilities, OTA notes.

The mentally disabled have three major problems
working on a regular basis: functioning in
society, difficulty concentrating and coping
with day-to-day stress, according to the
report.

The report also says that some mental health
experts believe there is "a significant
correlation between psychopathology, treatment
status and work." As a result, OTA says access
to effective treatment may be the deciding
factor in whether some mentally disabled people
can work, and employers may need to include
educational, psychosocial and vocational
services in any "reasonable accommodation"
under the ADA. Finally, the report hints that
Congress may have to address some unanswered
questions such as, "Can mentally disabled
employees be required to take medication as a
condition for keeping their jobs?," or "Can
employers monitor medication as part of a
reasonable accommodation?" For a copy of the
report, contact the OTA at (202) 224-8996.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

HOW MUCH DOES AN EMPLOYEE COST?

According to Chrysler Motors, the total
lifetime cost of a new worker is $7 million.
Dennis Pawley, Chrysler's head of
manufacturing, says that figure includes all
items associated with the hiring process:
background checks, hiring, remedial education,
salary, benefits and employee assistance
programs.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
MANAGEMENT POLICIES & PERSONNEL LAW via NewsNet
April 15, 1994

INTENT DOESN'T MATTER WHEN IT COMES TO OSHA

A federal appeals court rules that intent
doesn't matter when it comes to willful
violations of the Occupational Safety and
Health Act. The Eleventh Circuit Court of
Appeals holds that the law "makes irrelevant
the employer's good faith disregard of the
regulations, or the employer's belief that its
alternative program meets the objectives of
OSHA's regulations." (Martin v. Trinity
Industries Inc., CA-11, 92-2559)  In 1983, an
OSHA inspector found excessive noise levels in
the plant. Rather than installing a monitoring
system, the employer required workers to wear
protective gear whenever they were in the
plant. Even though those requirements went
beyond OSHA's regulations, the company was
cited for a willful violation in 1987. The
second OSHA inspector made the citation because
the company knew it had violated the noise
regulations and its hazard abatement program
did not meet OSHA's written



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-20</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B048-219</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mt17.html 205.156.212.5 19970122034018 text/html 28626
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:38:22 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:45 GMT
Content-length: 28439
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mt17.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
SUBSTANCE ABUSE REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1994<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>PHARMACOLOGICAL TREATMENTS FOR OPIATE&nbsp;DEPENDENCE: METHADONE AND MORE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(348 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>LAAM AND BUPRENORPHINE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(277 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>THE DETOXIFICATION PROBLEM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(152 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>CLONIDINE, ALONE AND IN COMBINATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(122 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>ONDCP, CLINTON `UNEQUIVOCALLY OPPOSED' TO&nbsp;LEGALIZATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(203 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>FEDERAL DRUG BUDGET SMALLER THAN THAT OF&nbsp;CITIES AND STATES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(303 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>BETTY FORD CENTER GETS NEW CLINICAL&nbsp;DIRECTOR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(82 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>STUDY: 11-PERCENT OF DELIVERING WOMEN TEST&nbsp;POSITIVE FOR DRUGS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(404 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>DRUG CONSUMPTION: IS IT POSSESSION?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(278 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>ALL NME LAWSUITS NOW RESOLVED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(123 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>NATIONAL NETWORK FOR NEEDLE EXCHANGE&nbsp;PROGRAMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(179 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>COSTS OF ALCOHOL DEPENDENCE: SICKNESS AND&nbsp;DEATH PREDOMINATE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(122 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>EAPA ENDORSES NTC'S PRINCIPLES OF CARE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(851 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>OKLAHOMA SEEKING DIRECTOR OF SUBSTANCE&nbsp;ABUSE PROGRAMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(107 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>NEW ADDRESS FOR EAPA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(30 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>CONFERENCES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(77 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
SUBSTANCE ABUSE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1994

PHARMACOLOGICAL TREATMENTS FOR OPIATE
DEPENDENCE: METHADONE AND MORE

The hunt for a "magic bullet," some kind of pill, to cure drug
dependence continues in research institutions throughout the country,
but methadone is still the gold standard by which other treatments are
measured. Methadone, however, is only for opiate addiction. And two
other drugs, LAAM and bu prenorphine, are expected to be available
soon for the treatment of opiate addiction.

"Methadone maintenance is the most effective pharmacotherapy for
any drug dependence," says Thomas Kosten, M.D., a Yale University
drug researcher who conducts federally funded studies on
pharmacological treatments for opiate dependency. Speaking at a
conference last year in Washington, Dr. Kosten explains the key
points to be remembered about methadone:

To work, the daily dose of methadone must be at least 65 milligrams;
the average dose given in the United States is only 45 milligrams a
day --not enough, so methadone is not generally being given a fair
trial.

At least two years on methadone is needed to make an impact; with
any less time, "you just run people in and out, in and out" of
treatment. The 180-day detoxification authorized by the Food and
Drug Administration is "not very promising."

Psychosocial supports are required, not just methadone. "A juice-bar
dispensing station may be better than nothing at all, but not much
better," says Dr. Kosten. The link to primary medical care should be
within the methadone program itself. Even though opiate addicts tend
to need medical attention, they don't make an effort to get it, says Dr.
Kosten.

When HIV-positive opiate addicts enter methadone programs, their
immune systems improve based on the activity level of "killer T-
cells," says Dr. Kosten. Since most cities now have 20-to 40-percent
HIV infection rates among injecting drug users, the AIDS-reduction
aspect of methadone is important.

Methadone's down side: it only affects opiates. Opiate addicts abuse
alcohol, cocaine, and benzodiazepines. Once on methadone, the
craving for opiates goes away, if the dose is high enough. But other
drugs may continue to be abused; the pharmacological action of
methadone will not help with them.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
SUBSTANCE ABUSE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1994

LAAM AND BUPRENORPHINE

The FDA has approved LAAM, which is essentially a long-acting
form of methadone, for the treatment of opiate addiction. Unlike
methadone, LAAM does not need to be taken every day, reducing the
need for take-home doses. One 60-to 80-milligram dose of LAAM can
be taken every other day, says Dr. Kosten, noting that heroin addicts
need to take heroin four or five times a day. With heroin, they get
high quickly, and they get sick quickly if they don't get more. With
methadone, this process is slowed down. And with LAAM, it is
slowed down even more.

One problem with LAAM is that it has a slow induction, taking
several days before a patient will feel okay. Since patients go through
a mild heroin withdrawal while on LAAM, before the slower-acting
drug takes effect, they are likely to drop out of treatment. After all,
they don't want to feel sick -- that's why they go for help in the first
place.

A solution to this problem, says Dr. Kosten, is to start people on
methadone and switch them over to LAAM. For this option to work,
it means the clinic must offer both methadone and LAAM.

Buprenorphine, another alternative to methadone, has the benefit of
having a shorter and less severe withdrawal. At a daily dose of two
milligrams, buprenorphine would prevent opiate withdrawal
symptoms. At high doses of 20 or 30 milligrams a day, it would
actually block the effects of opiates. Buprenorphine is a painkiller in
very low doses. The typical dose for an opiate addict being maintained
on buprenorphine is from 8 to 16 milligrams a day, says Dr. Kosten.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
SUBSTANCE ABUSE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1994

THE DETOXIFICATION PROBLEM

With all maintenance drugs, one thorny problem arises when a patient
wants to become drug-free. Detoxification from these medications can
be uncomfortable, especially for an addict who has habitually turned
to opiates for relief from that very discomfort. Researchers are still
working on the best ways to help patients
withdraw from maintenance medications.

Naltrexone is an opiate-blocking medication which has no effects of
its own, but which prevents opiates from having any effect.
Researchers had developed naltrexone with the premise that patients
could take it home, take one every morning, and know that whether
they injected heroin or not, they would not get high. Perhaps not
surprisingly, naltrexone was a failure because of compliance problems:
people didn't take it.

Researchers are now working on an injectable form of naltrexone. The
injection could be given once a month, and the blockade would last
until the next month's injection, says Dr. Kosten.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
SUBSTANCE ABUSE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1994

CLONIDINE, ALONE AND IN COMBINATION

Clonidine helps with the severity of opiate withdrawal, but not the
duration, says Dr. Kosten. For example, if methadone is stopped,
withdrawal symptoms will last about two weeks. If clonidine is given,
withdrawal will still last two weeks, but be somewhat less painful.
However, if clonidine is combined with naltrexone, the entire
methadone withdrawal process can be accomplished in three days.

In the most recent development, this approach can be used for
someone maintained on buprenorphine. A heroin addict or a
methadone maintained patient can be switched to buprenorphine, than
detoxified in a day hospital using naltrexone plus clonidine over an 8-
hour period. "You can get them from opiate-dependent to drug-free in
less than a day," says Dr.
Kosten.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
SUBSTANCE ABUSE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1994

ONDCP, CLINTON `UNEQUIVOCALLY OPPOSED' TO
LEGALIZATION

Legalizing drugs, mentioned as a possible anti-crime measure last
month by U.S. Surgeon General Jocelyn Elders, does not appear to be
an option for this Administration. Although the Surgeon General had
only suggested, in remarks at a National Press Club lunch, that
legalization was worth study -- and she stressed that she was speaking
for herself only -- the Administration hastily sought to undo any
impression that it was soft on drugs.

"The Administration has stated that legalization is a formula for self-
destruction and that it is unequivocally opposed to any `reform' such
as this that is certain to increase drug use," said Lee P. Brown,
director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy. "Legalization
would, in the Administration's view, do terrifying damage to
communities, families, and individuals that are already being torn
apart by drug availability and drug use. Any change in the current
policy of prohibiting drug use would seriously impair anti-drug
education efforts, drug-free community programs, drug-free workplace
programs, and the overall national effort to reduce the level of drug
use and its consequences."

The costs of prohibition, while they should not be minimized, are
nowhere near the costs of legalizing drug use, said Brown.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
SUBSTANCE ABUSE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1994

FEDERAL DRUG BUDGET SMALLER THAN THAT OF
CITIES AND STATES

The federal government spends less than state and local governments
on the drug effort, according to a recent survey conducted for the
Office of National Drug Control Policy. The survey, conducted by the
U.S. Bureau of the Census, applies to funding for criminal justice,
education, and treatment.

In 1991, state and local governments spent $15.9 billion on drug-
related activities, a 13-percent increase over what they spent in 1990.
The federal government, on the other hand, spent $11 billion on drug-
related activities in 1991.

"This survey demonstrates the substantial costs drug use has imposed
on state and local governments," said Lee P. Brown, ONDCP
director, in releasing the results at the start of a
meeting with representatives of governors and big-city mayors last
month. The survey "makes clear the necessity of reducing drug use
and the crime and violence associated with it," he said.

Although states frequently chastise the federal equation which gives
over 70 percent of anti-drug funding to law enforcement, they appear
to be forced to do the same thing. The criminal justice system
accounted for 79 percent of drug-related dollars spent by state and
local governments, according to the survey. Treatment and education,
or prevention, shared the
remaining 21 percent.

The National Drug Control Strategy, to be released by the ONDCP
early this year, will have more input from states and localities than it
has in past years, thanks to the two-day meeting held with governors'
and mayors' representatives last month. Brown is relying on states and
localities to continue to help fund the battle against drug abuse and
crime. But he is also giving them a chance to contribute to the
development of the national strategy.

The study can be obtained by contacting the Drugs and Crime
Clearinghouse at (800)666-3332.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
SUBSTANCE ABUSE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1994

BETTY FORD CENTER GETS NEW CLINICAL
DIRECTOR

Nancy Waite-O'Brien, a psychologist, has been named clinical director
of the Betty Ford Center. Waite-O'Brien has been with the Rancho
Mirage, California-based treatment center since 1989 focusing on the
women's program. Prior to joining the Betty Ford Center, she had
been in private practice in Palm Springs, a teacher in Minnesota, and
a counselor in St. Thomas.

As the senior staff psychologist, Waite-O'Brien will be in charge of
all counseling programs for addictive disease, supervising patient
assessments and guiding clinical staff.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
SUBSTANCE ABUSE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1994

STUDY: 11-PERCENT OF DELIVERING WOMEN TEST
POSITIVE FOR DRUGS

In one of the largest studies of its kind, over 11 percent of women
were found to have consumed drugs just before going into labor. The
study was conducted in California on a broad range of women who are
representative of the state's population. Published last year in The
New England Journal of Medicine (Volume 329, Number 12), the
study shows that doctors, clinics, and public health campaigns need to
do more to communicate the harmful aspects of drug use during
pregnancy. The study was conducted by researchers at several
universities and funded by the California Department of Alcohol and
Drug Programs.

The study looked at drug use, including alcohol use, by anonymous,
coded urine tests, administered in the hospitals prior to delivery.
Smoking was based on self-reports -- in California, all delivering
women are supposed to be asked about tobacco use.

The researchers tabulated the results by ethnic group. Black women
had the highest prevalence rates, followed by Hispanic women. Below
is a chart showing, by ethnic group, prevalence rates.


*  The percentage figures in the parentheses refer to the percentage of
births accounted for by each respective ethnic or racial group in
California.

The researchers were particularly concerned about Hispanic women.
The birth rate is high for this ethnic group: although only one-fourth
of women in California are Hispanic, they account for half of the
births. In addition, language was related to drug use during pregnancy,
the researchers found: one of every three women who tested positive
for alcohol did not speak English. Perhaps they are unaware of the
warning labels on alcoholic beverages, the researchers suggested. In
addition, medical care professionals may not be effectively
communicating the risks of drinking during pregnancy to these
women.

 Because urine tests only measure recent drug use, actual prevalence
of drug and alcohol use during pregnancy was probably higher than
the test results showed, the researchers said. Drug use during
pregnancy can result in low birth weight, prematurity, fetal distress,
stillbirth, malformations, and neurobehavioral dysfunction, the
researchers noted.

The sample size for the study was 30,000, and represented the ethnic
and racial groups of the 600,000 infants delivered in the state over a
one-year period ending June 30, 1992.

Reprint requests for "Prevalence and Magnitude of Perinatal Substance
Exposures in California" go to William A. Vega, Ph.D., School of
Public Health, Center for Community Health, Warren Hall, University
of California, Berkeley, CA 94720.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
SUBSTANCE ABUSE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1994

DRUG CONSUMPTION: IS IT POSSESSION?

A recent drug possession case in Washington State shows the
difference between assimilation, in which a drug is ingested and
assimilated into the body, and concealment, in which a drug is
ingested but not assimilated. The defendant, Curtis Lee Rudd, had
been convicted of cocaine possession based on baggies of cocaine
which had been pumped from his stomach. He claimed that the
evidence was not sufficient to convict him, but the Court of Appeals
of Washington, Division 2, disagreed. The court upheld the lower
court conviction, saying Rudd's case was one of
concealment.

In concealment, the drugs are ingested or otherwise inserted into the
body in a balloon, a baggie, or a similar container, the ruling said.
"Rather than being assimilated into the bloodstream, the substance
remains concealed in the body until retrieved or expelled." Evidence
showing concealment is usually sufficient to support a conviction for
possession, the court said.

With assimilation, on the other hand, the drugs are swallowed,
injected, or otherwise put directly into the body. The drugs enter the
bloodstream, where the user loses "dominion and control" over them.
Since dominion and control are the key features of possession, it is
virtually impossible to support a conviction for possession based only
on assimilation, the court said.

Rudd had swallowed the baggies in a motel bathroom while police
were trying to arrest him. Some of the bags broke in the process,
however, and he felt quite ill. He told the police he had swallowed the
bags of cocaine, and asked to be taken to a hospital, where his
stomach was pumped. The case is State v. Rudd, 856 P.2d 699
(Wash. App. Div. 2 1993).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
SUBSTANCE ABUSE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1994

ALL NME LAWSUITS NOW RESOLVED

National Medical Enterprises wrapped up 1993 by resolving the last
of the lawsuits against it by 13 insurance companies. The Santa
Monica-based chain of psychiatric hospitals announced last month that
it had agreed to pay $90 million to settle the fraud and abuse claims.
Insurance companies had charged that the company had
billed them for inappropriate services.

But NME's problems aren't over yet. There are still some patient
lawsuits in Texas to be settled. And the federal government is also
investigating possible health-care fraud at the company.

It appears that NME may be getting out of the behavioral health care
business, however. Its psychiatric hospitals are reportedly for sale, and
the company is expected to focus on its community hospitals instead.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
SUBSTANCE ABUSE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1994

NATIONAL NETWORK FOR NEEDLE EXCHANGE
PROGRAMS

People interested in needle and syringe exchange programs, supported
as an AIDS reduction measure, now have access to a national network.
The North American Syringe Exchange Network, headed by David
Purchase of the Tacoma Needle Exchange, has the following goals:

To bring together everyone who is interested in needle and syringe
exchange, including exchangers, outreach workers, researchers,
public health officials, treatment providers, and others; To disseminate
information about needle and syringe exchange; To support
exchanges and legalization of exchanges; To help new exchange
programs start up; To help develop model standards for exchange
programs; and To coordinate the fourth North American Syringe
Exchange Convention, set for March 1-5 in Santa Cruz.

To join the network, write to 535 E. Dock Street, #108, Tacoma, WA
98402, or call (206)272-4857. There is no charge to join. There is
also a free electronic bulletin board which will serve as the network's
main communication outlet. It is part of the federal Centers for
Disease Control National AIDS Clearinghouse. To get on line, call
(800)458-5231 and ask for NAC ONLINE.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
SUBSTANCE ABUSE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1994

COSTS OF ALCOHOL DEPENDENCE: SICKNESS AND
DEATH PREDOMINATE

Another study of the economic costs of alcohol dependence has shown
the potential cost-effectiveness of treating alcoholism in early stages.
In the current issue of Alcohol Health & Research World (Volume 17,
Number 1, 1993), estimated economic costs of the disease are outlined
for 1990. The majority of costs were due to alcohol-related diseases
and deaths. Only a fraction of costs were due to direct treatment for
the disease.

Below is a chart outlining the costs of alcohol dependence. Direct
costs are those for which payments are made; indirect costs are those
for which resources, such as income, are lost.

The statistics were compiled by Dorothy P. Rice, a professor in the
School of Nursing, University of California, San Francisco.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
SUBSTANCE ABUSE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1994

EAPA ENDORSES NTC'S PRINCIPLES OF CARE

As health care reform proceeds, the National Treatment Consortium
has been receiving endorsements of its "vision for quality care,"
formally adopted by the group last year as part of the lobbying effort
to make addiction treatment a core benefit. Most recently, the
Employee Assistance Professionals Association has signed on to the
principles, which are based on "building bridges," in the words of
NTC executive vice president Jeffrey Kramer. "A partnership needs
to be established for a viable, effective, efficient system of care,"
Kramer told SAR.

The principles which are incorporated in the NTC's "vision" have
been sent to Congress, to Hillary Rodham Clinton, and to others
involved in trying to keep treatment available and accessible. The
endorsement of EAPA expands the vision beyond that of treatment
providers into the workplace. The principles are listed below.

1.We Are in the Business to Save Lives

We no longer can afford to perpetuate systems that primarily serve to
maintain their own existence. This occurs in both the public and
private sector and exists among all factions of the health care purchase
and delivery system. We need to create a system that has the prime
objective of building healthy productive lifestyles.

2.Speak the Same Language

Universal operational definition of medical necessity and patient
placement criteria are needed to effectively work together. Such
criteria must require ongoing evaluation and field testing and the
development process must include the perspective of payers,
purchasers and providers. We need to continue to promote ideas that
focus on consensus and common concerns and serve to bring all the
factions of the health care system on the same level playing field.
Specifically, managed care and treatment providers need to have the
same regulations in managing and providing care.

3.Alcoholism and Drug Addiction is a Disease

This is a fundamental mandate and it is our responsibility to provide
clear straightforward information to the general public on the
biopsychosocial elements of the disease.

4.Implement Models for a Continuum of Care

We must build bridges between the efforts to educate, prevent,
intervene and treat addiction. Educational efforts should increase the
understanding of the biopsychosocial aspects of the disease and the
difference between having the disease of addiction and abusing alcohol
and other drugs. Prevention activities should include a focus on the
biomedical features of addiction and, when early signs of the disease
surface in the community, efforts should be made to promote early
intervention and treatment. Intervention and treatment must improve
their quality. They must be able to serve more people who need
treatment at a reasonable cost while at the same time ensure that the
services provided have the desired effect.

5.Include Primary Health Care in the Efforts of Early Detection,
Intervention, and Treatment of Addiction

It is necessary to include physicians, nurses and other primary health
care professionals to assist in early detection, intervention and
treatment of addiction.

6.Research Efforts Must Explore Causes of Addiction

Research initiatives should be directed to identify the biopsychosocial
causes of the disease. An effective partnership must be developed
between the research and service provider communities to apply
research findings and work together to develop effective diagnostic and
treatment tools to improve the quality of care. Any partnership
between the science and the service communities could also serve to
develop innovative treatment models that are effective with patients
who do not recover using traditional approaches.

7.Public Policies Should Emphasize These Principles

Addiction is a public health problem, and more support is needed to
effectively educate about, prevent, intervene with, and treat it. The
federal government should adopt the fundamental mandate in
developing its policies and help create effective models of care. To
begin the process, federal funding for demand reduction should be
given priority status equal to that given to supply reduction. Second,
more priority should be placed on funding research that examines
causes and cures of addiction. Third, policies should be developed to
broaden access to treatment, including those encouraging
public/private treatment partnerships.

8.Create Incentives to Work Together

Payers, purchasers and providers need to see the value in building
bridges and working together to create effective and efficient models
of care. We must create systems that integrate effective and efficient
ways of managing costs while at the same time providing the most
appropriate level of care. The value of the health care dollar is a
balance between efficiency and efficacy.

9.Use Quality Improvement Techniques

Payers, purchasers and providers must serve the best interests of the
patient. Quality improvement techniques can improve the efficiency
and efficacy of paying for, purchasing and providing treatment. We
should promote the use of quality improvement in managing and
providing care, as well as quality improvement in developing an
organized system of working together.

10.Build Bridges with the Medical and Mental Health Communities

Invite the medical and mental health communities to adopt the tenets
listed above and join us in the effort to improve the quality of
treatment.

For more information, contact Jeffrey Kramer at the National
Treatment Consortium, 444 North Capitol Street, Suite 642,
Washington, DC 20001; (202)434-4783.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
SUBSTANCE ABUSE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1994

OKLAHOMA SEEKING DIRECTOR OF SUBSTANCE
ABUSE PROGRAMS

The Oklahoma Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse
Services is seeking a Director of Substance Abuse Programs. The
position has a salary range of $52,000 to $62,000. Requirements for
the job are completion of studies for a master's degree in psychology,
sociology, social work, or a closely related field plus eight years of
administrative experience in substance abuse programs, including at
least three years in planning and directing a substance abuse program
in a community setting. Resumes must be received by January 14.
Send them to the Personnel Manager, Oklahoma Department of Mental
Health and Substance Abuse Services, P.O. Box 53277, Oklahoma
City, OK 73152.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
SUBSTANCE ABUSE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1994

NEW ADDRESS FOR EAPA

The Employee Assistance Professionals Association is moving this
month. The new address will be: Suite 500, 2101 Wilson Boulevard,
Arlington, VA 22201. The telephone number remains unchanged:
(703)522-6272.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
SUBSTANCE ABUSE REPORT via NewsNet
January 1, 1994

CONFERENCES

The annual meeting of the National Association of Psychiatric Health
Systems will be held January 23-26 in San Diego; for more
information, contact NAPHS at 1319 F Street, N.W., Suite 1000,
Washington, DC 20004-1154, telephone (202)393-6700...Alcohol
Policy Conference IX will be held January 30-February 2 in
Charleston, SC; for more information, write or call Katherine T.
Altman, 3700 Forest Drive, Suite 300, Columbia, SC 29204-4082,
telephone (803)734-9520.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-21</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B048-260</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mg15.html 205.156.212.5 19970122034108 text/html 23086
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:39:01 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:50 GMT
Content-length: 22899
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mg15.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
CAD/CAM UPDATE via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>DIGITAL DEMONSTRATES MDA SOFTWARE RUNNING&nbsp;ON ALPHA- AND INTEL-BASED WORKSTATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(533 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>ENERGY WEEK '96 FOCUSES ON TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCEMENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(129 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>GATF RELEASES LONG-AWAITED SKILLS STANDARDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(319 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>SKILLS STANDARDS BROCHURE AVAILABLE FROM GATF</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(140 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>NEW SEMINAR CATALOG AVAILABLE FROM GATF</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(169 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>IBM TO MARKET EMS MANUFACTURING SOFTWARE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(186 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>GENETIC WORKSTATION INTRODUCED BY VYSIS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(554 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>MICROVAX 3100 MODEL 96 -- A MINI DATACENTER&nbsp;IN A DESKTOP SERVER PACKAGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(963 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
CAD/CAM UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

DIGITAL DEMONSTRATES MDA SOFTWARE RUNNING
ON ALPHA- AND INTEL-BASED WORKSTATIONS

Digital Equipment Corporation has demonstrated its complete
family of Alpha-and Intel-based systems, all delivering
exceptional performance, running the industry's leading
Mechanical Design Automation (MDA) software applications at
Autofact '95.

"AlphaStation workstations are the world's best in performance
and offer customers a choice of leading 2D and 3D graphics
options and three operating systems -- Digital UNIX, Windows
NT, and OpenVMS. The workstations allow for real productivity
breakthroughs in MDA. Digital's new line of personal
workstations, from Intel- based models through to Alpha-based
models, are economically priced NT-based solutions and offer
easy CISC-to-RISC migration," said Herb Shumway, vice
president of Digital's Software Partner Group. "Digital's
complete range of workstations and servers deliver customers
the best performance at every key price point, providing
design engineers with the power they need for complex models."

Running Circles Around the Competition

Competitive MDA application benchmark demos in Digital's booth
will show the outstanding performance of AlphaStation
workstations. EDS Unigraphics and Pro/ENGINEER applications
demonstrated in the booth will run almost three times faster
on an AlphaStation 600 5/300 workstation than on SGI Indigo 2
R4400/200 and Sun SPARC station 20/71 workstations, and almost
twice as fast as an HP 9000 J210 workstation.

In addition, the Bentley MicroStation CADbench benchmark
running on the AlphaStation 600 5/266 workstation, and on the
Alpha XL 266, Celebris XL 5133, and Celebris XL 6150 Personal
Workstations, will demonstrate the range of systems available
from Digital -- both Intel-based and Alpha-based -- that run
popular Windows NT applications.

Leading MDA Applications Perform Best on Alpha-based Systems

Leading MDA software vendors are demonstrating their products
running on Alpha systems in their own booths, including,
Autodesk, Bentley, Matra Datavision, and SolidWorks, among
others. The following Digital Business Partners will be
demonstrating their application software in Digital's booth:

o ANSYS, Inc. -- ANSYS 5.2 is a multi-purpose design analysis
software for engineers who want multi-purpose finite element
analysis with versatile design analysis and optimization
capabilities.

o Bentley Systems, Inc. -- MicroStation with Modeler
MicroStation Masterpiece is a feature-based parametric solids
modeler and high-end engineering visualization software that
includes ray tracing and animation.

o CIMLOGIC, Inc. -- Toolbox is a set of application tools that
enhances AutoCAD and Designer and performs a number of
functions including 2D and 3D design, detailing, and
dimensioning. The company develops and markets design
automation and drafting annotation applications for AutoCAD.

o Computervision -- Optegra, TDM-Lite for Microsoft Windows NT
is a cost-effective way to bring the benefits of data
management to PC users. It is a member of Computervision's
Optegra enterprise data management family.

o EDS Unigraphics -- Unigraphics is complete CAD/CAM/CAE
software solutions and services that enable optimal individual
productivity, comprehensive design through manufacturing, true
collaborative engineering, and advanced process automation.

o MacNeal-Schwendler Corporation -- MAC/PATRAN and MSC/NASTRAN
is leading analysis software.

o Parametric Technology -- Pro/ENGINEER is a parametric,
feature-based solid modeling system for the design-through-
documentation of mechanical parts and assemblies.

Pro/MECHANICA is design optimization software for easy
evaluation of design form, fit, and function.

o SolidWorks Corporation -- SolidWorks 95 is the first
production-level solid modeling system to be built
specifically for Windows NT.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
CAD/CAM UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

ENERGY WEEK '96 FOCUSES ON TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCEMENTS

Rapid changes within the energy industry - oil, gas,
alternative fuels, and petrochemicals -- are having a major
impact both technologically and geographically. The ENERGY
WEEK'96 Conference & Exhibition, the world's largest event to
focus on current and future technologies for these industries,
attests to the significant advances underway around the globe.
It will also explore CAD/CAM/CIM technologies as applied to
energy industries. It will be held January 29-February 2,
1996, at the George R.  Brown Convention Center in Houston,
Texas.

This year, for the first time, the event is being sponsored
jointly by three major organizations -- the American Society
of Mechanical Engineers (ASME International), the American
Petroleum Institute (API), and PennWell Conferences and
Exhibitions (a division of PennWell Publishing Company).

For more information, call (212)705-8157.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
CAD/CAM UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

GATF RELEASES LONG-AWAITED SKILLS STANDARDS

The Graphic Arts Technical Foundation (GATF) released the
first two long-awaited books from the National Skills
Standards Project.

The Skill Standards Project was initiated in 1992 to develop
skill standards for education and training for the printing
industry. The first two standards, one on prepress/imaging,
and one on press, are now available. The finishing and
distribution skill standard will be available shortly.

Forty industry representatives of graphic arts firms,
associations, union, and education were members of the Project
Policy Committee that directed the project. Over 1,200
industry practitioners from throughout the U.S. spent hundreds
of hours developing and validating the standards.

This Skills Standards Project was funded by the U.S.
Department of Education (DOE). One half of the $516,127 grant
was received at the start of the project in 1992, while the
balance was funded by the DOE in March of 1994.

The skill standards grants were originally launched by the
Bush Administration. The Clinton Administration then included
the skill standards project as-a key part of its Goals 2000
initiative act which was signed into law in March of 1994.
The legislation includes provisions to establish a National
Skill Standards Board to oversee the implementation of
voluntary industry-based skill standards.

Initially, the printing industry was only one of seven
industries designated for a skills study of such magnitude,
but since the GATF project began, funding has been made
available to fifteen additional industries by the DOE and the
Department of Labor (DOL). Some of the other industries
include travel and tourism, computer-aided drafting,
biotechnical sciences, health science and technology,
electronics, retail trade, and metalworking.

The skills standards are available for sale for $20 each, or
you may order all three standards for $49. To order copies,
please contact the GATF Order Department at 412/621-6941. You
may also send requests by fax to 412/621-6598, or by mail to
4615 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
CAD/CAM UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

SKILLS STANDARDS BROCHURE AVAILABLE FROM GATF

A brochure detailing the just-released National Skill
Standards is available from the Graphic Arts Technical
Foundation (GATF).

The brochure contains an order form for the three national
skill standards books. The books on prepress/imaging, Press,
and Finishing and Distribution were released during Graph
Expo'95. The three standards books may be ordered separately
for $20 each, or $49 for all three books.

In 1992, GATF launched a three-year project to develop
world-class standards for business and education/training in
the graphic communications industries, which was funded by the
U.S. Department of Education (DOE) and by members of the
industry.

You may receive a copy of the brochure by sending your
request by fax to the GATF Marketing Department at
412/621-3049. You may also request a copy of the brochure by
writing to GATF, 4615 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA., 15213.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
CAD/CAM UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

NEW SEMINAR CATALOG AVAILABLE FROM GATF

The Graphic Arts Technical Foundation (GATF) is offering its
1996 seminar catalog.

The catalog gives full course descriptions of all seminars
offered by the Foundation, and it contains detailed
biographical sketches for the course instructors. The catalog
is updated annually in July.

GATF offers a variety of half- and full-day seminars covering
all aspects of lithographic printing, paper and ink problems,
digital press equipment, and environmental and safety
compliance issues. GATF also conducts seminars at trade shows
or on-site for industry groups and associations. During the
past year, the Foundation has presented over 175 seminars
throughout the U.S., Canada, and internationally. GATF also
offers customized seminars and customized training programs.

To receive a copy of the GATF Seminar Catalog, or for more
information about GATF seminars and custom training, please
contact Margaret von Koschembahr by phone at 412/621-6941, or
by fax to 412/621-3059. You may also request copies in writing
by directing them to the GATF Training Programs Group at 4615
Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
CAD/CAM UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

IBM TO MARKET EMS MANUFACTURING SOFTWARE

Effective Management Systems (EMS), a leading developer of
manufacturing software, has entered into a marketing agreement
with IBM to supply its Time Critical Manufacturing software on
the giant computer maker's RISC System 6000 manufacturing
process controlling system.

"Our customers want total solutions," said IBM Manufacturing
Segment Manager Randy Oyster. "EMS understands the
requirements of today's mid-sized discrete manufacturer and
provides preintegrated, art-to-part software solutions that
are affordable and offer relatively short implementation time
periods."

Under the agreement, IBM will handle all sales and service
functions associated with its customers while EMS will retain
responsibility for licensing and upgrades.

"We are extremely excited by the agreement with IBM and the
enormous potential in being part of a lead-with strategy for
the discrete manufacturers they target," said Mike Brennolt,
director of market programs (responsible for strategic
alliances) at EMS.

"Forming a partnership with IBM will allow us to make use of
new distribution channels and a dedicated, experienced staff
to further strengthen our presence within a key group of
manufacturers with sales ranging from $10 to $150 million."

For more information, call 414-359-9800.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
CAD/CAM UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

GENETIC WORKSTATION INTRODUCED BY VYSIS

Integrating various applications of cytogenetics and
karyotyping just became easier with the introduction of the
QUIPS Genetic Workstation from Vysis Inc., of Downers Grove,
IL. For research use in karyotyping, chromosomal evaluation,
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and comparative
genomic hybridization (CGH) analyses, the new integrated
system comprises a multitude of tools and optimized reagents
designed to easily capture, enhance, analyze and print high-
quality images.

The QUIPS Genetic Workstation allows researchers to visualize
fluorescent signals under a high-powered fluorescence
microscope. With a simple point and click, the user can
capture and resolve even closely spaced probe signals. The
system combines a high-performance, digital charged-couple
device (CCD) camera with powerful imaging software to permit
acquisition and analysis of even the weakest signals.
Resolution of the Photometrics CCD camera approaches the
theoretical maximum for light.

QUIPS configurations and tools include QUIPS-FISH, QUIPS-CGH,
QUIPS-AKS, and QUIPS-ACES.

The QUIPS-FISH system utilizes scientific grade CCD cameras
for unsurpassed spatial resolution and sensitivity with a wide
range of FISH probes and reagents. The system is equipped with
a complete set of filters and automation for most FISH imaging
needs, including Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH).
Featuring flexible text and graphic layout, QUIPS-FISH offers
accurate, high-resolution printing using dye sublimation
printers for a result that nears photographic quality.

Vysis offers a wide range of FISH probes and reagents
optimized for use with QUIPS-FISH instrumentation and filters.
Vysis CEP Chromosome Enumerator Probes, WCP Whole Chromosome
Paints, and LSI Loci-Specific Identifiers are powerful tools
for enumerating chromosomes in interphase or metaphase
preparations, identifying translocations, or determining other
chromosomal anomalies.

Vysis has designed the QUIPS Comparative Genomic Hybridization
(CGH) System to capture, analyze, visualize and produce rapid
quantitative interpretation and reports of CGH results in one
integrated unit. With CGH used more frequently now as a
powerful in situ hybridization tool for whole genomic DNA
analysis, accurate amplification of the ratio profile of two
fluorescent signals has gained in importance.

The system provides statistical interpretation of the ratio
profile information for quantitative comparison with control
data. In addition, it provides results-oriented automation and
integration of DAPI-banded karyotyping in a flexible data
format. Project management capabilities using a centralized
directory and near photographic quality output complete the
QUIPS-CGH System.

The QUIPS Automated Karyotyping System (AKS) automates the
process of capturing, enhancing, classifying and printing
high-quality images of chromosomes prearranged in a variety or
user-selected karyogram formats. QUIPS-AKS replaces 35mm
photography, darkroom processing and manual cutting and
pasting of chromosomes. The system provides auto-
classification of chromosomes and karyotyping of C, R, Q and
DAPI-banded chromosomes, managed by a centralized directory
for project management. The system simplifies results
reporting and provides near photographic quality high-
resolution accurate prints.

The QUIPS Automated Chromosomal Evaluation System (ACES)
increases throughput by scanning a slide and assessing
multiple gene probes in different colors within nuclei. An
example of the QUIPS ACES is counting human chromosomes in
amniocytes for ploidy status as related to genetic diseases.
The system automatically scans slides, isolates nuclei, and
counts multiple color signals to provide an easily interpreted
statistical result. Reliable unattended operation and rapid
image-acquisition and transfer increase the efficiency of the
cytogenetics laboratory, allowing technician time for other
required tasks. Vysis has designed the QUIPS ACES for future
expansion with additional assays and multiple slide
capabilities.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
CAD/CAM UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

MICROVAX 3100 MODEL 96 -- A MINI DATACENTER
IN A DESKTOP SERVER PACKAGE

HIGHLIGHTS

o The new MicroVAX 3100 Model 96 delivers large system
performance, almost 200 transactions per second, based on a 10
ns (nanosecond) NVAX chip -- at small system prices

o Twenty percent faster than its predecessor (MicroVAX 3100
Model 95), the Model 96 is a mini datacenter in a 16-pound
desktop package

o Engineered to ensure that applications and business
information are safe and secure, the Model 96 puts the CPU
power of a mid-range system on your desktop -- for the price
of a multi-user PC

o For the first time, all MicroVAX 3100 family members --
Models 40, 85, and 96 -- are protected by a 3-year warranty
versus a one-year warranty

PRODUCT DESCRIPTION

Users need more performance for growing user populations;
client/server solutions that lower their costs; and better
investment protection. The MicroVAX 3100 Model 96 is the
latest and fastest member of the MicroVAX family of low-cost,
high performance servers. The powerful desktop system answers
users' demands for client/server computing solutions that
combine quality and performance, at the right price.

The Model 96 includes a built-in growth path that is quick,
easy, and affordable. One quick upgrade allows the client to
add more users, increase the number and complexity of
applications, and improve general system response time --
without disrupting daily operations. Therefore, the system
purchase is well protected now and into the future.

The MicroVAX 3100 family features:

o A three-year on-site hardware warranty, versus the
previously offered one-year warranty.

o Continued support for MicroVAX 3100 Model 40 8-MB Base
Systems, which now include NAS 200; and the 16-MB ADVANTAGE
SERVER systems.

o Continued support for MicroVAX 3100 Model 85 64-MB
ADVANTAGE SERVER systems, and support for Model 85 Base
Systems through July 29 only.

o Support for the Model 95 through July 29 only, as the Model
96 replaces the Model 95.

o Connection to PC clients based on MS-DOS, OS/2, UNIX, and
Macintosh operating systems via NAS 200 software.

o Integration with IBM, Hewlett-Packard, Apple, Sun, COMPAQ,
and CRAY systems via Digital's DECnet, TCP/IP SNA, X.25, and
X.400 large system networking.


BENEFITS

The MicroVAX 3100 Model 96 combines the power and strength of
VAX technology, the integrity and maturity of OpenVMS
software, the affordability of industry-standard SCSI-based
storage, and the robustness of ADVANTAGE SERVER packaging to
deliver:

o Faster KA56 CPU based on the 10 ns NVAX chip, in BA42-B
enclosure.

o Up to 30 GB of SCSI storage and StorageWorks expansion.

o Up to 128 MB of error correction code (ECC) memory.

o On-board cache of 512 KB.

o ADVANTAGE SERVER systems packaged with a 1-GB SCSI disk;
CD-ROM; and NAS (Network Application Support) 200 licenses for
DECnet, TCP/IP, PATHWORKS, Polycenter Distribution Client,
DECwindows Motif, ObjectBroker, DECmessageQ, and DECprint
software.

o In-cabinet upgrades from the Models 40, 85, and 95; plus
system trade-ins for MicroVAX II, 2000, 3100, 3100e, and
VAX-11 Model 7xx, 82xx, and 83xx users (see the "VAX to VAX
Upgrades" article in this issue).

AVAILABILITY AND ORDERING

The MicroVAX 3100 Model 96, with the new three-year warranty,
is orderable now with shipping to begin May 19.

The Model 96 replaces the Model 95 (DV-31RAA-C9/E9/CA), which
is available through July 29 only and does not include the new
three-year warranty. In addition, Model 85 Base Systems
(DV-31JAA-C9/E9) are orderable through July 29 only and do not
include the three-year warranty.

The MicroVAX 3100 Models 85 and 96 ship with OpenVMS V6.1,
and also support OpenVMS V5.5-2H4 and higher. The MicroVAX
3100 Model 40 supports OpenVMS V5.5 and higher.

Order No. Description

MicroVAX 3100 Servers with Three-year Warranty: DV-31SCA-CA
Model 96 64 MB ADVANTAGE SERVER

DV-31JCB-CA Model 85 64 MB ADVANTAGE SERVER DV-31GAB-B9 Model
40 8 MB System Building Block DV-31GCB-CA Model 40 16 MB
ADVANTAGE SERVER

SERVICES

The warranty for the MicroVAX 3100 Models 40, 85, and 96
covers:

o Hardware: Three years on-site; next day response; five days
per week, nine hours per day (5 x 9) coverage; parts and labor
included.

o OpenVMS operating system: One year conformance to SPD, 90
days telephone advisory support.

o NAS 200: One year conformance to SPD, 90 days telephone
advisory support.

Users who require a higher level of support during the
warranty period should consider Supplemental Services.

Software Coverage Terms

Digital has provided telephone support on a software warranty
that included advisory and remedial components when purchased
at Standard Price. The new warranty no longer includes
remedial content or the rights to new versions. Digital has
added easy to order Supplemental Services to better match the
varying needs of both users and business partners.

The new software warranty includes one year conformance to
SPD; and 90 days telephone advisory support, Monday through
Friday, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. Telephone advisory support includes
information on product features and usage; and advisory
support on installation, problem isolation, and problem
notification (notifying the appropriate software organization
or vendor of any unpublished software usage problems).
Electronic problem submission and electronic conferencing are
available through Supplemental Service upgrades.

Hardware and Software Supplemental Services

Supplemental Service packages will upgrade the three-year
warranty from five days per week, nine hours per day (5x9),
next day service to a four-hour guaranteed response time, with
options for 5 x 9, 5 x 12, 6 x 16, and 7 x 24 call windows.

There are two software support Supplemental Service upgrade
packages for OpenVMS software. Each package extends the
warranty to 12 or 36 months, and upgrades the service level to
advisory and remedial software support with new version
license rights.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-22</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B048-286</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mg19.html 205.156.212.5 19970122034137 text/html 1515
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:39:41 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:50 GMT
Content-length: 1329
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mg19.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
COMLINE JAPAN DAILY: INDUSTRY AUTOMATION via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 08, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>KHI Establishes German Robot Sales Subsidiary&nbsp;</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(80 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
COMLINE JAPAN DAILY: INDUSTRY AUTOMATION via NewsNet
JANUARY 08, 1996

KHI Establishes German Robot Sales Subsidiary


   Kawasaki Heavy Industries <7012> announced the establishment
of a wholly owned subsidiary, Kawasaki Robotics Deutschland,
which is designed to fortify the company's European sales and
service of industrial robots.  The subsidiary, which is
capitalized at DM500,000, is headed by the former technical
manager of Kawasaki Heavy Industries UK.  Initially, Kawasaki
Robotics Deutschland will employ a staff of seven or eight.

Des: ZSA00/YBA12/ZEC00/ZE000
Ref: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbun, 12/28/95, p. 7; Japan Industrial
Journal, 12/28/95, p. 9







<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-23</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B048-324</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mg17.html 205.156.212.5 19970122034200 text/html 62302
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:39:59 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:50 GMT
Content-length: 62115
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mg17.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MANUFACTURING AUTOMATION via NewsNet <BR>
January, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>=======================================================</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>MANUFACTURERS MUST PROACTIVELY PLAN FOR CHANGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(460 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>MCAD/CAM, CAE SOFTWARE MARKET TOPS $2.5 BILLION IN 1995</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1634 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>PDM CONFERENCE '96 WILL HELP CONTROL PRODUCT DATA AND&nbsp;DOCUMENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(384 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>TELEDYNE BROWN GARNERS GRANT TO DEVELOP NEW LASER TOOLS&nbsp;TECHNOLOGY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(796 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>BERKELEY SCIENTISTS DISCOVER NEW MR MATERIALS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(803 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>EFFICIENT ION BEAM PULSING TECHNOLOGY COULD ENERGIZE KEY&nbsp;MARKETS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1315 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>KPMG PEAT MARWICK AND UNIVERSITY OF TENNESSEE TO SURVEY&nbsp;LOGISTICS TRENDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(574 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>LXE UNVEILS HANDHELD FUZZY LOGIC SCANNER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(967 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>RED PEPPER EXPLOITS A WINDOW OF OPPORTUNITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1063 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>BAAN AND HP ENHANCE STRATEGIC RELATIONSHIP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(588 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MANUFACTURING AUTOMATION via NewsNet
January, 1996

MANUFACTURERS MUST PROACTIVELY PLAN FOR CHANGE

Manufacturing Automation  underscores that manufacturers should
strive to continuously plan and reengineer their business processes
to successfully apply innovative technologies and thereby address
the evolving demands and expectations of their customers.

The Sixth Annual Grant Thornton Survey of American Manufacturers
Report , sponsored by Grant Thornton LLP (Chicago, IL, 312-856-
0200) and based on interviews with key executives at US
manufacturing companies with annual sales from $10 million-$500
million, addresses several issues that will impact manufacturers'
success or failure as they approach the millennium: strategic
planning; information technology; financial management; and
international expansion.

"No company today can escape the forces of change," asserts Michael
N. Cantwell, Grant Thornton's national director for manufacturing and
partner in charge of the study. "This holds true not only for the
world's industrial and retail powerhouses, but for midsize
manufacturers, which often supply materials, components, or
finished product to the biggest companies. While technology is an
enabler, it is not the solution unless companies engage in meaningful
business planning and processes." The following are among the
study's key findings.

Quality and customer service remain the two most competitive
factors for US manufacturers. Executives are twice as likely to cite as
reasons for their success either high-quality products (38%) or
superior service (33%) rather than cost-efficiency (17%) or rapid
product development (12%). However, the report states that speed
and agility will ultimately become a vital requirement for midsize

manufacturers, as their major customers move toward "mass
customization"--a made-to-order strategy offering greater product
options for the mass market. To realize this goal, 78% of midsize
companies are reducing product cycle times by streamlining product
design or reducing the number of component parts.

A clear majority (87%) of midsize companies have reengineered at
least one business process, most often in the production area (72%);
and 40% of the manufacturers rate the results of their reengineering
efforts as outstanding or excellent.

The majority of midsize manufacturers describe as average their
companies' use of technology in a variety of areas. However, 52%
plan to spend nearly an average of $500,000 in 1995 on new
systems, software, and telecommunications equipment. Despite the
availability of various techniques and technologies for enhancing
inventory management, 40% of midsize manufacturers report their
inventories are higher than they were two years ago. Most say
higher stocks are required to meet customer demands for rapid
response.

In the wake of various regional and global trade agreements, 72%
indicate they will place higher emphasis on developing foreign
markets for their products through such means as exporting and
joint ventures. Moreover, 72% of the companies that are pursuing or
plan to receive ISO 9000 certification report they will do so because
their customers expect or require it.

Sincerely,
Peter Adrian, Editor



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MANUFACTURING AUTOMATION via NewsNet
January, 1996

MCAD/CAM, CAE SOFTWARE MARKET TOPS $2.5 BILLION IN 1995

Worldwide revenues for mechanical CAD/CAM, CAE software will
expand at a scintillating 18.2% rate in 1995 to exceed $2.5 billion,
compared to over $2.1 billion in 1994, according to Daratech, Inc.
(Cambridge, MA, 617-354-2339). (See Figure 1).

The growth in the CAD/CAM, CAE software arena is being propelled
by a strengthening global economy, fueling capital investment by
manufacturing firms. Simultaneously, flagship software products
from many major vendors are generating sanguine demand from
customers in various geographical regions. Many of the products
have benefited from significant technology renewal and functional
enhancements in such areas as solids and assembly modeling,
EDM/PDM integration, and ease of use. Such products now appear
capable of realizing the visions promised by their developers, and
are gaining the confidence of users. Therefore, manufacturing firms
seeking to improve their design and manufacturing productivity and
boost their global competitiveness, are adapting these products in
record numbers.

Global mechanical CAE software revenues are forecast to increase
14.4% in 1995 to reach $355 million, from $310 million in 1994. The
growth in the MCAE software segment is driven by the efforts of
major analysis software vendors, such as MacNeal-Schwendler and
ANSYS, to transcend the engineering analysis market and penetrate
the much broader design engineering arena. Moreover, such vendors
are working to enable closed-loop design optimization by furnishing

bidirectional associativity between their analysis tools and leading
CAD software products.

For example, Parametric Technology Corporation (Waltham, MA)
plans to tighten the integration of Pro/ENGINEER with its recently
acquired MECHANICA design optimization software over the next
several Pro/E release cycles, with the aim of achieving full
bidirectional associativity. EDS Unigraphics (Maryland Heights, MO)
and MacNeal-Schwendler have partnered to deliver "closed-loop
associativity" between CAD/CAM and CAE software for Unigraphics
and MSC/NASTRAN users. SDRC (Milford, OH) has long emphasized
the high level of integration between the modeling and analysis
functions within its I-DEAS suite of design and analysis software.

Parametric Technology is projected to be the growth leader in 1995
among the leading mechanical CAD/CAM, CAE software suppliers. The
company's mechanical software revenues are forecast to grow 43.2%
to $313.9 million in1995, compared to $219.2 million in 1994, as it
rapidly gains ground on IBM, which remains in first place.
Parametric is forecast to be the number three software supplier in
the mechanical CAE arena in 1995, as a result of its acquisition of
Rasna Corporation and the latter's MECHANICA product line for
mechanical design synthesis. Parametric's MCAE software revenues
are projected to exceed $31.4 million in 1995, representing a
spectacular 86.3% increase over the estimated revenues of $17.1
million for MECHANICA in 1994.

Among the key factors driving Parametric's growth in 1995 and
1996 are the aggressive expansion of the company's worldwide sales

organization, accelerating sales of its flagship Pro/ENGINEER
software, and robust product sales in all major geographic areas. The
sales growth is also being spearheaded by what Parametric perceives
as a global trend among manufacturers to invest in tools and
technologies to increase productivity and capture a competitive
advantage.

IBM/Dassault Systemes (Armonk, NY/Suresnes, France) is expected
to be the premier supplier of mechanical CAD/CAM, CAE software in
1995, as its mechanical revenues derived from sales of CATIA and
CADAM software increase 27% in 1995 to $410.4 million, compared
to $323.1 million in 1994. IBM/Dassault notes that the growth in
CATIA sales in 1995 and continuing into 1996 will be fueled by such
key factors as Dassault's increased technical and marketing support
of IBM's North American sales force with respect to CATIA, success
in major automotive accounts, and increased revenue contribution
from the Asia/Pacific region.

Market acceptance of CATIA has increased, as the product's
competitive strengths have markedly improved over the past 18
months, according to IBM/Dassault. The product's new architecture
allows CATIA developer Dassault to deliver software upgrades every
four months; and the company says the processes are now in place to
meet this aggressive release schedule. Dassault reports that Release
4.1.5 of CATIA is the fifth major product release in 18 months, and
increases the total number of CATIA products by 60% over the
previous release. Dassault expects that frequent product upgrades
will allow for more rapid enhancement of CATIA's functionality
across a broad range of applications, thereby enhancing the product's

competitive position.

IBM/Dassault also reports expanding market acceptance of CATIA on

Hewlett-Packard workstations, with about 50 customers having thus
far installed CATIA on HP hardware, many of them new CATIA
accounts.

Autodesk, Inc. (San Rafael, CA), the projected leader in overall 1995
CAD/CAM, CAE software revenue, is forecast to be the number three
supplier of mechanical software, as its mechanical CAD/CAM, CAE
segment revenues increase 20.4% in 1995 to $230.5 million,
compared to $191.5 million in 1994. The company reports that
upgrade revenue from AutoCAD Release 13 has driven a significant
portion of its growth in 1995, along with incremental sales of
AutoCAD to new customers. Sales of Autodesk's Workcenter
EDM/PDM software and data publishing products are also expected to
contribute to the company's software growth in 1995.

Autodesk's Mechanical Desktop offering, announced in September
1995 and slated for shipment in late 1995 or early 1996, is
characterized by the company as heralding its most aggressive push
into the mechanical market. Autodesk's mechanical revenue growth
in 1996 will likely be driven by sales of this product, and third-party

applications provided by the company's dozen Mechanical
Applications Initiative partners. Autodesk notes that the partners
will deliver a range of complementary, fully integrated applications
for analysis through manufacturing that will possess the same look
and feel as Mechanical Desktop.

The forecast is based on Autodesk's November 6, 1995
announcement that its net revenues for the quarter ending October
31, 1995 will be lower than anticipated due to weak sales in Asia
Pacific and Latin America, slower than expected upgrade revenue
from AutoCAD Release 13, and an unfavorable currency impact due
to fluctuations in the US dollar. The company believes such factors
will persist into the fourth quarter, but is optimistic that the launch
of several new products late in the quarter and in the following
quarter will drive revenue growth in 1996. Before the
announcement, Autodesk's mechanical software revenues were
forecast to rise 26.7% to $242.6 million.

Structural Dynamics Research Corporation (SDRC) is projected to be
the sixth-ranked supplier of mechanical CAD/CAM, CAE software in
1995, with its mechanical software revenues growing 20.4% to
$134.1 million, compared to $11.4 million in 1994, reflecting user
acceptance of the latest version of I-DEAS Master Series, Release 2.1.
The company, moreover, is projected to be the number two supplier
of mechanical CAE software, as its MCAE software revenues expand
20% in 1995 to $37.5 million, compared to $31.3 million in 1994.

SDRC reports its software growth in 1995 and into '96 will be
propelled by greater use and integration of EDM/PDM with
CAD/CAM, CAE software, a more highly leveraged and expanded
distribution model, and support of its flagship solids modeling
software on Windows NT platforms. The company, which is currently
shipping I-DEAS Master Series software for Windows NT/Intel-based
systems, also anticipates boosting its revenues by gaining more
repeat business from its existing customer base.

EDS Unigraphics is projected to be the fifth leading supplier of
mechanical CAD/CAM, CAE software in 1995, increasing its
mechanical software revenues 14.9% to $199.4 million, compared to
$173.5 million in 1994. The company reports that the trend toward
performing large-scale, complex design and manufacturing work
among large manufacturing companies is providing it with a plethora
of sales opportunities in the area of CAD/CAM, CAE, EDM/PDM  and
related implementation services. EDS UG expects other groups within
EDS to provide the Unigraphics division with a heightened level of
such opportunities in the near future. An additional factor driving
EDS UG's software growth in 1995 is the recovery of the automotive
and aerospace industries, which account for a large share of the
company's business.

Computervision Corporation (Bedford, MA) is forecast to be the
fourth-ranked mechanical CAD/CAM, CAE software provider in 1995,
with its mechanical software revenues rising 10% to $215.6 million,
compared to $196.0 million in 1994. Moreover, CV is projected to be
the number five supplier of mechanical CAE software in 1995,
increasing its MCAE revenues 10% to $32.3 million, compared to
$29.4 million in 1994. Throughout much of 1995, CV maintained its
focus on cost reduction and profitability, while expanding their core

mechanical software and services business.

Closing major sales opportunities will be a key factor enabling
Computervision to meet or exceed projected revenue increase in
1995. CV's growth will also be fueled by a expanding number of sales

opportunities in CAD/CAM and EDM/PDM, and by the company's
implementation of its electronic product definition (EPD) strategy for
helping major manufacturers achieve concurrent engineering, digital
product development, and total product life-cycle management.
Revenues derived from applications based on CV's Pelorus product
architecture are also expected to contribute to the company's
software revenue growth.

Prominent manufacturers from North America, Europe, and the
Pacific Rim will convene in Boston, Massachusetts on March 4-6,
1996 to hear CEOs from the CAD/CAM, CAE and EDM/PDM industry,
including Steven Walske, Chairman & CEO, Parametric Technology
Corporation; James Meadlock, Chairman & CEO of Intergraph
Corporation; Russell Planitzer, Chairman & CEO, Computervision
Corporation; Bernard Charles, president, Dassault Systemes S.A., and
others explain their companies' strategies for computer-aided
engineering and manufacturing.

The discussions, which are part of Daratech's CAD/CAM, CAE and
EDM/PDM Strategy Workshops '96, will focus on how users should
update, revalidate, or completely reformulate their CAD/CAM, CAE
and EDM strategies to conform to contemporary technological and
business realities. This requirement has increasingly pressing in the
light of the significant advances in technology and the emergence of
the Internet and EDM/PDM as major factors impacting end-users'
CAD/CAM, CAE strategies.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MANUFACTURING AUTOMATION via NewsNet
January, 1996

PDM CONFERENCE '96 WILL HELP CONTROL PRODUCT DATA AND
DOCUMENTS

CIMdata's sixth annual PDM Conference, regarded as a major event in
the rapidly-expanding Product Data Management (PDM) industry,
will be held April 9-11, 1996 in Boca Raton, FL. The conference is
expected to attract nearly 1,000 delegates and more than 30
suppliers of PDM-related systems and services.

PDM Conference '96 will focus on the ways organizations use PDM to
control vast quantities of swiftly changing product data and
documents, thereby improving information flow, collaboration among
functional groups, and the speed of bringing products to the
marketplace. Exhibits of commercial systems by leading PDM
suppliers will be featured throughout the conference, which will
consist of one day of tutorials followed by two days of conference
sessions.

The conference agenda includes discussions of PDM system selection
and implementation, integration issues, user experiences, technology
and industry trends, multi-industry applications, quality support
efforts, certification requirements, and configuration management.
The cost is US$895 for the two-day conference, and an additional
US$400 for the one-day tutorials.

PDM serves as a tool to help engineers and others manage data as
well as the product development process. Systems keep track of the
reams of data and information required to design, build, support,
distribute, and maintain products. Encompassing the repertoire of
systems that manage product definition information, PDM is a
general extension of a wide range of techniques frequently referred
to as engineering data management (EDM), document management,
product information management (PIM), technical data management
(TDM), technical information management (TIM), image management,
etc.

Ed Miller, CIMdata's president, notes that the information managed
by PDM includes electronic documents, digital files, and database
records. "This type of product information usually pertains to
manufactured items, such as automobiles, aircraft, office equipment,
consumer products, and home appliances," Miller explains. "Other
industries also apply the technology in a more general sense of the
term 'product' so that PDM reaches across a broad expanse of
enterprises. Some of these include projects in the construction
industry, such as buildings and highways, oil refineries and other
types of process plants, complex facilities including airports and
warehouses, and distribution networks for electrical, gas, and other

utilities."

The global PDM market is forecast to expand at about a 33% annual
rate to reach about $636 million in 1995, compared to $478 million
in 1994, according to CIMdata.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MANUFACTURING AUTOMATION via NewsNet
January, 1996

TELEDYNE BROWN GARNERS GRANT TO DEVELOP NEW LASER TOOLS
TECHNOLOGY

Teledyne Brown Engineering has received a US Commerce
Department grant for cross-shared funding for optics technology
research and development. Teledyne Brown and Utilase Systems
(Detroit, MI) joined SDL, Inc. (San Jose, CA) to develop technology for
a new generation of laser-based cutting and welding tools that are
more versatile, less bulky, and less expensive to purchase and
operate than those currently available. The new technology promises
to enable laser-based materials processing to penetrate considerably
more manufacturing niches in the automotive assembly line.

Led by SDL, the team is one of 44 selected in five key technology
areas for the Commerce Department's annual Advanced Technology
Program (ATP) Awards--a program designed to catalyze economic
expansion and job creation. The ATP supports strategic, high-risk
research in cutting-edge technologies; and awards projects based on
their scientific and technical merit and potential benefit to the US
economy.

The team received one of 15 awards presented in the Motor Vehicle
Manufacturing Technology category. Teledyne Brown's role entails
developing optical systems to enhance the performance and
efficiency of lasers in material processing systems, thereby reducing
costs for US automobile manufacturers.

"SDL's decision to select Teledyne Brown Engineering as a major
contributor to this effort is an acknowledgment of our leadership in
the field of micro-optics," declared Paul Fileger, Teledyne Brown's
manager of electro-optics. "The ATP award demonstrates not only
the significance of our technology, but is evidence of the trend
toward laser-based systems i material processing."

The team members will receive nearly $3.6 million to match
company funding for research and development of the new laser
tools. The Department of Commerce committed over $188 million
through the Advanced Technology Program in 1995.

Bruce Peters, production manager, Electrooptics Products Group at
Teledyne Brown told Manufacturing Automation  that the overall
system developed by the researchers will use the brightness and
modularity of an array of laser diodes to replace CO2 and Nd:YAG
lasers in welding and cutting applications. The advantages of such
laser diodes include reduced costs and enhanced longevity. SDL will
provide the laser diodes and system packaging; and Utilase, which
supplies laser-based systems for machining and welding applications,
will provide the parameters and system requirements necessary for
satisfying customers.

Teledyne Brown will work with SDL on aligning an array of micro
lenses (that are on the order of several hundred microns in
diameter) with an array of laser diodes used in the system.
According to Peters, the first building block of the overall system will
be demonstrated by the end of 1996. The modular building block
will consist of a laser diodes or an array of diodes, an optical system,
and fixturing. With more than 40 years of experience in supplying
optical products and systems for the Defense Department, Teledyne
Brown (Huntsville, AL, 205-726-2429) has developed a
comprehensive range of optical products with broad commercial
applications.

Demand for laser diodes in the US is forecast to rise at a 7.6% annual
rate to reach $140 million in 2000, from $90 million in 1994,
according to The Freedonia Group, Inc.'s (Cleveland, OH, 216-921-
6800) Flat Screen Displays & Other Optoelectronics  report (#728).

Global revenues for laser machine tools are forecast to increase at a
7.1% compound annual rate to approach $1.3 billion in 1999,
compared to $803.1 million in 1992, according to Frost & Sullivan's
World Standard and Special Machine Tool Markets  report (920-10).
Revenues for 1996-1998 are placed at about $1.0 billion, $1.1 billion,
and $1.2 billion, respectively.

Worldwide unit shipments of laser machine tools are projected to
rise at an 8.7% compound annual rate to total 3,941 in 1999, from
2,193 in 1992. Unit shipments during 1996-1999 are pegged at
2,986, 3,268, and 3,589, respectively.

In 1996, the projected distribution of the total laser machine tool
revenues by product type is: CO2 lasers-64.0%; and Nd:YAG-36.0%.
The projected distribution in 1999 is: CO2-62.7%; and Nd:YAG-37.3%.

Revenues for the US laser machine tools market are forecast to
expand at a 6.8% compound annual rate to reach $264.9 million in
1999, as opposed to $167.5 million in 1992. Revenues for 1996-1998
are projected at $212.9 million, $228.0 million, and $245.5 million,

respectively.

In 1996, the projected end-user industry distribution of the total
revenues for the laser machine tools market is (all figures are
rounded): automotive-37.0%; industrial/electrical machinery and
equipment (I/EME)-22.4%; aerospace/defense-20.8%; and "other"
(including medical equipment and precision instrument suppliers,
shipbuilding, and railroads)-19.9%. In 1999, the distribution will be:

automotive-37.9%; I/EME-21.3%; aerospace/defense-20.5%; and
"other"-20.3%.

Revenues for the worldwide automotive industry market for laser
machine tools are forecast to advance at a 7.9% compound annual
rate to reach $491.6 million in 1999, from $289.2 million in 1992.
Revenues for 1996-1998 are put at $384.9 million, $416.7 million,
and $453.2 million, respectively.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MANUFACTURING AUTOMATION via NewsNet
January, 1996

BERKELEY SCIENTISTS DISCOVER NEW MR MATERIALS

Scientists at the Ernest Orlando Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory's Molecular Design Institute (Berkeley, CA, 510-486-
6249) have used combinational synthesis--a strategy developed at
the Lab for making and testing many complex metal materials in
parallel--to discover new magnetoresistive (MR) compounds; e.g.,
materials whose electrical conductivity changes in a magnetic field. A
US Department of Energy national laboratory managed by the
University of California, the Berkeley Lab conducts unclassified
scientific research.

Berkeley Lab researchers Xiao-Dong Xiang, Peter Schultz (who is also
a professor of chemistry at UC Berkeley) et. al. published their
findings in the October 13 issue of Science. The researchers initially

described their combinational technique for discovering new solid-
state materials with novel physical or chemical properties--
particularly their methodology allowing for the parallel synthesis of
spacially addressable arrays containing superconducting copper
oxide thin films--in the June 23 issue of Science.

"The technique is a powerful way to examine a broad base of
advanced materials," Xiang explained. "Magnetoresistant materials
are just the first."

Combinational synthesis (involving thin-film deposition and physical
masking techniques) purportedly enables materials scientists to
create thousands of complex materials in the time it typically takes
to create one. In the technique, materials are laid down in a
checkerboard arrangement, as thin squares arranged in a grid.
Different metal ingredients are stenciled onto the grid through cut-
out "masks." Each square in the grid receives a different combination
of metals, owing to the different cut-outs used for each ingredient.

Heat treatment mixes the ingredients and creates a grid of stable
compounds--a "combinatorial library." The materials can be scanned
for interesting electrical properties with a matched set of contact
pins. Xiang and Schultz have demonstrated that they can put as
many as 10,000 different hi-tech materials into a single square-inch
library.

The MR compounds in the study are members of a class of materials
known as perovskite oxides--conductive metal crystals comprised of
complex ratios of four to six metal atoms. Their many-atom structure
renders them especially suited for combinational study. Interesting
materials in such classes are generally discovered by substituting
atoms in an already known compound or changing the ratios of the
existing atoms. Using a combinatorial strategy, scientists can look at
many atom substitutions and ratio adjustments in a single
combinatorial library.

To search for new materials with magnetoresistance, the researchers
began with a well-studied class of MR materials based on manganese
oxide. They substituted similar elements from the periodic table--
iron, vanadium, and cobalt--for manganese, and made a separate
combinatorial library for each one. The researchers achieved success
with the cobalt oxide library, which yielded 26 new MR materials.
Such materials showed resistance changes as high as 72%, rendering
the cobalt oxides similar to the so-called "colossal" class of MR
materials. Colossal MR materials lose a great deal of their resistance
in magnetic fields, some as much as 99.99%.

Although the phenomenon is still not well understood, scientists
suspect that magnetoresistance is associated with a physical
characteristic known as spin polarization, which affects how electrons
can be passed back and forth between neighboring atoms. Atoms
with similar spin polarizations are much more likely to transfer
electrons between one another than those with different spin
polarizations. It is thought that magnetism aligns the spin
polarization in MR materials, thereby allowing electrons to jump
more freely between atoms, causing the resistance in a material to
decrease.

Previously, combinatorial approaches have been used successfully by
researchers in the life sciences who have searched for potential
drugs by screening vast libraries of protein combinations. Xiang and
Schultz are purportedly the first to apply the philosophy to solid-
state materials.

Xiang told Manufacturing Automation  that the new MR materials
could potentially be used in disk drive sensor heads, as well as in
other types of sensors to detect magnetic fields. He adds that colossal
MR materials have potential for considerably enhancing the
sensitivity of magnetic sensors and increasing the areal density of
memory devices.

Civilian, open global demand for magnetic field sensors are forecast
to increase at a 3.9% average annual rate during 1991-2001 to reach
828.1 mil. DM (about $552.1 million at the exchange rate of 1.50 DM
for the dollar) in 2001, compared to 565.3 mil. DM (about $376.9
million) in 1991 and 679.2 mil. DM (about $452.8 million) in 1996,
according to Intechno Consulting AG's (Basel, Switzerland) Sensor
Markets 2001  report. An updated version of the report is now
available.

In 1996, the application area distribution of the total civilian, open
magnetic field sensor market is: professional instruments-92.0 mil.
DM (about $61.3 million); consumer electronics-299.2 mil. DM (about
$199.5 million); and EDP office equipment-288.0 mil. DM (about
$192.0 million). VIP's monthly Sensor Business Digest  newsletter
provides in-depth information on key established and emerging
sensor markets, products, technologies, and applications.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
MANUFACTURING AUTOMATION via NewsNet
January, 1996

EFFICIENT ION BEAM PULSING TECHNOLOGY COULD ENERGIZE KEY
MARKETS

Spearheaded by Technology Ventures Corporation (Albuquerque,
NM, 505-246-2882), Quantum Manufacturing, Inc. (Albuquerque,
NM, 505-881-4121) has received a $4.2 million equity investment
from Rainbow Technologies, Inc. (Irvine, CA). The financing
agreement, signed in September, affords the opportunity to
implement QMI's plan to build a commercial prototype system and
begin validation studies with customers. Quantum's high energy
pulsed ion beam technology for efficient, low-cost surface treatment
of materials was developed by two Sandia National Laboratories

scientists--Regan Stinnett and Eugene Neau--who, with assistance
from Technology Ventures, formed QMI.

"It's amazing to us," Stinnett exclaimed. "And, while we have to give
credit to many people, including the management at the labs for
their encouragement, none of it would have been possible without
Technology Ventures Corporation. They were the key to the
commercialization process."

"We are proud to be part of this success," stated Sherman McCorkle,
president of Technology Ventures. "We believe it represents the best
efforts of our staff and the best and highest use of our resources."
Technology Ventures Corp. is a non-profit organization dedicated to

successfully commercializing technology from Sandia National
Laboratories. In operation for slightly more than two years, the
company has already assisted in the successful transfer of more than
a half-dozen such technologies, thereby offering a vital link for the
lab's scientists and engineers to the business and investment world.

'Technology Ventures is a true innovation in the world of technology

commercialization," declared Paul Robinson, Sandia Laboratories'
president and director. "Founded by Lockheed Martin Corporation as
a conduit for moving technology out of the labs and into the private
sector, this type of success demonstrates a breath and depth of
abilities that are more than enough to accomplish its goals." Stinnett
notes that Technology Ventures assisted the two entrepreneurs in
organizing the business effort from the ground up after recognizing
the significant commercial potential of the technology.

The chemical-free, commercial scale Ion Beam Surface Treatment
(IBEST) technology upon which QMI was formed uses repetitively
high average power pulsed ion beams to efficiently deposit energy in
the top 2-50 micrometers of the surface of a material, and was
developed at Sandia at a cost of more than $20 million. (See Figure
2). The technology, protected by six patents pending, uses short,
intense beams of ions to melt or treat metal, ceramic, glass, or plastic

surfaces in less than one millionth of a second. The controlled ion
deposition in a thin surface layer is followed by rapid cooling at up to
one billion degrees per second. As of mid-December 1995, QMI is
very close to completing negotiations with Sandia for the license to
IBEST technology.

QMI's rapid quenching technique--which uses a unique diode
designed by Cornell University for emitting the beam--has been used
to melt and resolidify metals and ceramics for various potential
industrial applications, including gear teeth for a major automotive

manufacturer. The process has demonstrated its ability to increase
the lifetime of tools by up to threefold, reduce corrosion of metals by
up to a factor of 100, polish and make surfaces nearly defect free,
and increase the bonding properties of plastic surfaces.

QMI's technology environmentally-friendly technology has potential
applications in many areas, including the tool-and-die industry,
aircraft manufacturing, automobile engines, medical implants and
tools, microelectronics fabrication, and even razor blades and
cookware.

A market analysis by KMPG Peat Marwick has confirmed the
attractiveness of the technology for the aircraft industry, tools and
dies, and polymer surfaces. For example, metal and ceramic dies can
range in cost from $5,000 to $50,000. Treating even the largest die
would cost less than a dollar, but could double its lifetime. Similar

advantages could be provided for hardware utilized in such
application areas as automobile engines, microelectronics fabrication,
and aerospace. QMI's technology costs only a few cents per square
foot in high process rate applications.

"We look for 'root' technologies--those that have many applications,
that provide the greatest impact," noted Bob Gibson, Technology
Ventures' director of equity funding who spearheaded the business
development effort for Stinnett and Neau. "This technology is
definitely a root technology. It has many applications. It can be
applied to high-value items, such as hardening an artificial joint used
in hip replacements. Right now, such a joint may last 10 years before

replacement. With this technology, it could last up to 30 years. It can
also be used in a variety of high-volume applications, and in the
future may even have uses in the purification and pasteurization of
food."

Fueled by such potential, Technology Ventures helped the scientists
form QMI and develop a business plan that would "make a business
out of the technology," Stinnett commented. Technology Ventures
helped the pair identify markets, map out a strategy that would
attract investors, and then introduced them to the investors
themselves.

Gibson introduced the scientists to a dozen qualified investors, many
of which attended Technology Ventures' Equity Capital Symposium
last May in Albuquerque. The introductions resulted in four written
offers, and QMI selected the deal with Rainbow Technologies.
"Technology Ventures kept us out of shark-infested waters," Stinnett
explained. "Because of them, we were able to hook up with the right
kind of investors."

"Rainbow is a qualified equity investor," Gibson noted. "This means
they have a long-term interest in the technology and in the company.
And, Rainbow is itself a solid technology company with an 11-year
history and a strong cash position. Currently, their main product is in

software security."

QMI represents an "outstanding investment opportunity," stated
Walter Straub, Rainbow's CEO and president. "We are excited about
the opportunity to invest in a company and technology with such
significant commercial potential."

Technology Ventures--which screens such opportunities as carefully
for the investment community as it screens investors for its

companies--encouraged Rainbow to pay close attention to QMI. In
the earlier stages of the commercialization process, Technology
Ventures helped incubate QMI by providing free office space and
related services, and contributing $10,000 in seed funding.

"But, we got a lot more than money and office space from them,"
Stinnett highlighted. "When we had to move quickly, to keep
investment interest alive, Technology Ventures helped us do that.
They started working with us in March, and now we have a complete
package, complete with financing. We wouldn't have been even close
without Technology Ventures."

However, Gibson credits the scientists for their willingness to enter
the business fray. "The toughest part of finding money is finding
people who are willing to do the things an investor needs to complete
the due diligence process. Stinnett and Neau have been a total joy to
work with. Not only are they world-class scientists, they have an
extraordinary commitment to making the business work."

Stinnett told Manufacturing Automation  that Rainbow has provided
QMI with seed funding to complete the process of obtaining a license
for the technology, and that Rainbow is committed to provide
funding to bring the technology to the commercialization stage.
According to Gibson, it is anticipated that there will be a series of
field use licenses for the technology. Such technology is available
through QMI as a package, including an exclusive global license to the
entire technology, the scientists who developed it, and OEMs who can

manufacture the required subsystems.

The value of worldwide shipments of polymers for surface
modification is forecast to increase at an 11.2% average annual rate
to exceed $3.1 billion in 1998, compared to over $1.8 billion in 1993,

according to Business Communications Company, Inc.'s Surface
Modification of Polymers  report (K4P-214). Ion implanted and ion
beam assisted deposition are expected to account for 13.4% of all
surface treatment techniques by 1998. The value-added through all
surface modification technologies is projected to increase at a 5.9%
average annual rate to reach $724.5 million in 1998, from $543.8
million in 1993.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
MANUFACTURING AUTOMATION via NewsNet
January, 1996

KPMG PEAT MARWICK AND UNIVERSITY OF TENNESSEE TO SURVEY
LOGISTICS TRENDS

KPMG Peat Marwick LLP (New York, NY) and the University of
Tennessee's Department of Marketing, Logistics and Transportation
(Knoxville, TN) will partner to broaden and deepen the scope of
KPMG's annual logistics benchmarking survey. The alliance will
furnish in-depth information concerning key trends in logistics to
businesses contemplating revamping their logistics processes.

The two organizations will begin the design and methodology of the
survey this month. During the past three years, KPMG has surveyed
about 300 companies to benchmark logistics operations. With the
alliance, plans call for expanding the survey to encompass several
thousand manufacturing and retail companies, allowing for a more
comprehensive view of logistics planning and trends.

Tom Mentzer, Bruce Excellence Chair of Business Policy at the
University of Tennessee, notes that the research will scrutinize the
main trends impacting business planning for logistics, including the
affect of technology on logistics (e.g., how technology has improved
the capability of businesses to track orders and control distribution).

An example of technology's impact on logistics is the ability of
companies to track shipments and packages. Ten years ago, it could
require up to 20 days to receive and send a shipment, let alone track
its whereabouts. Using technology, companies can presently quickly
and easily track a package to within blocks of its location and
determine the precise time of arrival at its destination. Additional
trends the survey will examine include strategic alliances between

manufacturers and retailers that have enhanced the process of
inventory controls, and the new market opportunity for third-party
logistics services providers.

"We're looking forward to working with KPMG on this project,"
Mentzer stated. "We think the alliance of our world-class logistics
expertise and analysis capabilities with KPMG's real-world logistics
consulting knowledge and technology implementation experience will
result in a sophisticated, thorough benchmarking tool."

"We are very excited about working with the University of
Tennessee on the survey," commented Steve Gold, partner, KPMG's
national logistics practice. "The University is nationally recognized as
an innovative business school, and is renowned for its quality
logistics program."

When released in June, the survey results will be distributed to all

participants and available internationally. The survey will continue
to be viewed as a source and baseline for CIOs, CFOs and logistics,

information, and financial managers.

The University of Tennessee's logistics and transportation program,
the oldest such program in the US, was ranked second in the nation
by the Journal of Business Logistics.

KPMG Peat Marwick LLP is the US practice of KPMG, which,
worldwide, has over 6,000 partners, as well as 67,000 professionals
servicing clients through 1,100 offices in 837 cities located in 134
countries. KPMG's National Logistics Consulting Practice focuses on
identifying and implementing logistics solutions throughout an
organization's supply chain. The Practice is comprised of experienced

professionals dedicated strictly to functional, operational, and
strategic logistics issues.

KPMG's core competencies in logistics cost reduction, warehousing
and distribution center systems, distribution strategy/site selection,

logistics systems, and activity-based management has made it a
leader in this expanding area of consulting expertise.

The Strategic Services Consulting unit of KPMG Peat Marwick LLP
(Miami, FL,305-789-2677) applies its expertise in operations
management and enabling technologies to help clients improve their
business performance. It focuses on delivering measurable
operational improvement of clients' business operations in terms of
time, cost, and quality. Strategic Services Consulting is organized into
three areas--Enabling Technologies, Enterprise Package Solutions,
and Operations Improvement.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
MANUFACTURING AUTOMATION via NewsNet
January, 1996

LXE UNVEILS HANDHELD FUZZY LOGIC SCANNER

The new handheld fuzzy logic smart scanner from LXE, Inc. (Norcross,
GA, 404-447-4224) is designed for industrial environments where
barcodes tend to be of less than perfect quality, and for use with the

company's 6400, 6200, and 280 generation systems. When combined
with LXE's interference-resistant frequency hopping spread
spectrum radios and terminals, the ruggedized fuzzy logic scanner
delivers a superior solution for outdoor industrial data collection

applications, particularly in harsh environments.

The LS3603 (which has a base price of $1,495) is claimed to be the
first scanner with artificial intelligence for performing aggressive,
"smart" scanning by assessing the print quality of the barcode and
compensating for imperfections. The device also enhances barcode
images to improve working ranges on all symbols and offers optimal
read rates on poorly printed barcodes, low -contrast and high-
density bar codes, and dot matrix symbols.

LXE's fuzzy scanner eludes connectivity problems with built-in
communications for RS-232 and wand emulation interfaces. Other
interfaces are available with the use of a "smart cable" which
eliminates the need for a separate interface controller, rendering the
LS3603 easier to install, maintain, and use. The scanner is built to
work in very demanding environments, such as those with extreme
temperatures (-22 degrees  to 122 degrees  F/-30 degrees  to 50
degrees  C), and can withstand extreme humidity as well as repeated
six-foot drops onto concrete. The LS3603 incorporates a patented
Mylar scan element which resonates at a fixed frequency, thereby
creating motion without wear and tear for guaranteed durability.

Global revenues for barcode scanners are forecast to expand at a
13.7% compound annual rate to approach $1.8 billion in 2000,
compared to $730.6 million in 1993, according to Frost & Sullivan's
World Barcode Equipment Markets  report (5193-10). Revenues for
1996-1999 are pegged at about $1.0 billion, $1.2 billion, $1.4 billion,
and $1.6 billion, respectively.

Worldwide unit shipments of barcode scanners are projected to rise
at nearly a 15.6% compound annual rate to total about 6,600,000 in
2000, as opposed to about 2,800,000 in 1993. Unit shipments for
1996-1999 are placed at 3,900,000, 4,400,000, 5,000,000, and
5,700,000, respectively.

In 1996, the projected distribution of the total barcode scannner
revenues by product type is: handheld laser scanners-31.1%; fixed
position laser scanners-49.4%; handheld CCD (charge coupled device)

scanners-12.9%; and wand/lightpen scanners-6.6%. The distribution
in 2000 will be: handheld laser scanners-31.8%; fixed position laser

scanners-46.7%; handheld CCD scanners-16.0%; and wand/lightpen
scanners-5.5%.

In addition, as of last September, LXE had shipped more than 200 2.4
GHz RF (radio frequency) terminals to ANC (Brussels, Belgium), one of
the leading five express package delivery services in England. A
major contract involving a 70-site installation was secured by LIS
(London, England), an LXE international distributor organization (IDO)
and one of the largest logistics systems integrators in Europe.

ANC selected LXE's advanced frequency hopping spread spectrum
system, which provides the backbone for wireless client/server
computing with the former's existing system. The LXE 2320 Scout
(TM) handheld computers (which have a base price of $1,900) are
used to scan barcode tracking labels on individual packages as they
are handled at various points in the delivery process. Such a tracking
system permits ANC to maintain "visibility" for each package from
the time of pickup to the point of delivery.

The 2320 DOS-based handheld data collection computer allows for
both warehouse and field automation operations in a single unit; and
features modular options which permit configuration for a wide
variety of auto ID inputs, including barcode scanning, "touch"
memory modules, RS-232 port, and/or infrared out for wireless
printing. The device supports RF transaction processing and batch
data collection. Working in combination with LXE's 6410 OmniNet
Access Point, the 2300 Scout is able to connect directly to LAN
servers over the wireless link running DOS applications.

"One of the obvious benefits of the new scanning and dispatch
system is that customer inquiries can be provided quickly and
efficiently, also potential problems are virtually eliminated," noted
Andrew Callaghan, ANC's managing director. "As service levels
become even more stringent, only the best will survive. ANC is
determined to be the leading service provider in this region,
therefore, we chose our suppliers very carefully. We feel that LXE's
2.4 GHz RF system will give us the cutting edge over our
competition."

Global revenues for barcode data terminals are predicted to increase
at a 13.6% compound annual rate to exceed $1.4 billion in 2000, from
$584.3  million in 1993, according to Frost & Sullivan's World
Barcode Equipment Markets  report. Revenues for 1996-1999 are
projected at $845.9 million,  $966.6 million, about $1.1 billion, and
over $1.2 billion, respectively.

Worldwide unit shipments of barcode data terminals are anticipated
to expand at nearly a 19.2% compound annual rate to total 1,730,900
in 2000, compared to 507,500 in 1993. Unit shipments for 1996-
1999 are placed at 927,300, about 1,142,600, 1,346,900, and
1,522,000, respectively.

In 1996, the projected product distribution of the total barcode data
terminals is: batch terminals-59.6%; and RF terminals-40.4%. The
distribution in 2000 will be: batch terminals-53.6%; and RF
terminals-46.4%.

The value of US automatic ID system and software sales, including
exports, is forecast to expand at a 10.9% average annual rate to
approach $8.1 billion in 2000, compared to about $4.3 billion in
1994, according to Business Communications Company, Inc.'s
Automatic Identification Systems  (K4G-12R). The data includes
barcode systems, magnetic stripe and smart cards, biometrics,
machine vision, radio frequency, optical character recognition, and
voice recognition auto ID technologies. Domestic sales of barcode
systems are projected to grow at a 12% average annual rate to
exceed $6 billion in 2000, from over $3 billion in 1994.

In 1994, US sales of RF ID systems totaled $391 million, $156 million
of which was accounted for by the manufacturing industry.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
MANUFACTURING AUTOMATION via NewsNet
January, 1996

RED PEPPER EXPLOITS A WINDOW OF OPPORTUNITY

The ResponseAgent (TM) product family from Red Pepper Software
Company (San Mateo, CA, 415-578-2640), an innovative developer of
real-time supply chain optimization software based on intelligent
agent technology, will be available with full support for Microsoft
Windows (R) 95 Clients, and Windows NT Servers in March of this
year. Production pricing for ResponseAgent, which is also available
with UNIX support, begins at $150,000.

Red Pepper's support for Windows 95 and NT integrates the leading
desktop user interface and environment with a highly advanced
supply chain optimization system that provides manufacturers with
an "intelligent assistant" which generates optimized plans, constantly
monitors vital manufacturing variables, and proposes solutions to
large-scale problems. Since most users are familiar with Windows,
the ResponseAgent learning curve will be quite rapid.

Users can, moreover, simply "drag" information from the
ResponseAgent and "drop" it into any desktop application--including
Microsoft Office--for further analysis or presentation. Individuals can

participate in planning sessions from remote sites, since the
ResponseAgent Windows 95 Client is designed to operate over
ordinary phone lines. The Windows 95 Client and Windows NT
Server support offered by the ResponseAgent products leads to a
significant increase in user productivity, decreases the overall cost of

client/server platforms, and accelerates ResponseAgent's return-on-
investment.

"We believe this a very important technology development for Red
Pepper," stated Jim Shepherd, vice president at Advanced
Manufacturing Research, Inc. (Boston, MA, 617-542-6600). "They
have correctly identified that manufacturers need the ability to
support mixed networks of UNIX and NT, and that Windows 95 will
rapidly emerge as the user interface standard. The improved user
interface and seamless integration with desktop applications like
Microsoft Office should significantly enhance the productivity of
individual ResponseAgent users and their ability to engage in
collaborative planning."

"Our ResponseAgents running Microsoft Windows 95 and Windows
NT offers a very wide range of benefits with unprecedented levels of
power and flexibility," noted Monte Zweben, Red Pepper's president.
"The combination provides five key benefits that ad up to superior
performance for our supply chain optimization customers. These
include the ability to plan and schedule remotely via modem-based
portable computers, seamless integration with Microsoft Office and
Backoffice applications and services, individually customized
ResponseAgent user interfaces, and a choice of either or both UNIX
and NT servers."

"Red Pepper is the leading developer of intelligent agent-based
supply chain optimization software, and Microsoft is very pleased to
have their family of products running on Windows 95 and Windows
NT," commented Doug Henrich, director, Microsoft Developer
Relations Group. "Red Pepper's ResponseAgents are addressing
enterprise-wide supply chain management challenges for
manufacturers, and Microsoft's strategy is to provide the best
scalable operating systems from the desktop to the data center. With
our Microsoft Office and Backoffice product families, we are also
providing the enterprise-wide applications and services
infrastructure todays leading manufacturers require. Microsoft's and
Red Pepper's products and strategies compliment one another to
provide quality solutions for manufacturing customers."

"From an end-user perspective, it will be incredibly powerful to
leverage all of our standard desktop productivity tools," noted Chris
Bourne, production planning manager at 3Com Corporation. "We have
a huge investment in personal computer hardware and software, and
we want to take advantage of the seamless integration of our

ResponseAgent-based Worldwide Inventory Planning System (WIPS)
with the rest of 3Com's mission-critical applications. The modem-
based remote access capabilities of the new ResponseAgent also
provide another powerful capability for our users. With the
ResponseAgent Windows 95 Client, 3Com will further advance its
leadership and competitive advantage in manufacturing."

Windows 95 provides the user interface for millions of personal
computers operating worldwide. The ResponseAgent Windows 95
Client enables users to enjoy the ease-of-use of PC-based applications
with an extremely advanced type of supply chain optimization
software. The advanced capabilities of Windows 95--such as point
and click, drag and drop, property inspectors, context-sensitive
menus, and on-line help--apply to the new ResponseAgent Client.
Ongoing user productivity is further bolstered through the user
interface consistency and powerful functions of Windows 95.

The overall system cost reduction enabled by Windows 95 extends
from platform acquisition through the life of the ResponseAgent
solutions. The initial system cost is reduced by employing standard
PC hardware for the ResponseAgent; and the flexibility to select the
best servers for particular applications further diminishes costs. The
ability to achieve more rapid system implementations results in
faster payback and higher ROI for ResponseAgents.

Since the ResponseAgent Client can fully interact with the Server
over ordinary phone lines, remote desktop and portable systems can
fully participate in the planning process--whether at home or on the
road. The same access can be provided to key suppliers, field sales
personnel, or potentially customers requiring the latest information
about product availability. The ResponseAgent Client further
maximizes the power of Windows 95 by seamlessly integrating with
standard desktop applications, including Microsoft Excel, Powerpoint,
Access, or Mail. Users can customize the ResponseAgent user
interface to meet their specific requirements. For example, the order
or format of ResponseAgent spreadsheets, or particular graphical
views, can readily be modified without programming based on user
preferences.

Founded in 1993, Red Pepper has leveraged its supply chain
optimization technology developed at NASA and coupled it with a
new object-oriented system, architected to help manufacturers plan
and schedule their operations in an increasingly complex business
environment. The company's products have evolved from the Ground
Processing Scheduling System used to refurbish the Space Shuttle
following space missions into ResponseAgent software products that
complement existing transactional systems (MRPII, DRP, shop-floor
control) and enable real-time responsiveness to customer demands.

Red Pepper's product offerings include Enterprise ResponseAgent

(enterprise-wide planning and scheduling systems), Production
ResponseAgent (integrated planning and scheduling systems for
production facilities), and Distribution ResponseAgent (integrated
planning and scheduling for distribution centers). ResponseAgents
are especially suited for manufacturers encountering significant

unpredictability in customer demand, material availability, or
capacity optimization. Manufacturing processes benefiting from such
products include make-to-stock, assemble-to-order, make-to-order,
and engineer-to-order.

The value of global shipments of US-based vendors' microcomputer-
based manufacturing planning and control software (excluding
services and hardware) is forecast to expand at about an 8.2% annual
rate to approach $1.6 billion in 1999, from nearly $1.1 billion in
1994, according to Plant-Wide Research Group's (North Billerica, MA,

508-663-9212) annual Manufacturing Planning & Control Systems
Review and Forecast. The value of shipments in 1996 is put at nearly
$1.2 billion.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
MANUFACTURING AUTOMATION via NewsNet
January, 1996

BAAN AND HP ENHANCE STRATEGIC RELATIONSHIP

Baan Company (Ede, The Netherlands/Menlo Park, CA, 415-462-
4949) and Hewlett-Packard Company (Palo Alto, CA, 415-857-1501)
are expanding their seven-year technology and service relationship
on a global scale. The enhancement of the relationship furthers
Baan's longstanding commitment to provide joint HP customers with
a strong multi-site, multi-national manufacturing solution, and
signifies HP's recognition of Baan as a leading global Enterprise
Resource Planning (ERP) software provider.

"Baan prides itself on sharing HP's value of being customer-centric,"
noted M.R. Rangaswami, Baan's vice president of worldwide
marketing. With this new alliance status, we are positioned to deliver
a higher degree of customer satisfaction through tighter technology
links and streamlined pre- and post-sales requirements
management. Additionally, this relationship provides the synergy
necessary to deliver a whole product--including software
applications--to the manufacturing marketplace, as well as key
vertical markets."

As manufacturers migrate to a global environment, information
increasingly must be managed at a multi-site, multi-national level,
and accommodate such variables as local languages, currencies,
manufacturing practices, and financial requirements. Baan--through
its TRITON family of client/server applications--and HP have jointly
supported hundreds of customers worldwide over the past seven
years. The companies jointly enable customers to progress from
proprietary, host-based systems to a distributed, open systems
architecture suitable for global business.

About 50% of Baan's customers--including ABB, Boeing, Hitachi, Oki

Manufacturing, Philips Medical Systems, Northern Telecom, and
Snap-On Incorporated--rely jointly on Baan and HP for a flexible
solution accommodating their changing business requirements. Under
the enhanced global partnering arrangement, the two companies will
be aligned more closely in terms of technology and
marketing/customer satisfaction.

Baan currently uses the HP 9000 for its own development
environment. The enhanced global partnering relationship will
enable the two companies to provide dedicated development teams
to optimize the performance of Baan's ERP applications on the HP
3000 platform. Such development teams will also build tight
integration between Baan's TRITON applications and HP's Service
Guard software to ensure high availability of TRITON/HP 9000 for

mission-critical environments. Moreover, the companies will jointly
integrate with respect to Baan applications and HP OpenView a
complete environment for application, system, and network
management, which are vital for multi-site operations.

Baan and HP are committed to jointly delivering the most advanced
pre- and post-sales services to boost overall customer satisfaction.
"HP is pleased to have Baan Company as one of HP's global partners,"
sated Janice Chaffin, director of channels marketing at HP's General
Systems Division. "Customers can avail themselves of the world-class
consulting and support organizations of both companies, knowing
they will get a complete solution."

The two companies will develop cooperative sales and marketing
programs for strategic accounts, as well as for key vertical markets
(including automotive and electronics). In addition, customers will be
able to leverage HP's Professional Sales Organization that offers

consulting/services for information technology architecture,
benchmarking, systems and network management, and customization
of HP software solutions. Such capabilities complement Baan's
present methodologies/services that insure swift, successful
implementations of TRITON applications.

Emblematic of their commitment, HP and Baan have jointly
established two Cooperative Technology Centers (CTCs) located in
Barneveld, The Netherlands and in Silicon Valley in the US. The
centers will focus on offering pre- and post-sales support in
simulating the customer' implementation environment, and joint
development projects.

Global primary software/services revenues from ERP vendors totaled
$3.0-$3.1 billion in 1994, and are forecast to increase about 15-25%
annually for at least the next three years, according to the Gartner
Group (Stamford, CT, 203-964-0096). Revenues for 1995 are put at
$3.5-$3.7 billion.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-24</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000634-B048-364</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mg25.html 205.156.212.5 19970122034251 text/html 56143
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:40:53 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:49 GMT
Content-length: 55956
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mg25.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MANUFACTURING NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
January 3, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>COMING SOON TO YOUR FACTORY: WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(692 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>LARGE MANUFACTURERS, SUPPLIERS JOIN ENERGY DEPARTMENT'S AGILE MANUFACTURING&nbsp;PROGRAM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(807 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>AT 101 YEARS OLD, NAME WILL KEEP UP THE GOOD FIGHT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(618 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>ARTHUR ANDERSEN'S VIEW INTO THE 1996 CRYSTAL BALL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(250 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>LIMBERING UP IS A BEST PRACTICE AT SPRING FACTORY RUN BY DAYTON PARTS INC.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(356 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>A NEW BUSINESS MODEL FOR DOD BEGINS TO GAITHER MOMENTUM: ADVANCED CONCEPT&nbsp;TECHNOLOGY DEMONSTRATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(881 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>JAPANESE AUTO EXECUTIVE TELLS DETROIT TO QUIT WHINING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(161 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>CORPORATE NEWS: KOLLMORGAN CORP.; SELECTRON CORP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(159 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>THE NAVY'S INNOVATIVE SOLUTION TO MAINTAIN CAPABILITY WHILE REDUCING ITS&nbsp;INFRASTRUCTURE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(665 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>1995: THE YEAR IN QUOTES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3341 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>A 1996 MANUFACTURING RESOLUTION: EDUCATION REPLACES COMPETITIVENESS AT NATION'S&nbsp;PRIMARY CONCERN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(372 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MANUFACTURING NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

COMING SOON TO YOUR FACTORY: WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS


The boom in wireless communications technology is soon going to hit the factory
floor, say analysts and those involved with the new systems. With the
unprecedented growth in consumer markets for cellular phones and such products
as wireless speaker systems, the technology for wireless data communications is
quickly maturing and coming down in price.

For companies supplying wireless equipment, the manufacturing market "is going
to be a very big deal," says Jack Killion of Wireless Publishing Inc.Others
are just as bullish.  "There is going to be a massive boom, driven by the
cellular phone market pushing down the costs of components and chips," says
Wayne Manges of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory's Centers for Manufacturing
Technology.  "This is a key technology for the 21st Century.  People who get
in early and stay with it will do extremely well."

Numerous companies are installing wireless networks in their factories.  "Our
customer list has become endless," says John Davis, Director of Industrial
Technology Marketing for Akron, Ohio-based Telxon, a publicly held company
(NASDAQ symbol TLXN).  Telxon expects to grow its wireless manufacturing group
by almost 30 percent this year.

"Our growth is out of sight," says Davis. "It's very profitable." With the
amount of growth that exists in the market "we're hiring people like crazy,"
Davis adds. "If you have a skill and you know this industry, we will hire you."
(Telxon supplies entire systems including handheld, pen-based, voice and vision
computers and real time data collection devices. Its revenues increased 28
percent from 1994 to 1995, from $271 million to $379 million.)

Ford Motor's Louisville, Ky., plant, a four-million square foot facility, has
installed a wireless data communications system. Boeing, Chrysler, GM, General
Electric, Miller Brewing, Northrop, Allied Signal, Intel, consumer packaged
goods companies, retail stores like Wal-Mart and others such as Disney and
American Express are installing systems for use in material management,
warehousing, quality control, monitoring and maintenance of machine tools and
in-building paging.

"The leading edge companies in every industry are the ones who are doing this,"
says Killion. "They're biting the bullet of higher costs because they recognize
the benefits are so good that they're just jumping on it."

Wireless manufacturing plants offer the opportunity for companies to retrofit
facilities without extensive engineering hassles. "You can never get the cable
right" in a manufacturing environment," says Manges of Oak Ridge. "There are
people who spend their whole life keeping the cable in order." Wiring in a
nuclear power plant, for instance, typically costs about $2,000 per foot. 

Wireless systems also allow companies to put real-time information in the hands
of empowered workers and they help in decision making. There are also benefits
associated with the speed and reliability of data and the ability to spot
problems earlier with fewer people. Farther down the line, wireless can help
improve customer service and lower inventories.

Analysts project the market for wireless automated data collection at $3.4
billion this year with a growth rate exceeding 20 percent per year.

But there are still a lot of technical issues that need to be resolved before
wireless systems become ubiquitous in manufacturing operations. Integrating
hundreds or thousands of data-generating sources into one seamless system is a
big challenge. Redundancy has to be built in the system.

"Because of the size of the problems and the amount of data [that is being
generated], wireless requires multidisciplinary people," says Manges.
"Theoreticians, mathematicians, communications experts, computer junkies" are
all needed to integrate sensors and data sources, all of which have their own
channel. "If all you've done is replace wire you haven't solved the problem,"
says Manges. "It's the non-architectural issues that are important: data
structuring, queuing theory, modeling. You have to start small and establish
standards as you build these systems." 

"Wireless is only now starting to be applied" in commercial enterprises, says
Killion. "It's a high priority for suppliers because there is so much
low-hanging fruit" in virtually every industrial sector.

Davis of Telxon can be reached at 216-873-2963; Killion can be reached at
201-285-1500; Manges can be reached at 423-574-8529.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MANUFACTURING NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

LARGE MANUFACTURERS, SUPPLIERS JOIN ENERGY DEPARTMENT'S AGILE MANUFACTURING
PROGRAM


The Department of Energy's Technologies Enabling Agile Manufacturing (TEAM)
program, about a year old, is "beginning to put some flesh on the bones," says
program manager Diane Bird.

TEAM is beginning to do "practical and important things," says Aris
Melissaratos Vice President of Science, Technology and Quality at Westinghouse
Electric Corp.  "They've taken the concepts of agility and are bringing
technology to the shop floor...This is substantive work and brings agility to
the real world rather than it being theory and academics."

TEAM's team now includes about 35 companies, many of which are household
names, such as Cummins Engine, General Motors, AlliedSignal and numerous
others from a variety of industries.  Universities, R&D consortia and other
government agencies are engaged in the effort.

"We're not industry specific, nor are we terribly process specific," says Bird,
who works in DOE's Defense Program's Office of Economic Competitiveness. "We're
going to take the highest priority needs across a variety of industry sectors
and across a variety of processes that are in concert with our own [DOE] needs
and work with that group."

DOE has committed $5 million a year for three years to the TEAM effort.  Bird
estimates that another $5 million in federal funding is finding its way into
the program through other government programs.  Industry is devoting about $10
million a year in the effort, for a yearly total of about $20 million.
"Financially, things are getting tougher," says Bird.  "People are beginning
to see the benefit of dividing up the workload and sharing the results."

One of the primary themes of TEAM is the integration of various design
software tools with the equipment that makes parts and products.  Customers,
suppliers and vendors in virtually every manufacturing sector have different
CAD tools, NC tools and NC programming software.  "One of the big complaints
is that not much of this talks to each other," Bird explains.  "It's not a
simple task to make that happen and to make it happen without data loss or
glitches."

The Energy Department has been dealing with this problem for 15 years. Its
nuclear weapons production complex has purchased machine tool controllers and
has modified them for its own use. That labor intensive effort worked fine when
DOE had lots of money, but its budget is going down and the agency is becoming
more dependent on the private sector to pick up the slack. Moreover, many
commercial companies have the same problem of integrating different design and
manufacturing systems.

"In the past we've had to maintain our hardware and software ourself," says
Bird. "But that's expensive and inefficient and we'd like to go buy this stuff
off the shelf." By involving industry in helping suppliers produce open
architecture equipment and software, the entire supply base will be far more
robust. "A larger group of users in the commercial environment will help find
glitches, improve it, and drive additional revisions and upgrades much more
quickly than we could with our low production volume," says Bird.

There is no doubt that this would happen without the Energy Department's help.
But DOE is restricted to "Buy American" procurement provisions. Unfortunately,
many overseas suppliers have no desire to sell equipment that would be used to
manufacture nuclear bombs.

Overseas suppliers also tend to implement their latest generation systems on
their home turf. "It's much more difficult to have those relationships with
foreign countries and assure that you are indeed getting the newest
state-of-the-art equipment," says Bird.

The new tools would be developed without DOE assistance, but if U.S. industry
misses the market window, then U.S. companies may not be involved both in
supplying the manufacturing systems and utilizing them. And thus DOE's push.
"Sure it will happen anyway," says Bird. "But will it happen by developments by
U.S. companies and entities or will it happen overseas and then we will just be
purchasing all of this?"

Bird can be reached at 202-586-0499. For written information on TEAM (the
compilation of overhead slides from the Annual TEAM Meeting), contact Richard
Neal of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory's Centers for Manufacturing
Technologies at 615-574-1862.

Who's On The TEAM?
AlliedSignal
Boeing* 
CAMAX
CAM-I
CIMPLEX Corp.
Cincinnati Milacron
Cognition Corp.
Concurrent Technologies Corp.
CTA Inc.
Cummins Engine Co.
Deneb Robotics
Eaton Corp.
Extrude Hone Corp.
Ford* 
General Motors
Hughes Missile System Co.
Inst. of Advanced Mfg. Sciences Inc.
ICAMP
ICON Industrial Controls Corp.
Innovative Productivity Inc.
Intelligent Systems Technology
MacNeal-Schwendler Corp.
Michigan Technology University
Moore Tool Co.
NCMS
New Mexico State University
OASYS Group
ONTOS, Inc.
Rockwell Intl.
SILMA
SME
Spatial Technology Inc.
STEP Tools
TD Technologies
Trellis Software & Controls
University of Kansas
University of Illinois
University of Minnesota
University of Missouri-Rolla
University of Texas at Arlington
UTC-Pratt & Whitney
Westinghouse Electric Corp.
Wizdom Systems Inc.
            (*Letters expected)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MANUFACTURING NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

AT 101 YEARS OLD, NAME WILL KEEP UP THE GOOD FIGHT


The National Association of Manufacturers has just completed its 100th year of
operation and the campaign it started planning four years ago to boost the
image of manufacturing in the U.S.  society will continue.

"The whole idea of the Manufacturing Campaign is that it would reach a peak in
1995, and that's true," says Ladd Biro, Vice President of Marketing and Member
Services at NAM and President of the organization's Manufacturing Institute.
But there is plenty of more work to do.

No other national group is tasked with promoting the importance of
manufacturing to the country.  When NAM president Jerry Jasinowski started
planning the campaign, few positive statements were being made about
manufacturing.  Layoffs, pollution and knuckle-headed management stories ruled
the day.  Manufacturers were on the defense.

But there are plenty of success stories that have since been written and the
Manufacturing Institute is doing its best to target members of Congress and the
media to pick up on them.

The campaign last year involved hundreds of people at the national, state and
local level. NAM sponsored 40 events in 25 states. It commissioned artwork and
posters by Peter Max. It wrote a manufacturing coffee table book. It promoted
manufacturing through a national media campaign. And it created a popular
manufacturing educational program for the nation's high schools that is now
being incorporated in a CD-ROM format.

The entire campaign consumed some $3 million and was funded by the nation's
largest manufacturing companies.  Intel, for instance, is underwriting an
$80,000 essay contest for high-school students.  The theme is the future of
manufacturing in America and the contest has drawn more than 2,300 entries.
Only about 750 were expected.

NAM expects the manufacturing campaign to consume between $1 million and $1.5
million this year. "I don't see us letting up on a publicity campaign," says
Biro, who joined NAM from American Airlines in 1992. "There is always going to
be a job to do." Much of the funding this year will come from grants.

The campaign has done a great deal to improve NAM's image as well. NAM is
extremely healthy, says Biro. Revenues have increased by 6 to 7 percent a year
for the past four years. "We're not trying to grow staff, but last year was a
record for membership growth," says the 34-year-old Biro. NAM now has 13,600
member companies.

A lot of that growth has to do with the improved fortunes of manufacturers and
the high profile of NAM president Jerry Jasinowski. But a great deal of it can
be attributed to  Biro and his staff's attention to improving services to
members and marketing NAM in a more aggressive manner. Others in the trade
association field are envious of the job NAM has done in this regard, and it is
often held up as a benchmark for how to improve member services and increase
membership.

Central to the marketing operation is a telemarketing sales force of 20, which
will be increased by three this year. Paid on a commission basis, these folks
call prospective members and those who are renewing their memberships. Biro
believes he can add 1,000 new members this year and he has a personal goal of
25,000 members. The average member pays around $500 a year in dues, but the
range is from $150 to $130,000 per year.

"Our image has changed," he says. NAM is no longer thought of as being a stodgy
place. The organization has improved its communications to members and has
started promoting its own accomplishments rather than taking a more modest
approach to its successes in Washington. Biro can be reached through NAM at
202-637-3000.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MANUFACTURING NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

ARTHUR ANDERSEN'S VIEW INTO THE 1996 CRYSTAL BALL


One of the keys to success for manufacturers in 1996 will be "innovative
alliances," says Steven Hronec, worldwide director of Arthur Andersen's
manufacturing industry practice. While new approaches to improving operations
and reducing costs will be important, "manufacturers that want staying power
will continue to use...new alliances to compete," says Hronec.

Companies will need to team up with customers, suppliers and competitors and
the most successful firms will access customer and supplier information
through electronic data interchange and the Internet.  The most successful
global companies will move beyond the "country-to-country" management approach
and will use communications technologies to choose from global vendors and
suppliers, rather than being limited to local, regional or national resources.

Manufacturing Execution Systems and Enterprise Requirements Planning will
continue to gain in popularity during the year.  Companies that involve
employees in their strategic planning processes will succeed above and beyond
their rivals, says Hronec.

Savvy manufacturers will use "activity-based cost management" which will allow
them to restructure their operations to concentrate their resources on the
processes that are the most profitable and cost effective.  "We see
manufacturers either combining operations or splitting them up to enhance
their competitive advantage," says Hronec.  "Either way the result is
something different from what they were before."

Finally, the ISO9000 quality and ISO14000 environmental standards will continue
to be important. ISO14000 will "soon become a basic and necessary part of doing
business around the world," says Hronec, who can be reached at 213-614-8512.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MANUFACTURING NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

LIMBERING UP IS A BEST PRACTICE AT SPRING FACTORY RUN BY DAYTON PARTS INC.


To manufacture springs, you have to be flexible. That's the lesson learned by
Dayton Parts Inc., of Harrisburg, Pa., a $57 million manufacturer of 17,000
different types of springs primarily used in trucks.

The company had a problem of excessive worker injuries which it discovered
occurred almost entirely during the first two hours of each shift.  In 1990,
the company experimented with a stretching program for all of its plant
personnel and a core group continued with the program for one year.  "At the
end of the year, none of the employees in the stretching group had been
injured," says a U.S.  Navy Best Manufacturing Practices survey of the company
conducted this past summer.  "This result influenced DPI to make stretching
exercises mandatory again in 1992.  All employees are now required to stretch
for 10 to 15 minutes before starting production.  This time is included within
the normal workshift."

The stretching program costs about $75,000 per year to operate, but it pays a
handsome dividend. In conjunction with other safety programs, the company's
annual cost of workman's compensation has decreased from $700,000 to $200,000.
The savings were refunded to the company and the money was used in part to pay
employee bonuses.

Dayton Parts sounds like most companies that have become enlightened over the
past decade.  Its management philosophy is based Eliah Goldratt's theory of
constraints as outlined in his book, The Goal, which is required reading in
all plant departments.  "Every action is focused on the common goal of making
money now and in the future," says the BMP survey.  "This program...has
effected a real cultural change throughout the company."

Safety, customer service, quality and cost reduction are driving forces in the
company. "Shop-floor supervisors now function more as coaches in the continuous
improvement process as the workcells are becoming sell-managed," says the BMP
survey. "Employees are actively involved in continuous improvement teams and
their input is making a difference."

For a copy of the 12-page report, contact Ernie Renner, Director of the BMP
program at 1-800-789-4267, or fax a request to him at 301-403-8180 (e-mail:
ernie@bmpcoe.org).





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
MANUFACTURING NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

A NEW BUSINESS MODEL FOR DOD BEGINS TO GAITHER MOMENTUM: ADVANCED CONCEPT
TECHNOLOGY DEMONSTRATIONS


The Advanced Concept Technology Demonstration  (ACTD) program at the Pentagon
has evolved in just two years into becoming a substantial effort that will
leverage three-quarters of a billion dollars. And if the Pentagon brass has its
way, it should grow substantially in the future. 

For fiscal year 1997, the ACTD office working with the services had drawn up a
list of 100 potential ACTDs-"fieldable prototypes"-before winnowing that down
to 46.  The office expects to start another dozen or so new projects next
year, although the number of new starts "is not the characteristic by which we
ought to be measured," says Jack Bachkosky, Deputy Under Secretary of Defense
for Advanced Technology.  The program also has been pared back by Congress.
The Pentagon asked for $65 million this year, but received an appropriation of
$39 million.

The program aims to quickly prove the viability of new military systems within
tight budgetary constraints.  The systems are tailored to the needs of the end
user-the warfighters-and include close participation by technologists,
industry and program managers.  "We're marriage brokers," says Bachkosky in
explaining his role in fostering the deployment of commercial off-the-shelf
and mature technologies into useful new defense systems.

The eight ACTDs now under way and the nine new projects that will start in
1996 represent a new way of doing business for the Pentagon.  With technology
changing faster than the defense procurement system, military planners are
fielding systems that are obsolete before they go into production.

The ACTDs only embrace mature technologies that can be fielded almost
immediately in new systems, "We make sure the users understand they know what
the technology will and will not do," Bachkosky told a group of reporters in a
recent Pentagon briefing.  Some technologies may not be mature enough to carry
out a far-fledged mission.  Others that use commercial components not designed
for the military may not work without radical reengineering at substantial
cost.  Such technologies are probably not good candidates for ACTDs, says
Bachkosky.

"ACTD provides the procedures for the users to identify his needs initially,
then there is a continuous interaction" so the user understands how much such a
system will cost and whether it's feasible for it to go into production through
the normal acquisition process, he explains. 

Understanding the cost of production and ownership-maintenance and manpower
needed to operate the system-is part of the ACTD process. "If it does provide a
needed capability and its costs are not insurmountable, then it will go into
low-rate production," says Bachkosky.

The "Predator" autonomous aerial vehicle, which is now flying above Bosnia, is
an example of a more mature ACTD.  It has a range of 500 miles; can fly at
25,000 feet for 40 hours and can cruise at 70 miles per hour.  It is equipped
with a payload of sensors.  Commanders on the ground would love to have a
system that flies at mach one or mach 1.6.  But to field such a system, the
ACTD program would have to begin an entirely new project.  If the field
commanders "want to buy a 911 Porsche for a Honda Civic price" then the ACTD
office has to tell them "we can't afford it," says Bachkosky.  "We give them
an estimate on how much more it will cost.  The warfighter can accept that or
not."

The ACTD program "is a way of working around the acquisition process,"
Bachkosky adds.  "It provides an entry for systems the military wants and
needs."  The office is working closely with industry and industry associations
to create projects based on purely commercial technologies.  Even a company
like Disney has something to offer in the way of simulation technology.
"They're not immune from taking money from DOD as they are from anywhere
else," says Bachkosky, who can be reached at 703-697-6446.

APPROVED 1996 ACTDS:
o Combat ID
o Logistics (Total Asset Visibility)
o Medium Lift Helicopter (completed)
o Semi-Automated Imagery Processing
o Battlefield Awareness and Data Dissemination
o Counter Proliferation
o Military Operations in Built Up Areas (delayed 1 year)
o Ship Defense Against Imaging IR Missiles (cancelled)
o Navigation Warfare
o Miniature Air Launched Decoy
o Land Vehicle Survivability
o Biological Defense Net

FUNDING FOR ACTDS INITIATED IN 1995:
o Joint Countermine, $133.6 million
o Rapid Force Projection Initiative, $89.2 million
o Precision Signals Intelligence Targeting, $10.5 million
o Advanced Joint Planning, $63.4 million
o Synthetic Theater of War, $104 million
o Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, $197 million
o Counter Multiple Rocket Launcher, $37 million
o Cruise Missile Defense, $37 million
Total Service/Agency Funding: $641 million
Total OSD Integrating ACTD Funding: $30 million
Total ACTD Funding: $671 million

ACTDS: MOTIVATION FOR CHANGE:
o The revolution in information technology-18 month technology turnover
o An acquisition system optimized for major weapon system procurement
o Diversity and uncertainty of future military operations
o "The rate of acquisition process change must mirror the rate of technological
change to be relevant."

ACTDS: SELECTION CRITERIA:
1. Technology sufficiently mature
2. Increased military utility
3. Affordable
4. Near term
5. Early and extensive user involvement
6. Risks identified, understood and accepted
7. Funding to complete the planned program
8. Cost effective demonstrations focused on principal issues
9. Funding programmed to support two years in the field




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
MANUFACTURING NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

JAPANESE AUTO EXECUTIVE TELLS DETROIT TO QUIT WHINING


The Japanese automobile market is not a "sanctuary" as Chrysler Chairman Robert
Eaton says it is, according to William Duncan, general director of the Japan
Automobile Manufacturers Association. "Eleven auto manufacturers now compete in
Japan intensely for a market that is less than half the size of the U.S.," he
says. "This is hardly a sanctuary."

The Big Three's problems in Japan are being caused "precisely" for the reason
that Japan's market "is not a sanctuary that allows manufacturers to ignore
customers needs for easy profits."  In August of last year, imports took 13
percent of Japan's automobile market and 32 percent of the large car segment
was captured by Ford, GM and Chrysler.

"Detroit's automakers have only recently indicated a serious interest in
selling cars in Japan and still have a long way to go to match their European
counterparts in product availability, market fit and investment," says Duncan,
who can be reached at 202-296-8537.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
MANUFACTURING NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

CORPORATE NEWS: KOLLMORGAN CORP.; SELECTRON CORP


Kollmorgan Corp.  has won the The National Electrical Manufacturers
Association's Automation Forum's Renewal Award for improving its manufacturing
facilities and keeping them in the United States.  "Kollmorgan could have
easily decided to manufacture products offshore, but believed they could
achieve competitive manufacturing costs and efficiencies by rearranging its
facilities into focused factories in North America," says Automation Forum
executive director Bill Rolland, who can be reached at 703-841-3200.

Solectron Corp., the company that does nothing other than focus on
manufacturing electronics products for others, had another banner quarter.
Its sales for the first quarter of 1996 were up 36 percent to $691 million,
and its net income soared 50 percent to $27.3 million ($0.52 per share).
"During the quarter, several of our customers, particularly those in the
peripherals, telecommunications and workstation markets, expanded their
relationship with us and/or increased their volume requirements," says
Solectron president and CEO Koichi Nishimura, who can be reached at
408-942-1943.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
MANUFACTURING NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

THE NAVY'S INNOVATIVE SOLUTION TO MAINTAIN CAPABILITY WHILE REDUCING ITS
INFRASTRUCTURE


Like the other military services, the Navy has an extensive number of
manufacturing facilities.  For the most part, these are referred to as depots,
although there are other manufacturing assets, such as shipyards and
industrial departments.  Over the years, these facilities have been used to
maintain the fleet and have benefited from protective legislation guaranteeing
sources of work.  But as the Defense Department continues to downsize, these
in-house assets are being viewed for reduction or closure.

The current policy of the government is to depend on the private sector to the
maximum extent possible.  This policy has been established in OMB Circular
A-76, "Performance of Commercial Activities," and has recently been
reemphasized in the "Roles and Mission" report presented to the Secretary of
Defense.  Under certain conditions, however, the private sector is not used.
These would include areas protected by the government to maintain capability
as governed by the "60/40" rule which keeps 60 percent of all maintenance work
in-house, and areas where the private sector has defaulted on performance
requirements, can't respond to fleet emergencies, or chooses not to bid on
government solicitations.

There are presently two versions of legislation pending in Congress to address
the "60/40" rule.  Both bills appear to eliminate this "60/40" restriction,
forcing the services to outsource work previously performed in-house.  Taking
the potential legislative decision to the extreme, depots would be closed for
business and private industry would become responsible for all defense
industrial work.  This would include those categories of work that private
industry failed to do correctly the first time.

Obviously, out-sourcing all defense work is not the sole solution to
downsizing.  The government will need to maintain some in-house manufacturing
capability to respond to fleet needs when private industry cannot do so.  The
result will be a compromise to the "60/40" rule, where the government
maintains a much smaller in-house capability.  A challenge for the Defense
Department, therefore, is deciding how to address this impending legislation
in a timely and efficient manner.

In Lakehurst, N.J., the Navy has a $200 million manufacturing facility, which
occupies 250,000 square feet of unique buildings and is staffed by 214
manufacturing engineers and artisans.  The primary purpose of the Lakehurst
plant is to provide prototype manufacturing support, producibility analysis,
drawing package validation and the application of new manufacturing
technologies to the design, development, and product verification of flight
critical aircraft launch and recovery and support equipment.  A significant
part of the Lakehurst work involves completing contractor defaulted efforts,
responding to fleet-critical needs and conducting work the private sector was
not interested in doing.

Supported by the National Performance Review recommendations, a downsizing and
the creation of a competency-aligned organization, Lakehurst has been reduced
to its core, with employment down approximately 33 percent from four years
ago.  The key to the continued success of this downsized organization was
identifying the critical in-house labor required to perform the tasks
necessary to deliver quality equipment and support contracting efforts.  Tasks
that could be performed by industry were earmarked for contracting out.  The
net result is an industrial facility that is working with non-defense
organizations and is operating at the same level of performance at a reduced
cost.

According to Richard Rumpf, former Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Research,
Engineering and Systems, partnering permits the government to maximize use of
private industry, reduce the possibility of default, keep the fleet running
smoothly and allow the government to reduce its size while maintaining
capability. 

     The partnering concept is also fully compliant with Federal Acquisition
Regulations and public law. Concepts for partnering are being refined and
explored at Navy Lakehurst and, if successful, offer the possibility for
applying the partnership concept to depots when and if the "60/40" rule is
abolished in the December, 1997, timeframe. Partnerships are a win-win
arrangement for both the Navy and industry.

-Gindele is with the Naval Air Warfare Center's Aircraft Division at Lakehurst,
N.J. He can be reached at 908-323-5219




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
MANUFACTURING NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

1995: THE YEAR IN QUOTES


"If it ain't broken, break it," became a cliche in 1995, but it's probably the
best way to describe what was happening in the industrial sector last year.

If only that was the case in politics. Politicians spent the year breaking what
was already broken. As U.S. industry stormed into 1996, the U.S. government
limped. 

While the private sector was undergoing a rebirth with a surge of confidence
provided by the maturation of new technologies and the booming stock market,
the U.S.  government reached a nadir, getting bombed in Oklahoma and closing
its doors in Washington.  If it's any consolation to those who work for Uncle
Sam, it wasn't long ago that U.S.  industry was in about the same situation
with few predicting the turnaround that has ensued.

1995 will be remembered as the year the Internet sprang into the consciousness
of the nation. It was a year in which the electronic revolution intensified.
Manufacturing found a seat at the corporate table, having been orphaned for
decades. The quality revolution seeped further into the business culture. And
the government was on the verge of a radical restructuring.

For the vast majority of people in the U.S.  who are involved in the new
industries that have been created over the past 20 years and the older
industries that have been transformed by the new technologies, a new age of
hope has definitely appeared, driven by the knowledge that humans are
resourceful, extremely hard working, are capable of changing quickly and
learning new skills.  This abundance of energy is collectively transforming
the way we live.  All of this is good news.

Here are some of the more profound, enlightened and interesting things people
said in 1995, as captured by the editorial staff of Manufacturing News.

ON INDUSTRY

"There is a disproportionate amount of pessimism in America about our ability
to compete globally.  Remember, 10 years ago people were saying that we
couldn't compete at all and we were living in a post-industrial society and
manufacturing was written off.  The big story is that that is not happening.
I don't think the majority of Americans know about this story."
--Jerry Jasinowski, president of the National Association of Manufacturers, May
15, 1995

Over the next 50 years, companies will generate hundreds of billions of
dollars-and maybe even trillions of dollars-a year in revenue. Management will
utilize concepts common in organisms and start applying them to corporate
structures. "We will take anecdotes out of nature and convert them into
practical, living guidelines. We will find better ways of letting things
organize from the bottom instead of from the top."
--Bob Galvin, Chairman of the Executive Committee, Motorola, Nov. 15, 1995

"I don't want guys on the [manufacturing] line supporting me.  I want to
support the guys who are doing the work.  I'm just overhead."
--Koichi Nishimura, President and CEO of Solectron Corp., Jan. 3, 1995

"Will Rogers once said, 'Even if you are on the right track, you'll get run
over if you just sit there.' And he was right.  None of us can afford to
become complacent."
--William Mitchell, Vice Chairman, Texas Instruments, March  31, 1995.

"Leadership is all about causing change. Management is about maintaining a
certain level of performance or implementing a program. You have to have both
skills, but the one that we have least of at this point is leadership."
--Eric Houts, Continuous Improvement Program Manager, Kaiser Electronics, Feb.
1, 1995

The Asian competitive threat, particularly from South Korea, "is coming much
faster than most people think and the implications for business, government,
our customers and employees-our overall competitiveness and our standard of
living-are enormous."  The U.S.  government and industry must undergo a "major
change, [otherwise] the role of the Western World will gradually diminish."
--Alex Trotman, Chairman and CEO, Ford Motor Co., Sept. 15, 1995

"I will be a very content business executive when we sell our $250 million
[defense] business and I don't have to deal with the Defense Department of the
United States or [defense departments] anywhere else in the world. I will be
very content when we're down to zero percent of our business."
--Tracy O'Rourke, Chairman and CEO, Varian   Associates Inc., March 15, 1995.
Five months later Varian sold its Electron Devices operation to Leonard Green &
Partners for $200 million.

"I often do a pronoun test when I go into companies.  I say to the workers,
'Tell me about this company?' And if they say 'They' [when talking about
management], I know it is [a struggling] company.  If they say 'We,' I know
it's a different kind of company."
--Labor Secretary Robert Reich, April 17, 1995.

"I have been through the entire transition of the military being the primary
driver of new semiconductor technologies to the military being such a small
part of it that it doesn't drive anything, virtually,"
--Don Walker, Vice President of Motorola and Director of the company's
Commercial-Plus Technologies Operation formerly the Military Products
Operation, based in Tempe, Ariz, speaking about the company's decision to
close its military semiconductor business, May 15, 1995

"In our world-class plants the only person not on a shift is a plant manager
and he is required to come down once a month and run the line."
--James Schoonover, Director of Operations for DuPont, July 3, 1995

"This year, the government of Switzerland is procuring more fighter aircraft
than the United States. We are primarily working off our backlog and new orders
are at an all-time low."
--James Sinnett, Vice President of New Aircraft and Missile Products, McDonnell
Douglas, September 1, 1995

"Most of our major new products have come from the unarticulated needs of our
customers and understanding that. We have to raise the level of innovation we
have in the company."
--William Coyne, Vice President, R&D, 3M, Oct. 17, 1995

"The nice thing about the [semiconductor fabrication plants being built] is
that today, 60 percent of the equipment going into them-whether they're in the
United States or somewhere else-is from U.S.  suppliers."
--William Spencer, President of Sematech, April 17, 1995

"An awareness of the electronics [contract] manufacturing services industry
continues to increase among analysts and investors. In our opinion, this is an
opportune time for investors to capitalize on this industry."
--William Cage, J.C. Bradford & Co., September 1, 1995

"Quantitative analysis of the culture of top growth companies reveals that they
consistently place higher value in areas such as teamwork, innovation, customer
orientation, flexibility, accountability and organizational learning.
Interestingly, top growth companies place low value on bureaucracy, political
power and an orientation toward profit."
--Douglas Tuttle, Deloitte & Touche, July 1, 1995

"At least three-quarters of America's gain in export competitiveness can be
linked to [the high yen].  It is important to recognize that part of the
apparent transformation in the competitive picture is the result of factors
that don't have much to do with the fundamentals of productive performance."
--Richard Lester, director of the MIT Industrial Performance Center, October
17, 1995

"Plants that export are quite different from firms and plants that do not...In
almost all dimensions, the exporters' performance is preferable."
--Why Exports Really Matter, a report from the Manufacturing Institute, July
17, 1995

"The use of advanced manufacturing technologies confers benefits upon both
firms and employees.  Employees in technology-using firms are the recipients
of higher wages and stronger wage gains."
--John Baldwin, Statistics Canada, July 3, 1995

"The only sustainable competitive advantage you can achieve in the chemical
industry is through new technology, not cost, not service. Technology. And the
development of this new technology is essential just to stay even with the
competition." 
--Jim Trainham, Director of Engineering R&D at DuPont's Central R&D facility,
Oct. 2, 1995

"We're at a critical point-a crisis point-in that the printed board technology
and the assembly technology hasn't kept pace.  It's becoming a roadblock.  So
we need a significant effort to overcome that because the country that doesn't
have a printed circuit assembly industry probably soon isn't going to have
much of an electronics industry either."
--Thomas Dammrich, Executive Director of the Institute for Interconnecting and
Packaging Electronic Circuits, July 3, 1995

"There have been further losses among manufacturers of food processing
equipment and packaging and a decline in investment in food science and
technology research.  Both are bellweathers of erosion in technological
leadership and innovation."
--Al Clausi, President of the Institute of Food Technologists, July 17, 1995

"It cost [Wrangler] a little more to make that pair of jeans in the United
States than it would in Bangladesh, but, hey, they can make them today and
deliver them tomorrow, whereas if they order from Bangladesh, they have to wait
at least three or four months to get the boat back over here."
--Peter Butenhoff, President of TC Squared, Feb. 15, 1995


ON JAPAN'S LINGERING PROBLEMS -
AND AWESOME POTENTIAL

"Early on in the current recession, many writers blamed Japan's economic
misfortunes on external factors-appreciation of the yen, U.S.  trade pressure
and the bust of the economic 'bubble.' More recent writings about business
ties to the ominpresent bureaucracy may reflect deeper and more serious
thinking on what's wrong with Japanese ways."
--Ayako Doi, Editor of Japan Digest, Jan. 3, 1995

"Anybody who believes the Japanese are on their back is just wishfully thinking
and in two years, the Japanese are again going to be 10 feet tall,"
--George Gamota, Director of the Mitre Corp., July 17, 1995

"The Japanese are [still] 10 years ahead of us...It's not like we're gaining
anything in the manufacturing field."
--William Boulton, Auburn University's Center for International Commerce, Oct.
17, 1995

"The U.S. holds 95 percent of the world's microprocessor market. Why? Because
Intel, HP and TI have shorted the timeframe of the life of their chips by 50
percent. When they do that, the creative side dominates, whereas on the
improvement side, when the Japanese start to improve the Intel 486, the Pentium
is released. By the time they start to improve the Pentium, the next one is
coming out. The Japanese are really hurt by this strategy."
--John Preston, Director of Technology Development, MIT, Feb. 15, 1995

"At Nissan, industrial engineers will take video tapes of people doing a piece
of work and then the industrial engineer will go fast forward, repeat, fast
forward, repeat and time it and analyze the motion of the wrists and fingers
down to a level where they are then able to detail out how to do this process
the most efficient way and train their people that way. It was strange to see
how the person almost became part of the machine. They were almost one."
--Willie Kim, Group Leader for Manufacturing Engineering at McDonnell Douglas,
commenting about his experience working at Nissan for one year as part of the
Commerce Department's Japanese Manufacturing Fellowship Program, March 3, 1995.

The high yen, high production costs in Japan, and the threat of having
manufacturing plants closed not so much because of damage from an earthquake
but because of a disruption in Japan's finely tuned just-in-time delivery
system "is totally rewriting their books on their investment plans."  It's
especially true now that Japan's economy is picking up and companies are in
the process of deciding when and where to add production capacity.
--Sheridan Tatsuno, Japanese Analyst, shortly after the devastating Kobe
earthquake, Feb. 1, 1995

Commerce At Light Speed (CALS) is being viewed as a way to transform the
keiretsu structure of Japanese industry.  "CALS is drawing attention as a new
rule for transactions between companies that go beyond corporate groupings.
Even the automotive industry, which used to be well known for its keiretsu
relationships, is beginning to seek transactions beyond corporate groupings
such as introducing common parts and components."
--Norihiko Ishiguro, Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry, Nov.
15, 1995

"[The lifetime employment] guarantee might be the structural deficiency of the
Japanese system that is resulting in the prolonged slowdown of the economy.
If that's the case, then they definitely need to change their management
style.  But if they see a recovery just as they used to when they went through
the typical business cycle, they may be able to maintain the old system."
--Joji Arai, Secretary General of the International Productivity Service,
August 7, 1995.


THE AUTOMOTIVE INDUSTRY

"We're in the fashion business and it's a little like the movie business.
There is a need for right-brain people in a car company-people who are highly
creative and who have an innate sense of the market.  Sometimes if you go
rigorously by what the marketing people say what needs to be done, you will be
guaranteed to do the wrong thing."
--Robert Lutz, President, Chrysler Corp., Feb. 1, 1995

"While we're researching agile, the Japanese are implementing it. And it is the
master of lean, which is Toyota, that is going and implementing it. We don't
have any more time to study,"
--Donald Runkle, Vice President of General Motors and General Manager of GM's
Delphi Saginaw division, May 15, 1995

"The advantage of having a single CAD/CAM system, and in particular one like
CATIA, lies primarily in the fact that the entire enterprise can easily access
and communicate product and process definition without the ever-present fear
that it will be misinterpreted either because of translation errors or [it] not
[being] up to date. We can directly trace much of our improved quality and
reduced cost to our implementation of a single CAD system."
--Frank Ewasyshyn, Vice President of Advanced Manufacturing Engineering,
Chrysler Corp., July 17, 1995

"Each of the Big Three companies has a long way to go in the cultural change
process which will result in a truly lean enterprise."
--Daniel Roos, Co-Director of MIT's International Motor Vehicle Program, Nov.
1, 1995

"The focus [of the Ford Production System] is on zero waste, zero defects, high
levels of machine reliability and measuring ourselves every step of the
process."
--Roman Krygier, Advanced Engineering and Process Leadership for Ford
Automotive, Nov. 1, 1995. 

LABOR

"For the sake of the shareholder and [executive] bonuses, [management is]
willing to keep the people down in Third World countries also. I don't see
corporations talking about real democracy in China or Korea. They don't give a
shit about democracy over there. They don't give a shit about it because they
don't really know what democracy is because they don't have democracy in their
own plants in the United States."
--George Korpias, President, International Association of Machinists, Dec. 1,
1995

"True apprenticeships [for tool and die makers] have gone away, which is very
bad. What happens is you have this group of journeymen whose average age now is
61 years old, so it won't be long before there won't be anybody left to train
the new people coming into the field. It's an urgent thing."
--Sam Hart, a machinist at the Oak Ridge Y-12 production facility, Feb.  15,
1995

THE NEW CONGRESS

"The bar has been raised with this session of Congress in terms of someone
showing us that we are making a prudent investment. A prudent investment isn't
good enough. A desirable investment isn't good enough any more. A
well-intentioned investment won't make it in this environment. The old game is
over. And it really is over because times have changed."
--Rep. Bob Franks (R-N.J.), Feb. 1, 1995

"The long-term commitment of the country to research and development is in
jeopardy.  There is a real chance that we'll wind up with a budget resolution
or a set of priorities that do not reflect the same level of national
commitment to research and development that we've had since the second world
war."
--Sen. Jeff Bingaman (D-N.M.), May 1, 1995

Q: "The freshmen organized in the House right now want to get rid of the whole
Department of Commerce."
Good: "I find that one just absolutely mind boggling. How could you possibly be
a group of people who are presumably pro business and want to abolish the only
advocate for business in the cabinet?"

"Q:  But they come over here and see people walking the halls like zombies,
doing nothing."
Good: "That's bull_, come on. I can go to anybody's establishment and find
zombies. And I can find them on Capitol Hill. There are a hell of a lot of
people in this building who are career folks who really work very hard and are
very smart and do a good job.  Sure there is stuff that doesn't get done very
well, nobody is going to argue that. But a hell of a lot gets done pretty well.
The other point is I get a little bit aggravated about the fact that the
suggestion is that I checked my brains when I came here."
-Mary Good, Undersecretary of Technology at the U.S. Department of Commerce,
April 17, 1995

"I don't think the Chrysler bill is going to go any place. They [Republican
freshmen] worked solo. You're going to privatize NIST? Over my dead body."
--Rep. Constance Morella (R-Md), Chairman of the House Science Committee's
technology subcommittee, June 15, 1995

The House Republicans "are not anxious to cut off something [pork-barrel
projects] that they got a good deal of benefit out of. The new [committee]
chairmen are chomping at the bit to get some goodies for themselves."
--Rep. George Brown (D-Calif.), Ranking Minority Member of the House Science
Committee, March 3, 1995

"We've been doing technology with industry and triggering things for the
commercial marketplace forever.  We keep kidding ourselves about why we're
doing the projects.  But I like doing it from out behind the curtain [of the
military].  It's risky, and I don't know if it will last, but we owe it to the
country to do it correctly and be honest about it."
--Arati Prabhakar, Director of the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, June 1, 1995, discussing the fate of the Advanced Technology
Program, which is still up in the air.

"The National Association of Manufacturers believes the disproportionate large
cuts proposed in newer R&D programs are a mistake."
--NAM policy statement on federal R&D budget cuts, Sept. 1, 1995


NATIONAL LABS, R&D AND UNIVERSITIES

"I wonder if the new Congress realizes how angry U.S. high-tech companies are
becoming at what they perceive as the unfair competition they are increasingly
encountering from the federal laboratories for diminishing federal science and
technology spending. In too many instances, federal laboratories established to
serve the public interest seem to have evolved into institutions bent on their
own survival whether that serves the public interest or not."
-Brenda Forman, Director of Marketing Policy for Lockheed Martin, March 15,
1995

"It is now part of every program manager's job not only to develop great new
military relevant technologies, but to take the responsibility of determining
how it will get built."
--Michael McGrath, manufacturing program manager at the Defense Department's
Advanced Research Projects Agency, March 15, 1995

"...One of the difficulties with ARPA is that it has grown so big that-at least
in my view-its character is threatened. There is a danger in ARPA getting too
big, both in changing its character and it becoming too bureaucratic. That is
not necessarily good for an entrepreneurial organization. I'm trying very hard
to shrink the agency. It is not a popular notion. ARPA is very entrepreneurial.
The object of the game is to get all the money."
--Larry Lynn, Director of the Advanced Research Projects Agency. Oct. 17, 1995

"When Alice went looking for a land of nonsense, she found it. It was the
university."
-John White, Dean of the College of Engineering, Georgia Institute of
Technology, July 17, 1995

"Today, the future has no organized political constituency."
--Charles Vest, President, MIT, Oct. 2, 1995






<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
MANUFACTURING NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

A 1996 MANUFACTURING RESOLUTION: EDUCATION REPLACES COMPETITIVENESS AT NATION'S
PRIMARY CONCERN


Last year was one of the best ever for U.S. manufacturers and will go down as
the year that manufacturing was finally recognized as being as important to the
country's future as financing has been for the past decade or more.

Thank goodness. The nation couldn't wait much longer for manufacturing to
undergo an image change both in the public and corporate worlds.

But now the manufacturing community has to build on the good news of 1995.

Education has replaced competitiveness as the buzzword of the 1990s. As well it
should.

During Christmas break, I drove my family from Washington, D.C., to Toronto, a
10-hour trip. About halfway between the two cities lies Corning, N.Y., near the
Pennsylvania border. On the way back from Toronto, we stopped at the Corning
Glass Museum.

The museum includes a tour of the Steuben glass factory, which my children
found to be "awesome, cool," they say.  They had no idea of how glass was
made, and could not believe their eyes when a craftsman making a $400
paperweight easily cut the hot glass with a pair of shears.

The factory was spotless and modern. The workers obviously enjoyed what they
were doing. And the products they made were works are art-expensive, but worth
it-given the amount of work and skill needed to make them, say my kids, who
enthusiastically said they'd love to learn the craft.

Having never thought of it before, they realized how important glass is in our
culture and that it's been made for more than 3,000 years. They experienced the
entire  process, from the gathering of the raw materials to the grinding,
polishing and inspection of the final product.  "I loved it," said my
12-year-old daughter.

If you are the owner or manager of a manufacturing plant, show it off to the
children in your community AND their parents AND the press. 

Manufacturing is reclaiming its place in American society, but it needs a push.
Making products is sexy, vibrant, high-tech, exciting and rewarding. This
message has to get out to millions of people in the country who are fretting
about the future.

Keep telling the story.

--Richard McCormack




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-25</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B018-175</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mg16.html 205.156.212.5 19970122034314 text/html 62276
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:41:12 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:51 GMT
Content-length: 62089
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mg16.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
SENSOR BUSINESS DIGEST via NewsNet <BR>
January, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>=======================================================</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>MEMS DEVICES WILL CONTINUE TO CARVE OUT SIGNIFICANT&nbsp;MARKETS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1402 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>AMMI EXPLOITS GROWTH OPPORTUNITIES FOR SILICON&nbsp;MICROMACHINED SENSORS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(731 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>FIBER-OPTIC SENSOR MAY SPARK DIESEL ENGINE COMBUSTION&nbsp;PRESSURE MONITORING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1778 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>RESEARCHERS CLARIFY KEY SOURCES OF INDOOR AIR VOCS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1081 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>CALORIE SENSOR COULD HEAT UP CONSUMER HEALTH CARE AND&nbsp;MEDICAL ARENAS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(647 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>BSAC AND CDS-PENN STATE TO INVESTIGATE PZT FILMS FOR MEMS&nbsp;STRUCTURES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(967 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>SENSORS AND ACTUATORS ARE BECOMING THE SOUL OF THE&nbsp;MACHINE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(379 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>NANO-ENGINEERED MATERIALS IMPROVE SENSOR PERFORMANCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1135 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>INNOVATIVE SENSORS COULD REFRESH AIR CONDITIONING SYSTEMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(338 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
SENSOR BUSINESS DIGEST via NewsNet
January, 1996

MEMS DEVICES WILL CONTINUE TO CARVE OUT SIGNIFICANT
MARKETS

The foundation of MEMS (Microelectromechanical Systems)
technology is the ability to create controllable, mechanical, moveable

structures using silicon IC technology, notes Dr. Janusz Bryzek,
president of Intelligent MicroSensor Technology (IMST, Fremont, CA,

510-770-9168). The silicon pressure sensor represents the first
commercially successful application of micromachining.

Since sensors are often the vital components determining the
feasibility of new products, they have a significant leverage factor,
enabling production of sensor-based systems exceeding sensor cost
by several orders of magnitude; e.g., a $10 MAP (manifold absolute
pressure) sensor facilitates production of fuel efficient, low polluting,

$25,000 cars. Originally an expensive and exotic technology, silicon-
based pressure transducers were initially employed exclusively in
specialized aerospace, testing, and instrumentation functions, Bryzek
explains. However, within the past decade, advances in silicon
micromachining manufacturing technology have created a plethora of
new uses for such technology.

Silicon is widely used in manufacturing purely electronic integrated
circuits, where only the material's electrical properties are exploited.

Micromechanics utilizes the electrical and mechanical properties of
silicon to create a new generation of electromechanical silicon chips.

Silicon micromachining technology is attractive, owing to its
mechanical properties and to the support available from the IC
industry. Mechanically, silicon is almost a perfect material for
pressure sensors, since it is stronger than steel, as light as aluminum,
not subject to mechanical hysteresis, highly sensitive to stress, and
can be readily batch micromachined. Support available from the
mainstream electronic industry includes proven semiconductor
manufacturing processes, ultra-pure, low-cost materials, advanced
manufacturing equipment, high-volume manufacturing and
packaging technologies, and educated technologists.

The significance of the leverage that silicon sensor technology enjoys
is particularly clear when comparing the total R&D expenditures in
the sensor and IC industries. The global sensor budget, covering a
diverse range of technologies, is on the order of $200 million
annually, according to Bryzek. Funding for new developments by the
IC industry and supporting services totals on the order of billions of
dollars per year. Adopting mainstream electronic industry
developments significantly reduces the development time and cost
for micromechanical devices; and new micromachining or sensor-
specific technologies can be developed from the rich foundation
created for electronic ICs.

The roots of silicon micromachining technology hark back to Bell
Laboratories. The research team developing the basics of
semiconductor technology discovered a piezoresistive effect in silicon
and germanium. The first research paper, published in 1954,
characterized the basic piezoresistive properties of such materials.
The piezoresistive effect creates a resistance change in the
semiconductor material in response to stress, which is about two
orders of magnitude larger than the equivalent resistance change of
metals used for non-silicon strain gage applications.

California's Silicon Valley played a vital role in bringing MEMS
devices to the marketplace. Characteristic of many semiconductor
companies, the initial silicon sensor start-ups spun-off from Fairchild
in the 1970s: ICT Transducers (now Foxboro/ICT, San Jose, CA);
National Semiconductor's Sensor Group (now SenSym, Milpitas, CA);
Endevco R&D (Sunnyvale, CA); and Cognition (now Rosemount, whose
Measurement Division is headquartered in Eden Prairie, MN).

Bryzek has helped pioneer and generate the market momentum and
infrastructure for silicon micromachined sensors, having been a co-
founder of such companies as NovaSensor, which was acquired by
British-based Lucas Industries, plc circa1990. Lucas NovaSensor(R)
(Fremont, CA) is under the rubric of Lucas Control Systems Products
(Hampton, VA), a part of Lucas Industries, plc.

During the past ten years, the Silicon Valley MEMS market has
emerged to form a mini industry. According to Bryzek, about 900
people are currently employed in the MEMS industry in the Valley,
which is comprised of eight active microsensor companies, 13

companies/organizations involved in microstructures, and three
university R&D centers. The average sales per employee for the top
three microsensor companies in Silicon Valley amounts to about
$133,000.

The total MEMS sensor/non-sensing market is forecast by Bryzek to
grow at a 16.5% compound annual rate to reach $6.7 billion in 2005,
compared to about $1.45 billion in 1995. The non-sensing MEMS
market (encompassing fluid controls, data storage, displays, biochips,

communication, and miscellaneous devices) is anticipated to advance
at 52.5% compound annual rate to total $3.4 billion in 2005, from
about $50 million in 1995.

The MEMS pressure sensor market is projected to expand at a 9.6%
compound annual rate, from $1.0 billion in 1995 to $2.5 billion in
2005. Shipments of silicon pressure sensors, according to Bryzek,
rose from about 3 million units in 1983 to over 40 million units in
1995, and are forecast to exceed 125 million units/year in the next
decade. The total market for MEMS inertial sensors is expected to
increase at nearly a 7.2% compound annual rate to reach $800
million in 2005, from $400 million in 1995. During the past three
years, the silicon acceleration sensor market mushroomed to 15
million units per year. Several additional MEMS inertial sensor
applications are in the initial commercialization phase, promising the

formation of billion dollar market opportunities.

Bryzek expects sanguine expansion in MEMS sensor markets, as well
as non-sensing MEMS applications. MEMS pressure sensors will
experience significant growth, primarily fueled by automotive
applications and smart sensors with networked output. Emerging
automotive applications for MEMS pressure sensors include fuel
vapor sensors, high-pressure fuel injection systems, diesel MAP
(manifold absolute pressure) sensors, and "braking by wire"
(electronic braking) in passenger cars and trucks. The volume of
inertial (acceleration, rate, gyro) sensors will rapidly expand, mainly
in the automotive and virtual reality sectors, accompanied by
substantial price erosion.

The next generation of fluidic components (such as pressure valves)
is expected by Bryzek to enjoy considerable growth. The current
generation of fluid controls is not yet capable of sufficiently meeting
user requirements, since they have drawbacks in terms of lack of
media compatibility, limited temperature range, and restricted
pressure range.

Active development of MEMS-based data storage technology is
underway; and Bryzek perceives the most commercially promising
development to be the hard drive head suspension (gimble) with an
on-chip servomotor, driven by an industry consortium initiated by
Professor D. Miu of UCLA.

The servomotor enables .1 um positioning accuracy of the head,
corresponding to about 100 GB/sq. in. read-write density, and fits
into the "sockets" of the existing mechanical devices to provide 10
um resolution. Since current industry volume is on the order of one
million heads per day, with an estimated volume price of about $5
for the gimble/head assembly, this application represents a potential
market of $1.3 billion. Moreover, several other storage chip
technologies hold promise for achieving volume production during
the next decade.

Activity in the area of MEMS display chips is being spearheaded by
Texas Instruments' (Dallas, TX) micromirror display development.
Two Silicon Valley start-ups are focusing on MEMS display
technology (electrostatically activated microbeams reflecting light),
including Echelle (Mountain View, CA). MEMS displays have potential
to capture a significant share of the large display industry.

MEMS biochips can allow a new generation of products to appear in
the marketplace, including DNA multipliers, chemical reactors, and
bacteria processors. Bryzek expects the MEMS biochip market to
grow briskly over the next ten years, adding that about one billion
biochips annually could potentially be used in DNA multipliers.
Concerning MEMS communication devices/components, fiber-optic
aligners have been on the market for a number of years. Bryzek
observes that the recent development of fiber-optic MEMS switches
has potential for enabling the implementation of on-demand
residential multimedia applications.

In November 1995, Dr. Bryzek left Lucas NovaSensor to start-up
IMST, which aims to become the global leader in smart integrated
and networkable sensors in less than five years. The company, which
is in the process of formation, plans to initially develop a new
generation of OEM pressure transducers featuring advances in
functionality, price/performance, quality, and reliability, while
retaining socket compatibility with many competitive "dumb"
devices. The products will incorporate a unique on-sensor-chip
pressure media protection capability to eliminate the need for metal

diaphragms. They will also offer a high level of electronics
integration, including electronic trimming for compensation and
calibration, wireless communication, and control networking.

Dr. Bryzek has initiated discussions with selected companies
interested in creating strategic partnerships with his new venture.
He plans to initially introduce products that meet the requirements
of such partners, and then unveil standard product lines. Dr. Bryzek
welcomes inquiries from companies interested in establishing a
business relationship with IMST.

Sincerely,
Peter Adrian, Editor



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
SENSOR BUSINESS DIGEST via NewsNet
January, 1996

AMMI EXPLOITS GROWTH OPPORTUNITIES FOR SILICON
MICROMACHINED SENSORS

Advanced MicroMachines Incorporated (AMMi, Cleveland, OH, 216-
229-4636) has doubled its sales staff over the past few months to
capitalize on promising business opportunities in the silicon
micromachined sensors arena.

One opportunity entails the design and development of a
micromechanical extreme temperature sensing bimetallic switch that
does not require power. The device is based on the same principles
that apply in the macro world--two adjacent materials with different

coefficients of thermal expansion will experience a bending moment
along their lengths, as one material expands more than the other.
Although this concept is well over 100 years old, new challenges
must be surmounted when dealing with structures that are about the
size of a human eyelash, such as residual stresses formed in the
structures due to wafer processing.

However, micromachined bimetallic temperature sensors offer the
key benefits of enhanced sensitivity, due to both their larger
deflections and increased radii of curvature. Such advantages can be
leveraged to cost-effectively produce micromachined bimetallic
switches that latch into place when an extreme hot or cold
temperature is achieved, which enables the device to be effectively
applied for diagnostic monitoring. For example, such sensors are
sufficiently small to be embedded in a truck tire. When it is time to
retread the tire, a quick check can be performed to determine
possible damage to the polymer rubber caused by overheating.
Additional potential applications include relays, temperature
switches, and thermostats.

Another business opportunity identified by AMMi calls for designing
and developing a miniature array of high frequency response heat
flux sensors to be used inside a gas turbine engine. The product is
unique, since an array of sensors is embedded in a flexible material,
allowing for mounting many sensors onto the curved surface of a
turbine blade in a timely and effective manner. While the
commercial applications for such a product in aircraft engine testing
are limited due to high temperature constraints, many other market

opportunities are opened when other types of sensors are considered
as candidates for being embedded as arrays in flexible materials,
notes Louis Toly, AMMi's business manager.

AMMi's mission within the competitive sensor market is to be the
preferred source for the design, development, prototyping,
integration, testing, and packaging of microsensors and
microactuators for industrial and medical applications. The company
has expertise in all aspects of sensor design, including both the
sensor component and the associated ASICs for signal processing.
Such components are integrated in a hybrid configuration and
packaged for protection from harsh environments. The company,
therefore, can provide its clients with sensors possessing smart
capabilities.

AMMi began as a provider of consulting services in the area of MEMS
about two years ago, and still plans to continue in this arena. Large

corporations are often reluctant to invest manpower and equipment
in MEMS, due to the significant inherent financial risks involved in
making a new technology commercially available. AMMi helps
mitigate such risks by assisting new entrants in the silicon
micromachined sensors arena, which is fraught with growth
opportunities.

Demand for MEMS-based temperature sensors for tires is projected
to total $250 million (representing 25,000,000 units) in 2000,
according to System Planning Corporation's (Arlington, VA, 703-351-
8677) Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS)  market study. The
global market for MEMS temperature sensors in automobiles is
forecast to reach $400 million (representing 40,000,000 units) in
2000. The report notes that sensors that demand for MEMS
temperature sensors is expanding in the automobile, truck, and tire
industries, and that such sensors will continue to find new
applications in such devices as fire alarms, HVAC systems, and
portable electronics.

The value of the Western European market for silicon temperature
sensors is projected to rise at a 10.6% average annual rate to total
$19.5 million in 1997, from $10.7 million in 1992, according to Frost
& Sullivan's report on The European Market For Silicon Sensors
(#RE1760/J). The market for silicon temperature sensors in Western
Europe is pegged at $15.9 million in 1995. In 1997, the end-user
industry distribution of the Western silicon temperature sensor
market will be: while goods (e.g., washing machines, dishwashers,
ovens, coffee makers)-35%; automotive-32%; HVAC (including
industrial/domestic thermostats)-10%; electronics/instrumentation
(temperature compensation and control)-15%; and "other" (including
shavers)-8%.

SBD  forecasts that global revenues for silicon/IC temperature
sensors will expand at a 6% compound annual rate to reach $40.2
million in 2000, compared to about $30 million in 1995.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
SENSOR BUSINESS DIGEST via NewsNet
January, 1996

FIBER-OPTIC SENSOR MAY SPARK DIESEL ENGINE COMBUSTION
PRESSURE MONITORING

The new diesel combustion pressure sensor (Model OPS350-3000)
available from Optrand, Inc. (Ann Arbor, MI, 313-769-4094) is
designed for continuous, long-term operation under diesel
combustion conditions. The reliable, low-cost sensor-- which is
especially suitable for engine health monitoring or control in
stationary and movable diesel engines--is capable of withstanding
high overpressures and combustion detonations without suffering
damage or performance degradation.

Using Optrand's fiber-optic sensing technology developed for adverse

environmental applications, the OPS350-3000 operates at sensor
housing temperatures up to 350 degrees C, and has a guaranteed life
of 200 million cycles, which is purportedly not currently available
from other competing commercial products. Optrand's diesel
combustion pressure sensor is available in a sealed gage pressure
package, and is offered in two versions with accuracies of 1% and 3%.

In conjunction with Optrand OPT1000 series opto-electronic
interfaces, the sensor system provides a frequency response of 0.1
Hz to 15 kHz, covering engine knock frequencies. The sensor is
available in four miniature housing styles ranging in size from M5
(5mm diameter thread) to 3/8"-24 in diameter. Specifically intended
for high-volume and OEM applications, the OPS350-3000 is offered in
custom OEM housings suitable for direct engine installation in
addition to standard pressure configurations.

Incorporated in 1992, Optrand focuses on researching, developing,
and manufacturing fiber-optic sensors for extreme environments.
The company's products address pressure, temperature, air/fuel
ratio monitoring, and control requirements in the combustion engine,
electrical utility, and jet engine industries.

Marek Wlodarczyk, Optrand's president and CEO, told SBD  that the
OPS350-3000 provides key performance and design advantages over
competing piezoelectric and piezoresistive sensing technologies for
engine monitoring/control applications. He notes that piezoelectric
sensors, which are used predominantly for combustion engine
research/testing, are expensive, and have a relatively short life, due
to their construction and to the limitations of piezoelectric materials.

The silicon piezoresistive combustion pressure sensor, which
Wlodarczyk indicates is also mostly used for research purposes,
requires special mounting so that the temperature of the sensing
element does not exceed about 125 degrees C. Moreover, the
required size of the silicon piezoresistive sensor package (which
includes the sensor and electronics) limits its mounting flexibility in
the engine.

As noted in Multi-Channel Fiber-Optic Pressure Sensor System for
Monitoring and Control of Reciprocating Engines, by T. Poorman, S.
Kalishnikov, and M. Wlodarczyk, which was presented at the 10th
Annual Gas Machinery Conference & Exhibition  in October 1995,
sensing crystals are unable to withstand continuous high pressures.
Strain or capacitance gages used in pressure transducers exhibit
large unrepeatable, unpredictable changes in output at high
temperatures. The changes, resulting from such effects as alloy
segregation, phase changes, selective oxidation, and diffusion,
ultimately lead to premature failure of the gage or lead wires.

Transfer pin designs--which connect the pressure sensing diaphragm
to the crystal to separate the temperature-sensitive crystal from
high combustion temperatures--are subject to hysteresis and
repeatability errors, resulting from response variations induced by
temperature gradients presented to the mechanical assembly.

Water cooling is required for piezo-type sensors to operate over the
full range of combustion engine temperatures. The signal
conditioning electronics of such sensors must be located at or near
the sensor head to counteract strong EMI effects, which can subject
the electronic components to temperatures exceeding 125 degrees C,
thereby requiring expensive components with high-temperature
capability. The sensing crystal and the electronic circuitry must be

electrically and thermally well-shielded, resulting in a large sensor
package. The authors note that electronic sensors have not thus far
been able to effectively address the overall cost, size, reliability, and

high-temperature durability requirements for continuous engine
control applications.

Optrand's uncomplicated intensity-modulated fiber-optic combustion
pressure sensor, which uses an optical fiber in front of a flexing
diaphragm for optical reflection measurement of pressure-induced
diaphragm deflections, offers promise for satisfying the performance
and cost constraints of industrial and, over the longer-term,
automotive applications.

In contrast to both the piezoelectric and silicon piezoresistive
combustion pressure sensors, the OPS350-3000 does not require a
transfer pin to mechanically couple the diaphragm to the sensing
element. Furthermore, in the OPS350-3000, which does not require
special mounting, the top of the sensing element is only 30 microns
away from the diaphragm. The diesel combustion pressure sensor's
diaphragm, moreover, has been optimized in terms of its operating
and overpressure range, yield strength, and fatigue life.

Wlodarczyk notes that Optrand's longer-term strategy entails
offering reliable, low-cost fiber-optic sensors for use in passenger
cars. The OPS350-3000 is primarily intended for larger, less price-
sensitive engines. Target markets/applications include natural gas
and diesel fueled engines used in power generation, marine
applications, and locomotives. Optrand's OPS350-3000 has been
evaluated for use in stationary engines for power generation; and
OEMs have expressed keen interest in integrating the sensor into a
new generation of engine controls.

The starting prices for the OPS350-3000 sensor and signal
conditioning electronics are $395 and $595, respectively. In OEM
quantities (1,000 units), the sensor plus signal conditioning
electronics is available at a starting price of about $400.

Significant gains in the efficiency of large-bore combustion engines,

diminished levels of noxious emissions, and enhanced engine life can
be achieved via closed-loop engine controls based on combustion
pressure information, according to the aforementioned paper. The
use of cylinder pressure as a control parameter in gasoline engines
has been demonstrated to lead to optimal control of spark-timing,
engine speed, throttle, air/fuel ratio, and to an optimized response to
ambient conditions. In-cylinder pressure sensors can also provide for
direct and deterministic misfire detection. In lean burn combustion,

controlling spark timing and air/fuel ratio via in-cylinder
measurement so that "cold combustion" can occur leads results in
high efficiency, reduced NOx emissions, and minimized torque
variability.

Although reduced fuel consumption and increased torque output are
obtained in large-bore engines operating under lean burn conditions
and at higher compression ratios, the increased ratio leads to a
greater tendency toward engine knock. Effective knock control is
facilitated by monitoring each cylinder individually. Currently used
knock sensors mounted externally to the engine body can suffer
from shock and vibration effects.

Cylinder pressure information is of considerable value, along with
other engine parameters, for engine diagnostics and health
monitoring. Pressure trend analyses can extend maintenance
schedules and provide a warning before significant engine problems
develop.

In addition, there are opportunities to use continuous cylinder-
pressure monitoring to address existing and emerging emissions
regulations. The Clean Air ACT Amendments (CAAA) of 1990 will
induce most US operators of Stationary Reciprocating Internal
Combustion Engines (SRICEs) to continuously monitor and report
their emissions.

Some emissions sources will need to be equipped with Enhanced

Monitoring/Compliance Certification (EM/CC) capability, in which a
mechanism, procedure, or system will be implemented to ensure that
the unit complies with an emission limit/standard on a continuous
basis. Although cylinder pressure measurement does not provide
direct information on emissions, the authors note that maintaining
nominal pressure levels in all cylinders is a prerequisite for realizing
low emission levels. Moreover, cylinder pressure measurement is
described as the best predictor in Parametric Emissions Monitoring
Systems (PEMS) that are used to predict emission levels of
combustion emission gases, such as NOx, VOCs, and carbon monoxide
(CO), without requiring direct monitoring techniques.

Global revenues for fiber-optic pressure sensors are predicted to
expand at a 13.9% compound annual rate to reach $92.7 million in
1999, from $37.3 million in 1992, according to Frost & Sullivan's
World Fiber Optic Sensor Markets  report (912-40). Revenues for
1996-1998 are projected at $59.2 million, $68.0 million, and $79.0
million, respectively.

Worldwide unit shipments of fiber-optic pressure sensors are
anticipated to rise at an 18.3% compound annual rate to total
380,300 in 1999, compared to 117,100 in 1992. Unit shipments
during 1996-1998 are put at 200,700, 243,500, and 300,600,
respectively.

Revenues for the US fiber-optic pressure sensors market are forecast
to expand at a 13.2% compound annual rate to reach $65.8 million in
1999, from $27.6 million in 1992. Revenues for 1996-1998 are
projected at $42.8 million, $48.9 million, and $56.6 million,
respectively.

Unit shipments for the US fiber-optic pressure sensors market are
expected to rise at about a 17.7% compound annual rate to total
274,200 in 1999, as opposed to 87,900 in 1992. Unit shipments
during 1996-1998 are pegged at 147,100, 177,800, and 218,500,
respectively.

In 1996, the projected end-user industry distribution of the total
global revenues for fiber-optic pressure sensors is (all figures are
rounded): process industries-17.3%; industrial machinery-11.4%;
medical-61.1%; and "other" (including power plants, explosives
manufacturers, plastic producers, automotive industry, and machine
tool manufacturers)-10.5%.

Revenues for the Western European market for fiber-optic pressure
sensors are forecast to advance at about an 8.7% compound annual
rate to reach $7.4 million in 1999, as opposed to $4.1 million in 1992,

according to Frost & Sullivan's report on Fibre Optic Sensor Markets
(Europe)  (1940-40). Revenues in 1996-1998 are placed at $5.6
million, $6.1 million, and $6.7 million, respectively.

Unit shipments for the Western European fiber-optic pressure
sensors market are expected to rise at a 13.3% compound annual rate
to total 34,452 in 1999, from 14,360 in 1992. Unit shipments for
1996-1998 are projected at 23,483, 27,038, and 30,582, respectively.

In 1996, the projected geographical distribution of the total revenues
for the Western European fiber-optic pressure sensors market is:
Germany-38.6%; UK-13.7%; France-16.0%; Italy-8.6%; Iberia (Spain,

Portugal)-9.2%; Scandinavia (Denmark, Sweden, Finland, Norway)-
4.6%; Benelux (Belgium, Luxembourg, the Netherlands)-4.6%; and the
rest of Europe (Austria, Greece, Ireland, Switzerland)-4.7%.

The world market for fiber-optic pressure sensors is forecast to
stand at $17.7 million in 1998, compared to $16.8 million in 1993,
according to Business Communications Company, Inc.'s Fiber Optic
Sensors  report (LG-116R). Global unit volume of fiber-optic pressure
sensors is projected to total 16,000 in 1998, from 14,000 in 1993.

Civilian, open global demand for pressure sensors used in ships and
railborn vehicles is forecast to reach 49.5 mil. DM (about $29.1
million at the exchange rate of 1.7 DM for the dollar) in 2000,
compared to 45.7 mil. DM (about $26.9 million) in 1991 and 48.5 mil.
DM (about $28.5 million) in 1995, according to Prognos AG's Sensor
Technology 2000  report.

SBD  projects that global revenues for fiber-optic pressure
sensors/systems will expand at about an 8% compound annual rate
to reach $25.4 million in 2000, compared to about $17.3 million in
1995.

Global demand for automotive pressure sensors is projected at $210
million in 1995 and $240 million in 1996, according to BIS Strategic
Decisions' (Luton, England, ++44-1-582-405678) latest Automotive
Sensor Demand Forecast Market Report. Worldwide unit volume for
automotive pressure sensors in 1995 and 1996 is projected at
21,000,000 and 26,000,000, respectively.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
SENSOR BUSINESS DIGEST via NewsNet
January, 1996

RESEARCHERS CLARIFY KEY SOURCES OF INDOOR AIR VOCS

A research study funded by the Georgia Environmental Technology
Consortium--a division of the Georgia Research Alliance-- suggests
that metabolic gases emitted from molds and fungi growing inside
buildings may constitute a significant source of airborne volatile
organic compounds (VOCs) that can engender indoor air quality
problems collectively referred to as the "Sick Building Syndrome."

Indoor air quality problems have historically been blamed on
various factors, including emissions from particleboard partitions,
paints, carpets, and cleaning supplies. The study suggests that control

measures prescribed for sick buildings may have to be altered to
address microbial problems in addition to building materials.

"As molds and fungi grow, they give off metabolic gases that contain
VOC emissions," explained Dr. Charlene Bayer, principal research
scientist and director of the Georgia Institute of Technology's Indoor

Environment Research Program (Atlanta, GA, 404-894-3825). "Some
of the volatile compounds that we are finding are primary solvents;
and we think some of the manufacturers are being blamed for
emissions from their products when the emissions may actually be
coming from the microbes. Because the VOCs have usually been
attributed to other types of sources, the source control may be
incorrect."

Bayer and Sidney Crow, a biologist at Georgia State University
Southeast, collected fungi samples from buildings afflicted with
microbial contamination, and allowed the samples to grow in the
laboratory. The VOCs released from the microbial broths were
collected, identified, and then compared to those detected in the
ambient air within the buildings.

"Many of the volatile compounds produced by the cultured fungi are
identical to those originating from solvent-based building materials
and cleaning supplies," Bayer noted. "These VOCs included hexane,
methylene chloride, benzene, and acetone."

The microbial VOCs may contribute substantially to the overall level
of ambient VOCs in buildings, according to Bayer. For example, in one
building the researchers scrutinized, microbial contamination was
clearly evident on the walls, carpets, and other locations.

"The concentration of hexane--a solvent commonly used in cleaning
fluids, paints, and adhesives--was extremely high, but no source of
hexane could be found," Bayer stated. "The microbial contamination
could have been the source of the hexane."

Cladosporium, Penicillium, and Aspergillus are among the myriad of
commonly occurring microbes that can beset homes, schools, and
offices. Typically, a foul, musty odor is the initial indication of their

presence. The rampant growth of such microbes produces headaches,
itchy eyes, rashes, and respiratory problems.

Conditions favorable for stimulating microbial growth include heat
and moisture. In the Southeast's semi-tropical climate, buildings are
major targets for microbial contamination.

Molds and fungi are not particular about what they eat, and will
devour nearly any organic material, including the dirt and dust
trapped within ventilation systems. To ameliorate the risk of
microbial contamination, one should first seek ways to reduce the
required nutrient base.

"Under ideal conditions, a building's ventilation system should filter
out both the microbes and the dirt they feed upon," Bayer indicated.

"Unfortunately, however, many homes, schools, and small office
buildings use cheap, throwaway filters in their ventilation systems."

Cheap furnace filters are merely "boulder catchers," Bayer remarks.
"They only catch the big stuff. They don't catch the fine dust
particles, and they don't catch the microbes. So, they really don't do
anything to help human health." Bayer recommends discarding the
cheap filters and replacing them with more efficient, albeit more
expensive, ones.

However, the problems with ventilation systems increase with the
size of the building. In the fiberglass-lined ductwork often used for
noise control in larger office buildings, the fibers tend to trap dirt,
which provides a rich nutrient base for the microbes.

"Add a little moisture, and you have a mold garden growing in your
network," Bayer declared. "The microbes grow and multiply, and
then get blown all over the building to infest other areas." Moisture
control is vital for preventing microbial contamination, since
microbial growth can skyrocket when the humidity rises. "Many
buildings erected in the Southeast simply were not designed to
handle the heavy humidity loads we have, particularly during our
hot, muggy summers," Bayer remarked. "And most building owners
don't run their ventilation systems continuously."

Schools typically turn their systems off during the summer months;
and most office buildings cycle their systems over nights and
weekends, often creating an unpleasant "Monday morning cocktail"
for the workers. Such intermittent operation permits the humidity to
increase and the molds to multiply.

Preventive maintenance encompasses proper filtration, correct
moisture control, and periodic cleaning of the entire ventilation
system, including the humidifier assembly on residential furnaces.
"Typical reservoir humidifiers are little mold factories," Bayer notes.
"They are just pools of standing, stagnant water throughout much of
the year that allow mold to grow and infiltrate the ducts. They
should be cleaned regularly."

A considerable amount of research remains to be conducted,
including identifying individual metabolic gases and their respective
odors, and acquiring a greater understanding of the microbes that
are producing them. The human response to molds and fungi, and the
sources of complaints in buildings can be more fully understood, once
a knowledge base is developed in these areas.

"Ultimately, we want to identify the microbial contamination on the
basis of the odors which are present," Bayer states. "That way, we
will be able to identify the source much more quickly and accurately,
and deal with the problem faster and more effectively...before it
becomes a major problem requiring extensive remediation."

SBD  forecasts that global revenues for gas sensors used in building
and safety applications will rise at a 9.4% compound annual rate to
total $185 million in 2000, compared to about $108 million in 1994.

Revenues for the Western European HVAC (heating, ventilating, and
air conditioning) market for gas sensors are forecast to increase at
more than a 28% average annual rate to reach about $16.8 million in
1998, from nearly $3.8 million in 1992, according to Frost &
Sullivan's European Gas Sensor Markets  report (1902-40). Revenues
for 1996 are pegged at nearly $10.1 million.

Unit shipments for the Western European HVAC gas sensor market
are projected to rise at about a 32.9% average annual rate to total
308,000 in 1998, compared to 56,000 in 1992. Unit shipments in
1996 are placed at 185,000.

The projected distribution of the total revenues for the Western
European HVAC gas sensor market by sensor type in 1996 is:

electrochemical-$6.15 million; zirconia-$0.05 million; and miniature
selective semiconductor-$6.5 million.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
SENSOR BUSINESS DIGEST via NewsNet
January, 1996

CALORIE SENSOR COULD HEAT UP CONSUMER HEALTH CARE AND
MEDICAL ARENAS

MOI Corporation (Pittsburgh, PA, 412-231-5776) has developed a
calorie sensor that measures body energy (calories) by using
sophisticated heat flow sensors that measure the body's heat flow.
The sensors are capable of measuring conductive, convective,
evaporative, and radiant heat flow. The heat flow detected by the
sensors is monitored by a minicontroller that calculates, after input
of anthropomorphic measurements, actual calorie expenditures. The
calorie sensor provides an accuracy comparable to that of oxygen
consumption measurements.

Measuring energy expenditure is reportedly quite difficult. A widely
accepted method of indirectly assessing energy expenditure is to
measure oxygen consumption. Directly measuring energy
expenditure requires expensive equipment and a controlled
environment, and is, therefore, limited to laboratory settings. Other
attempts at measuring energy expenditure, such as heart rate
monitors and motion sensors (accelerometers), have limitations
which adversely affect their measurement accuracy. Heart rate is not

well-correlated to calorie expenditures. Accelerometers cannot
measure calorie expenditure during static activity, and do not
accurately measure such expenditures during vertical motion (e.g.,
bike riding, stair climbing).

MOI's extremely sensitive calorie sensor actually measures the
amount of heat the body releases; and continuously, directly
measures the amount of calories that are "burned" by an individual
regardless of whether he/she is resting, sleeping, or vigorously
exercising. Key characteristics of the sensor include: simple
calibration (merely input height and weight); no usage restrictions
(all activities are accurately monitored, and 24 hour/day, 365
day/year use is possible); and design parameters are limited only by

electronics and sensing area considerations.

The determination of calorie expenditures is a vital component of a
weight control or fitness program. The MOI calorie sensor can be
configured as a watch-like consumer product for people wishing to
lose weight, or as a medical device for monitoring the calorie
requirements of patients with specific caloric needs, including
diabetics and critical care patients. The sensor can also be an
alternative or adjunct tool for oxygen consumption measurements for

researchers.

The calorie sensor is touted as the "next step" in the ongoing
development of personal diagnostics (i.e., glucose meters, home
cholesterol tests, pregnancy tests, blood pressure meters, pulse and
heart rate monitors) that has broad applicability to consumer
markets, since it offers individuals more control over their lives. The
genesis of the product--which embodies significant research and
product development--was guided by numerous focus groups of
potential consumers (including people in exercise, wellness, and
dieting programs), as well as endocrinologists, diabetologists, exercise

physiologists, and weight-loss industry executives. The results
indicate to MOI that there is a very substantial market for the calorie
sensor.

Prototype units are available, and have been used extensively by
university researchers in studying metabolism and obesity. The
system consists of two components--the sensor unit and the display
unit. A low power RF transmitter is used for communication with the
display unit. Capable of being either a simple LCD display or a more

sophisticated PC-based analysis system, the display unit uses a
prefabricated receiver to minimize design complexity. Patents for the
calorie sensor have been filed worldwide; and the first US patent
should be issued this spring. MOI seeks a licensee or partner for
creating a final design, manufacturing, and marketing.

A medical product development company, MOI has developed
successful and creative technology (including the BMC Accu-Chek
Advantage glucose system). The company specializes in applying
sensor technology to the needs of the medical marketplace, and has
particular expertise in biosensors and heat flow sensors. MOI--whose
principals are Neil Szuminsky and Paul Pottgen--has licensed patents
to sensor technology that have become highly successful products in
the consumer health care market.

Civilian, free global demand for calorimeters/thermal sensors is
projected to total 406.9 mil. DM (about $203.4 million at the
exchange rate of 2.0 DM for the dollar), compared to 278.9 mil. DM
(about $139.4 million) in 1991, according to Prognos AG's Sensor
Technology 2000  report.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
SENSOR BUSINESS DIGEST via NewsNet
January, 1996

BSAC AND CDS-PENN STATE TO INVESTIGATE PZT FILMS FOR MEMS
STRUCTURES

The Berkeley Sensor & Actuator Center (BSAC, 510-643-6690)) at
the University of California, Berkeley and the Center for Dielectric
Studies (CDS) at Pennsylvania State University have been awarded
funding from the National Science Foundation (NSF), under the Tie
Grant Industry/University/NSF Cooperative Research Program, to
conduct a mutually supportive research program on thin dielectric
and piezoelectric films applied to MEMS structures. The two-year
program is budgeted at $25,000 per year to each institution. The
principal investigators are Professor R.S. Muller at BSAC, and
Professors J.P Dougherty and Susan Trolier-McKinstry at CDS-Penn
State.

The two Centers will utilize their expertise to characterize films and
film preparation technologies from all sources, with the aim of
establishing reliable processes for producing dielectric and
piezoelectric films for MEMS applications. A key goal of the research
is to increase by at least an order of magnitude (a factor of 10) the

performance of piezoelectrically activated microdevices by
implementing highly active piezoelectric films--mainly PZT (lead-
zirconate-titanate)--in MEMS devices.

Fundamental work on surface micromachined devices, microsystems,
and components has been conducted at BSAC. Piezoelectric devices
have been built and integrated with silicon microelectronics,
primarily using thin-film zinc oxide (ZnO), a considerably less active

piezoelectric than PZT. Such zinc oxide devices--including
microminiature microphones and sound sources, acoustic wave
sensors, and fluid pumps--are expected to exhibit markedly
enhanced performance, as a result of substituting a highly active
piezoelectric material, such as PZT, for ZnO.

Recognizing the need for improved piezoelectric films, BSAC has
begun producing PZT thin films by using a state-of-the-art, one-
third-million-dollar advanced sputtering system. Moreover, other
fabrication facilities at UC Berkeley are starting to produce PZT; i.e.,
within the Department of Materials Science and Minerals Engineering
(under Professor T. Sands), and the Integrated Materials Laboratory.

CDS-Penn State has amassed a strong background in the preparation
and properties of PZT; and has conducted cutting-edge research in
the fabrication, and underlying physics of thin-film dielectric,
piezoelectric, and ferroelectric materials. CDS-Penn State researchers
have the background and equipment for extensive testing of film
materials.

In PZT Dielectrics for MEMS Applications --the proposal for the NSF
grant--the principal investigators note that piezoelectric and
ferroelectric films are finding an increasing number of applications in
the rapidly expanding MEMS field. Achieving a fundamental
understanding, reliability, and control over the fabrication of such
films is necessary to transform these advances into practical, reliable

engineering products. The need for piezoelectric film expertise is a
particular challenge for the US.

"In Japan, piezoelectrics have been incorporated into important
commercially successful products (starting with camera-focusing
drivers) for some years." Japanese researchers have focused on PZT
for microactuation, and have demonstrated considerable expertise
with the thin-film material. In the US, however, thin-film dielectrics
and piezoelectrics--especially PZT--are still primarily a focus area at

research laboratories. Via the tie-grant research, and the corporate

memberships of the two Centers, highly active piezoelectric, and high
quality dielectric, films for MEMs will be demonstrated to American
industry.

CDS has extensively studied piezoelectric materials--in bulk,
multilayer, thick- and thin-film forms--for their dielectric and
piezoelectric properties. The most useful piezoelectric materials are
ferroic nature--either ferroelectrics or closely related substances.
The intimate coupling between the piezoelectric and dielectric
properties in ferroics necessitates that both be completely
characterized to understand the materials and the physical
mechanisms responsible for their properties.

A central focus of the study is to understand the role of PZT film

microstructure, film composition, and electrode materials relative to
the observed response and charge storage in thin films of the
material. The dielectric and electromechanical properties of the films
will be studied using a wide variety of standard characterization
techniques, along with transmission electron microscopy and double
beam interferometry.

One of the open questions concerning the use of thin-film PZT sensors
and actuators is the degree to which non-180o domain walls
contribute to piezoelectric activity. In commercial (bulk) piezoelectric

actuators, typically up to half the strain obtained is associated with

domain-wall motion.

However, thin films are mechanically clamped by the substrate, and
generally have a considerably smaller grain size than bulk materials.
Since each of these factors can lead to clamping of the domain-wall

contribution to the dielectric and piezoelectric properties, it is
unclear what piezoelectric constants should be assumed for the film
in designing MEMS devices. The study will elucidate the role of
domain walls in controlling the piezoelectric properties of PZT thin
films, and provide a set of useful piezoelectric properties for MEMS
designers.

BSAC envisions a variety of surface micromachined devices
employing PZT films, including cantilevered actuators, microgrippers
with integral-force feedback, and accelerometers. The principal
investigators expect activating films of PZT to play a vital role that
cannot be matched by alternative piezoelectrics, such as ZnO. For
example, in-plane microgrippers presently in fabrication require the
large piezoelectric coupling offered by PZT for the desired deflection

amplitudes; and the sensitivity of piezoelectrically-based
accelerometers will be significantly bolstered by the large coupling

coefficients of PZT. Joel Nice, BSAC's manager, indicated that PZT

accelerometers would offer such advantages as increased sensitivity,
greater frequency range, and instantaneous readout.

SBD  projects that global revenues for automotive and non-
automotive silicon micromachined accelerometers will increase at a
27.2% compound annual rate to reach $169.5 million in 2000,
compared to about %50.9 million in 1995.

Worldwide revenues for piezoelectric accelerometers are projected at
$116.7 million in 1996, according to Frost & Sullivan's World
Acoustic and Vibration Sensors and Test Instruments Market  report
(727-30).

The US market for microactuators is projected to total about 2 million
ECU (approximately $2.6 million at the current exchange rate) in
1995 and 30 million ECU (about $38.7 million) in 2000, according to
sgt Sensor Consulting Dr. Guido Tschulena's (Wehrheim, Germany,

++49-6081-56168) Micromechanics  report.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
SENSOR BUSINESS DIGEST via NewsNet
January, 1996

SENSORS AND ACTUATORS ARE BECOMING THE SOUL OF THE
MACHINE

The application of sensors and actuators is becoming increasingly
important for controlling machines and plants, and is determining
the internal competition of machine building companies, according to
a detailed investigation of the current state and key trends in the use
of sensors and actuators in the German and Dutch machine building
industry.

The study, conducted by sgt Sensor Consulting Dr. Guido Tschulena,
scrutinized six selected sectors of the machine building industry in
Germany and The Netherlands: agricultural and horticultural
machines; textile machinery; lifting and handling equipment; wood,
furniture, and paper machinery; and packing and packaging
machinery.

Electronics control and sensors/actuators accounted for 14.5% and
3.65%, respectively, of the total selling value of the machines. The
share of the total machine value attributed to sensors and actuators
for each machine building segment is: packaging machinery-3.3%;
lifting and handling equipment-4.5% (floor conveyor and stock
systems-12.8%; passenger, mass, and part loads transport-2.1%);
textile machinery-5.6%; woodworking and processing machinery-
3.4%; machinery for food and beverages-1.9%; and agricultural
machinery-2.3%.

Information--including the degree of automation in the selected
sectors, and the specific profit for the machine builders--has been
gathered from 122 companies, representing 253 machine products.
The sensors that are commercially available at present only partially
fulfill the product requirements, such as quality, reliability, and
freedom from maintenance.

The investigation demonstrates that the use of sensors and actuators
is enhancing the economy of machines and plants and boosting the
quality of fabricated goods. The high technical standard of the
machine builder is reflected in their ability to integrate appropriate
sensors and actuators into the machines. Moreover, the utilization of
sensors and actuators provides a powerful tool for machine builders
to differentiate their products from those of their competitors.

Figure 1 shows the percentage share of various types of sensors that
are used in the German- and Dutch-built machines, based on the
responses of 122 companies, encompassing 253 machines. The share
of the various types of actuators used in such machines is:
micromechanical-5%; electric-80%; pneumatic-51%; mechanical-33%;
and hydraulic-36%.

The investigation was conducted for Centrum voor Micro-Elektronica.
The 170-page report is available in English for 150 Guilders (about
$93 at the current exchange rate) from: Mr. A.W. van Schadewijk,
CME Centrum voor Micro-Elektronica, Postbus 1001, NL 3900 BA
Veenendaal, The Netherlands.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
SENSOR BUSINESS DIGEST via NewsNet
January, 1996

NANO-ENGINEERED MATERIALS IMPROVE SENSOR PERFORMANCE

Sensor technology can significantly benefit from nano-engineered
materials (i.e., materials whose grain sizes have been precision
engineered at scales of less than 100 nanometers, a shown in Figure
2), notes Dr. Tapesh Yadav, president of Nanomaterials Research
Corporation (NRC, Tucson, AZ, 520-294-7115). Such materials exhibit
a very high interfacial area and a unique blend of physical and
electrochemical properties.

When their grain size is reduced below 10 nanometers, conventional
materials exhibit unique properties because quantum confinement
effects increasingly become dominant. The confinement effects
enable a blend of mechanical properties that simplify and accelerate
sensor fabrication. Moreover, the nano-engineering of sensors allows
for miniaturization to sub-micron levels. The high interfacial area,
unique electrochemical properties, confinement effects, and
packaging advantages of nano materials offer an opportunity for
engineering sensors in general, particularly chemical sensors, that
provide substantially improved sensitivity, selectivity, response
time, stability, and reliability.

Under NASA and ARPA sponsorship, a team of scientists at NRC and
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) is developing a
range of nano-engineered sensors (NANOSENSORS(TM)) for industrial,
domestic, and medical applications. The effort has already
demonstrated several sensors with superior performance. For
example, nano-engineered oxygen sensors have been prepared from
a ceramic composite.

Such oxygen sensors are easier to prepare than conventional oxygen
sensors because of the ease in which the ceramic layer can be made
more fully dense without losing its interface area. Nano-engineered
oxygen sensors can operate at temperatures of less than 500 degrees
C (which is nearly half the temperature required by conventional
oxygen sensors), and exhibit enhanced selectivity, stability, and
response time. Furthermore, nano-engineered hydrogen sensors have
been found to exhibit an order of magnitude higher sensitivity.

Applications for nano-engineered sensors that are under
investigation include automobiles, neonatal care, industrial process

monitoring, and domestic safety. In automobiles, low-temperature
oxygen sensing can facilitate more rapid control of engine
combustion during cold-engine ignition; and oxygen sensors with
enhanced stability and sensitivity can help control optimal
fuel/oxygen stoichiometry and reduce NOx emissions. Nano-
engineered humidity sensors can help provide auto-control of
humidity inside the passenger cabin.

By utilizing lower energy consuming, less intrusive, more sensitive

nano-engineered sensors, health care quality can be bolstered, while
reducing costs in intensive care units and for premature babies. In
the industrial area, NRC sensors are particularly suited for moderate

temperature (RT to 700 degrees C) process monitoring in the
chemical, metallurgical, and utility industries. In addition, nano-
engineered sensors can enable more reliable technology with
reduced false alarms for domestic monitoring of carbon monoxide
and VOCs.

To meet the anticipated market and product development
requirements for nano-engineered sensors, NRC is also scaling-up its

patent-pending synthesis process for bulk producing the precursors
necessary for preparing nano-engineered sensors. The process is
capable of producing precision distributed, 1 to 100 nanometer scale
powders of sensor precursors (ceramics, metals, intermetallics,
composites). The effort is sponsored in part by NASA, the DOE, the US
Army, and the NSF. Moreover, several leading corporations have
initiated discussions with NRC regarding focused, milestone-based
strategic alliances for meeting their anticipated needs for next-
generation sensors.

Revenues for the US market for automotive lambda oxygen sensors
are forecast to increase at a 20% compound annual rate to reach $465
million in 1998, from $156 million in 1992, according to Frost &
Sullivan's Industrial Gas Sensor Markets  report (2661-40). Revenues
for 1996 are pegged at $385 million.

Revenues for the US zirconia gas sensor market are predicted to
expand at a 10% compound annual rate to total $43.1 million in 1998,
compared to $24.5 million in 1992. Revenues for 1996 are placed at
$35.8 million.

In 1996, the projected industry distribution of the total US zirconia
oxygen sensor market is: power generation-$9.1 million;

chemical/petrochemical-$12.2 million; metals/steel-$3.1 million;
commercial (office buildings)/health care-$4.1 million; and "other"
(including glass, ceramic, and semiconductor)-$7.3 million.

Revenues for the Western European market for lambda oxygen
sensors are forecast to advance at a 23.5% average annual rate to
reach $347.7 million in 1998, from $97.9 million in 1992, according
to Frost & Sullivan's European Gas Sensors  market report (1902-40).
Revenues for 1996 are put at $150.9 million. The data
overwhelmingly refers to closed-loop engine control application for
such sensors in vehicles equipped with catalytic converters.

Unit shipments of lambda oxygen sensors in Western Europe are
anticipated to rise at a 21.5% average annual rate to total about
24,200,000 in 1998, as opposed to about 7,500,000 in 1992. Unit
shipments for 1996 are projected at about 11,600,000.

Revenues for the Western European zirconia gas sensor market are
expected to increase at a 2.4% average annual rate to reach $17.2
million in 1998, from $14.9 million in 1992. Revenues for 1996 are
pegged at $16.5 million.

Unit shipments for the Western European zirconia gas sensor market
are predicted to rise at a 4.5% average annual rate to total 8,670,000
in 1998, from 6,650,000 in 1992. Unit shipments in 1996 are placed
at 7,945,000.

In 1996, the projected end-user industry distribution of the total
revenues for the Western European zirconia gas sensor market is (all
figures are rounded): chemicals-$2.4 million; petrochemicals-$2.7
million; power generation-$4.0 million; steel-$1.4 million; heat
treatment-$1.7 million; HVAC-$0.1 million; and "other"-$4.3 million.
Such zirconia gas sensors are primarily used for combustion
monitoring applications, where they are configured as fixed
installations for heavy-duty boilers and furnaces, or used in
fixed/portable combustion efficiency test equipment.

Global demand for automotive oxygen sensors is projected to total
$745 million in 1999, compared to $341 million in 1994,
representing a 16.9% compound annual growth rate, according to BIS
Strategic Decisions' (Luton, England) latest Automotive Sensor
Demand Forecast Market Report.

SBD  forecasts that global revenues for solid electrolyte/Lambda
automotive oxygen sensors will increase at a 5.8% compound annual
rate to stand at $675 million in 2000, compared to about $480
million in 1994. The growth over the forecast period will be
primarily driven by California and federal OBD (On-Board
Diagnostics)-II requirements necessitating that the vehicle self-
diagnose/monitor the hydrocarbon conversion efficiency of the
catalyst system, which began to take effect in new emissions control
systems during the 1994 model year.

The automotive industry is now mainly using a dual oxygen sensor
system (rather than a single oxygen sensor) to diagnose the catalyst's

deterioration and monitor its hydrocarbon performance. However,
the dual oxygen sensor method has limitations for addressing
increasingly stringent automotive emissions monitoring
requirements, since it essentially measures the catalyst's oxygen
storage capacity, rather than catalyst hydrocarbon conversion
efficiency. By circa the end of the decade, the growth in the
automotive oxygen sensor market is expected to be negatively
impacted by competition from other gas sensors that are capable of
more directly monitoring low levels of key (non-oxygen) exhaust
gases to diagnose the catalyst's efficiency.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
SENSOR BUSINESS DIGEST via NewsNet
January, 1996

INNOVATIVE SENSORS COULD REFRESH AIR CONDITIONING SYSTEMS

Hokuriku Electric Industry Co. (Toyama-ken, Japan, ++81-0764-67-
1111) is focusing on developing high-performance composite sensors,
including a 30 mm square module comprised of a high-density
ceramic substrate and a sensor capable of measuring temperature,
air current, radiation, and humidity. The IC substrate functions as the
signal processing circuit for the module that could be used in air
conditioner systems. The company, which uses various technologies
to promote its sensor business, also has other single-unit composite
sensors that measure temperature, humidity, and dew formation.

Yamatake-Honeywell (Tokyo, Japan, ++81-03-3486-2031) has
developed a radiation temperature sensor for measuring
temperature in perimeter zones that are affected by light radiated
from the sun. The device is designed to measure radiated heat from a
remote location (ceiling) to form a monitoring system for an air
conditioner controller used to adjust the temperature to a
comfortable level. The sensor, which sells for 30,000 yen per unit
(about $296.40 at the current exchange rate), can be attached to the
ceiling, as well placed in open space where there are no columns or
walls.

Civilian, open global demand for temperature sensors used in the
area of heating, air conditioning, and ventilating technology is
projected to reach 353 mil. DM (about $176.5 million) in 2000, from
177.6 mil. DM (about $88.8 million) in 1991, according to Prognos
AG's Sensor Technology 2000  report.

The civilian, free Japanese market for temperature sensors used for
climate technology in the building and safety area is forecast to total
66.9 mil. DM (about $44.6 million at the exchange rate of 1.50 DM for
the dollar) in 1996 and 89.5 mil. DM (about $59.7 million) in 2001,
according to Intechno Consulting AG's (Basel, Switzerland) Sensor
Markets 2001  report. An updated version of the report is now
available.

SBD  estimates that global revenues for infrared temperature sensors
(excluding IR thermal imaging) totaled about $102 million in 1995.

Source: The Japanese Sensor Newsletter  (September 1995),
published quarterly by Edison Sensor Technology Center, Cleveland,
OH. Ordering information is available from VIP (415-345-7018).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-26</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B018-203</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mg23.html 205.156.212.5 19970122034329 text/html 27620
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:41:37 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:49 GMT
Content-length: 27433
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mg23.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
SENSOR BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
January 3, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>ALCOHOL SENSORS INTERNATIONAL COULD BE READY TO TAKE IGNITION&nbsp;INTERLOCK MARKET BY STORM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(935 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>AFTER A YEAR OF TURMOIL AND GROWING PAINS, SENSORMATIC WANTS A CALMER&nbsp;1996</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(400 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>SENSOR FIRMS WORK TO BUILD BLOOD SUGAR SENSORS FOR DIABETICS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(545 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>SIEMENS ROLLS OUT SENSORS TO DISABLE PASSENGER AIRBAG IF CHILD SEAT&nbsp;PRESENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(394 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>FIRST TECHNOLOGY POSTS HEALTHY GAINS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1152 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>CAR BUYERS BECOMING AWARE OF SIDE-IMPACT AIRBAGS; SOME ARE DEMANDING&nbsp;THEM ALREADY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(389 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
SENSOR BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

ALCOHOL SENSORS INTERNATIONAL COULD BE READY TO TAKE IGNITION
INTERLOCK MARKET BY STORM

     The market for sensors that disable a car's ignition if drivers
have too much to drink continues to grow, and a new company wants into
this robust business.  Islandia, N.Y.-based Alcohol Sensors
International Ltd. topped off several years of intensive R&D with an
initial public offering of its stock in mid-November, and already has
seen its market value double.  From an initial price of 7 on NASDAQ,
ASI's stock price had risen to 12 5/8 at our deadline.
     The frenzied reception by investors is no surprise to ASI
President and CEO Robert Whitney, who told SENSOR BUSINESS NEWS his
firm's technological superiority should help ASI rake in $50 million
in sales during 1996.
     ASI claims its sensor, called the Sens-O-Lock, is superior to
competing products since it never needs to be recalibrated and is
easier to use because of its unique, open-chamber technology, which
requires no direct mouth contact to take a breath sample and test for
the presence of alcohol.
     "There is no question we lead the way.  We've spent tons of time
and money for the best mousetrap in the world," said Whitney.
     But the chief executive of LifeSafer Interlock Inc., of
Cincinnati, Ohio, which makes a competing product, questioned the
credibility of a product that never is checked for accuracy once it is
installed.  He said sensors used for such critical tasks ought to be
verified regularly, as is his firm's LifeSafer.
     "I wouldn't want the liability associated with it," said
LifeSafer President Richard Freund.  "I think that's a real big issue. 
It exposes a publicly traded company to a lot of liability problems."

  ...State Laws Create Market

     In as many as 32 states, authorities have the option to require a
driver convicted of driving while intoxicated (DWI) to have an alcohol
sensor installed in his or her vehicle as a condition of retaining
their driver's license.
     Once the vehicle begins moving, the devices ask randomly for
another sample.  If the driver fails, the unit will flash the
vehicle's external lights and sound the horn if the vehicle is not
brought to a stop within a brief period.
     ASI also wants to sell the device to parents and others who want
a means of preventing their families from driving drunk.
     In all cases, the device will be installed by specially trained
technicians who work for firms that install car alarm systems, Whitney
said.  Drivers who use the device under court order will return to the
technician regularly to enable authorities to keep tabs on whether the
system has detected alcohol and how often it has been used.
     Auto safety experts vouch for the effectiveness of the devices in
keeping alcohol-impaired people from operating their vehicles.  "We
support ignition interlocks if they are set up properly," said John
Undeland, spokesman for the American Automobile Association's
Washington, D.C.-area division.  "The only downside, if there is one,
is that once the system is in place, it doesn't change people [who
have alcohol problems].  They still drink, but they just can't drive."
     Carl Ekstein, vice president of marketing and business
development for Rockville, Md.-based Life Sciences Corp., which
installs and maintains LifeSafer units in several mid-Atlantic states,
agreed.  "These devices are highly effective in stopping repeat
offenders.  Our experience is that less than 1 percent of people using
the sensor are rearrested for DWI," Ekstein told us.
     Whitney told us ASI plans to market the Sens-O-Lock in two
versions.  Equipped with a data logger, the device will be used by
people who have been ordered by authorities to do so.  Whitney said
the market in just the United States is perhaps $300 million per year. 

  ...Voluntary Market Expected to Be Larger

     ASI charges about $600 per year for each data logger-equipped
device.  But officials said they expect to realize the majority of
their revenue from sales of the Sens-O-Lock to municipalities and
businesses for use on their vehicle fleets, and from retail sales of a
simpler, Sens-O-Lock stripped of the data recording capabilities and
priced at about $429.
     "We see this as going into every school bus, locomotive and
subway train," said ASI Director of Marketing Frank Savarese.
     But Ekstein questioned ASI's ability to crack the voluntary
market.  "I've already tried it and I'm not deluged with requests. 
It's hard to get enough cases for market research," he told us.
     Freund said the Sens-O-Lock's positioning as a product the
consumer can have installed and never have to adjust could be a
problem.  "I understand their motivation [in wanting to sell to
consumers]," he said.  "We have looked at the possibility of a simple
product, but if we put it out for the consumer market, we would
require that it be periodically recalibrated.  We have some voluntary
users, but they are a small percentage.  We focus on DWI offenders."
     ASI also may have overstated the size of the market for ignition
interlock devices, Freund said.  "The market is 10 years old, and at
the end of 1995 about 20,000 people had the devices in their cars," he
told us.  "That's about a $15 million market, and we have half of it."
     ASI's Whitney remains undeterred and said that all told, the
worldwide market for vehicle alcohol sensors could one day top the
billion-dollar figure.
     In addition to making a big splash in the market for alcohol
sensors, ASI hopes to expand into sensing other substances, although
Whitney declined to provide details.  "We will be a major player in
the sensor world," he predicted.
(AAA Potomac, John Undeland, 703/222-4100; ASI, Robert Whitney,
516/342-1515; Life Sciences Corp., Carl Ekstein, 301/212-9222;
LifeSafer Interlock, Richard Freund, 800/531-0006.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
SENSOR BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

AFTER A YEAR OF TURMOIL AND GROWING PAINS, SENSORMATIC WANTS A CALMER
1996

     Sensormatic Electronics Corp., buffeted last year by
improprieties in its accounting practices and by disappointing sales
following a banner year in 1994, hopes new President and Chief
Operating Officer Robert Vanourek--who joined Sensormatic in October
1995--will improve its fortunes this year.
     The Boca Raton, Fla.-based company's stock price on the New York
Stock Exchange fell by more than half during the second half of 1995,
to 17 3/8 at our deadline.  The stock tumbled in mid-December after
officials told shareholders the company would take an unspecified
charge as part of a restructuring effort to strengthen results.
     "The company last year had a lot of trouble attributable to its
phenomenal success and growth," said a source close to Sensormatic. 
"The company's growth outpaced its infrastructure.  Things have
happened so rapidly that they really weren't able to put the checks
and balances in place."
     Officials would not specify what steps they plan to take to
rejuvenate the company, but it is likely the company will try to
improve its financial recordkeeping, keep close tabs on expenses, and
boost productivity.  Executives said it was too early to say how much
the changes would cost, but the sour response from Wall Street to the
restructuring announcement suggests investors remain somewhat
skeptical of the company.

  ...Checkpoint's Presence Formidable

     Although Sensormatic counts among its customers most of the
world's largest retailers, it continues to face a strong challenge
from arch rival Checkpoint Systems Inc., of Thorofare, N.J.
     "We have lost the momentum in drug stores and there is aggressive
competition in the food market," Vanourek acknowledged to shareholders
Dec. 14, "but we will not concede any market to any competitor." 
     Checkpoint officials said their firm is poised to control about
75 percent of the drug store theft control market.  Overall sales at
Checkpoint grew more than 60 percent for the nine months ended Sept.
24, 1995, even as sales at Sensormatic were soft.
     Expect Sensormatic to continue its attack on Checkpoint as it
tries to solidify its dominant position in loss prevention and renew
its commitment to the retail market.  A possible tactic could be
emphasizing the advantages of Sensormatic's magnetic technology
compared with Checkpoint's radio frequency-based equipment, which has
been called unreliable by some critics.
     "Sensormatic will hit Checkpoint hard over the issue of how its
technology can be fooled," our source told us.  "Sensormatic is
certainly going to use that as ammunition."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
SENSOR BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

SENSOR FIRMS WORK TO BUILD BLOOD SUGAR SENSORS FOR DIABETICS

     Several sensor companies are racing to give diabetics relief from
the daily finger-pricking required to monitor their blood glucose
levels and to enable better management of the troublesome disease.
     San Diego-based Synthetic Blood International Inc. told SENSOR
BUSINESS NEWS tests on laboratory animals indicate its implantable
biosensor is nearing the point where it does not upset the immune
system and lasts long enough to be practical.  The device, similar in
some respects to a pacemaker, would be placed in the stomach or the
abdomen and could go a year or longer between battery changes, said
Synthetic's Alan Brunson.  It would provide measurements as often as
every seven minutes.
     Meanwhile, MiniMed Inc., of Sylmar, Calif., reported it plans to
start a clinical trial of its glucose sensor by late this year.  The
sensor is designed to be inserted subcutaneously by diabetics.  An
alarm would signal abnormal blood sugar levels.
     "I don't think people know how bad people who are diabetics have
it," said Synthetic Blood President and CEO Gerald Schlatter.  "It is
really a different way of life.  We've done market research on this
product and we feel that the product would be very well received."
     Synthetic Blood believes the market for blood glucose sensors
could hit a billion dollars or more.  The company hopes to partner
with a larger company to commercialize its technology, and plans human
trials by the end of 1996.
     "We're versatile and we can correct mistakes easily.  But
companies like ours can have a tough time raising R&D money.  Larger
companies in biotechnology look for small companies like ours.  We've
had various conversations with pacemaker and drug companies,"
Schlatter told us.

  ...Biocontrol Technology Points Angry Finger at the Press

     The announcements from Synthetic Blood and MiniMed come as
Pittsburgh-based Biocontrol Technology Inc. publicly complained about
media coverage of its Diasensor noninvasive blood glucose sensor,
which has been in the FDA approval process for more than a year.  The
company already is selling the device abroad and said it expects to
begin U.S. production of the sensor this month, but Biocontrol
officials appear to be worried the company is seen in a negative
light.
     The firm issued a sharply worded news release urging potential
customers to lambast reporters for criticizing the product's large
size and $8,000 cost, and for raising questions about its reliability.
     "Biocontrol pledges that we will continue to focus on getting the
Diasensor...through the process necessary to market it and that we
will not be stopped by any negative or uninformed sources who would
prefer, for known and unknown reasons, to have us fail," the release
said.  "...It is very difficult to believe that the timing [of the
criticism] is simply a matter of coincidence."
     A Biocontrol spokeswoman did not return phone calls from SENSOR
BUSINESS NEWS to discuss the issue.  
     (Synthetic Blood's Schlatter said he does not anticipate
difficulty when the time comes to get FDA approval to market the
company's product.)
     In a related matter, Biocontrol and Diasense Inc., which jointly
have developed the Diasensor, said they planned to combine their
operations sometime in the first quarter of this year.  Officials said
the merger was in the financial best interest of the Diasensor
project.  (Biocontrol Technology, 412/ 429-0673; MiniMed, Synthetic
Blood, 619/595-4829; Kevin Sayer, 818/362-5958.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
SENSOR BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

SIEMENS ROLLS OUT SENSORS TO DISABLE PASSENGER AIRBAG IF CHILD SEAT
PRESENT

     In spite of their proven ability to save lives, front passenger
airbags pose a threat to young children.  When the airbag deploys, it
can injure or kill a child riding in a car safety seat, say experts.  
     A solution is for the child to ride in the back seat, but some
vehicles, such as pick-ups, do not have rear seats.  In any case, many
parents feel more comfortable with their children beside them as they
drive.
     Siemens Automotive Corp. believes it has a better answer.  The
Auburn Hills, Mich.-based unit of German multinational Siemens AG last
month introduced a sensor designed to deactivate the passenger airbag
if a specially equipped child safety seat is directly in its path.
     As an added benefit, the system also will turn off the airbag if
the seat is empty, saving the considerable cost of replacing the
airbag in the event of a collision that otherwise would cause it to
activate.
     Beginning late this year, 1997-badged cars from two unnamed
European luxury carmakers will come with the sensors as standard
equipment, accounting for some 600,000 vehicles worldwide, said
Siemens spokesman David Ladd.  
     Chrysler, Ford and General Motors also are "enthusiastic," he
said.  The cost to the automakers will be under $40 per vehicle, Ladd
told us.
     The system uses pressure-sensitive foil within the seat to detect
weight greater than 25 pounds.  Sensors at either side of the seat
look for devices on specially-equipped safety seats and will disable
the airbag if the seat is rear-facing or at an angle.
     Ladd said safety seat makers in Europe already have agreed to put
the equipment on their seats, and U.S. makers are likely to follow
suit.  The modifications cost boost the seat prices by about 5
percent, he said.
     Within a few years, other sensing systems--perhaps based on
optical or radar technology--should appear and eliminate the need for
specially equipped child seats, Ladd said.  Today, such alternative
systems are considered too unreliable and are cost-prohibitive, he
told us.
     Ladd said Siemens will discourage retrofitting existing vehicles
or child safety seats with the technology.  "The strategy is to
install the equipment at the point of manufacture," said Ladd.  "It's
more reliable."
     Some 1996 vehicles will come equipped with a key-operated switch
to disable the front passenger airbag, but whether people will use the
switch properly is questionable, experts say.  (Siemens Automotive,
810/253-1000.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
SENSOR BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

FIRST TECHNOLOGY POSTS HEALTHY GAINS

     Sales and profit figures from a key supplier of fuel cut-off
sensors and other safety products to many of the world's automakers
underscore the importance of the automotive industry as a hot market
for sensor makers.
     Southwood, England-based First Technology PLC reported sales of
$28 million for the six-month period that ended Oct. 31, 1995, up a
healthy 10.2 percent.  Profits grew to almost $5.1 million, a gain of
some 16 percent.  The company predicts strong sales in 1996 even if
worldwide demand for cars falls, as its safety products are installed
on a greater proportion of new vehicles.
     Much of the growth is a result of the company's growing
domination of the market for the fuel cut-off sensors, which disengage
a car's fuel system in the event of a crash, said Chairman Fred
Westlake.  In November, First Technology opened a factory in eastern
France to increase its capacity to produce the sensors (SEN, Dec. 6,
1995, p. 3).  The company also has facilities in the United States. 
(First Technology, Phone: 011/01344/22322.)


S. Himmelstein Rolls Out High-capacity Torquemeters
     S. Himmelstein and Co., of Hoffman Estates, Ill., introduced a
series of high-capacity, non-contact, strain gauge torquemeters.  The
sensors measure the torque, speed, power and efficiency of large
rotating equipment.  They are available in capacities ranging from
750,000 to 4 million pound-inches.  (S. Himmelstein, Steven Tveter,
708/843-3300.)

Breed Technologies Gets ISO 9001 and QS 9000 Certification
     Breed Technologies Inc., a Lakeland, Fla.-based maker of crash
sensors and airbag systems for automakers worldwide, reported it has
received ISO 9001 and QS 9000 quality assurance certification from the
British Standards Institution.  The QS 9000 program identifies auto
suppliers that meet certain standards for quality management, and
recognition by the program is likely to be crucial by 1997.  (Breed
Technologies, Lisa Spinazzola, 941/668-6464.)

ISA Merges With International Division
     The International Society for Measurement and Control (ISA) and
its international subsidiary have dropped the distinction between
themselves effective Jan. 1.  ISA, headquartered in Research Triangle
Park, N.C., created the international division in 1986 to handle its
growing international membership base, but delegates recently voted to
combine ISA's North American and international operations and create
an International Development Council instead.  ISA sponsors an annual
conference and trade show that attracts hundreds of sensor,
instrumentation and software firms.  (ISA, 919/549-8411.)

Sensotec Rolls Out Two Sensors
     Sensotec Inc., of Columbus, Ohio, released two new sensors to
measure static and dynamic displacement.  The units have free,
unguided armatures and are ideal for use in limited-space, remote or
hazardous locations, according to the firm.  The sensors cost $136
each.  (Sensotec, 800/848-6564.)

HPS Leases New Building
     MKS Instruments Inc.'s Boulder, Colo.-based HPS Division, said it
leased a 13,000-square-foot facility to expand its production of
SensaVac vacuum gauges.  The new building is next door to the
company's present location and should help HPS provide faster service
and a broader product line, the company said.  The SensaVac line
currently includes standard and convection Pirani gauges and hot and
cold cathode ionization gauges.  (HPS, 800/345-1967.) 

Arizona Instrument Moves Ahead With New Technologies
     Arizona Instrument Corp., a maker of equipment for quality
control, industrial control and environmental monitoring, said it has
completed development of a gold film micro-sensor to be used in its
next-generation toxic gas monitors.  The Phoenix, Ariz.-based firm
also said it has made progress on its new line of moisture analyzers,
which will be sold under the name Computrac and will be targeted at
the titration market, estimated to be $60 million worldwide.  Both
product lines are scheduled for commercial availability at the end of
1996.  (Arizona Instrument, Scott Carter, 602/470-1414.)

Toshiba Shows Samples of New Shock Sensor
     Japan's Toshiba Corp. late last month began shipping samples of a
new shock sensor, according to the Comline news service.  The sensor
uses half the power of its predecessor and is just a third of the
size.  Samples are available for 300 yen, or about $3, each. 
(Toshiba, Phone: 011/03/3457-2148.)

New Accelerometers Are Less Costly to Repair, Company Says
     A pair of piezoelectric accelerometers from San Juan Capistrano,
Calif.-based Endevco Corp. are the industry's first such devices with
a completely replaceable subassembly, the company said.  The devices
can measure vibration in three orthogonal axes and are considerably
less expensive to fix than competing products, which must be entirely
replaced if one axis is damaged, according to 
Endevco.  (Endevco, Anthony Chu, 714/493-8181.)
              Endevco's Accelerometer

Honeywell Buys General Signal's Sensor Business
     Honeywell Inc. said it has agreed to buy the sensor,
instrumentation and measurement business of General Signal Corp.'s
now-defunct Leeds & Northrup unit for an undisclosed sum.  Honeywell,
based in Minneapolis, will fold the business, which includes assets
related to analytical devices, controllers and temperature and
humidity sensors, into its existing industrial control business.  The
sale bolsters Honeywell's position as a supplier to the process and
discrete manufacturing industries.  It also is the final step in
Stamford, Conn.-based General Signal's dismantlement of the Leeds &
Northrup division and will help the firm reduce its debt load. 
(General Signal, Nino Fernandez, 203/329-4320; Honeywell, Meta
Gaertnier, 612/951-0773.)

Ohio Firm Expands Data Acquisition Offerings
     Cleveland, Ohio-based IOtech Inc., announced it has expanded its
DBK series of signal conditioning and expansion products for personal
computer-based data acquisition.  The firm's new eight-channel relay
contact output card is designed for industrial applications that
require power signal switching.  It lists for $295.  (IOtech, 216/439-
4091.)

U.S. Carmaker Buys FiberChem Sensor System
     Las Vegas-based FCI Environmental Inc., a unit of FiberChem Inc.,
said a Big Three auto manufacturer has purchased one of its CMS-5000
continuous monitoring systems to monitor storm water discharge in
accordance with federal regulations.  FCI declined to identify the
purchaser, but officials said they expect to sell more of the systems
to it during 1996.  The sale is an indication that its environmental
sensor technology has applications beyond the oil industry, where FCI
has realized most of its sales.  (Liviakis Financial Communications
Inc., 916/448-6084.)

New Photoelectric Sensors Use Lasers for Extended Range
     A new series of photoelectric sensors from Banner Engineering
Corp. are the world's first retroreflective laser sensors, according
to the Minneapolis-based company.  The Omni-Beam sensors contain a
Class II laser diode and achieve sensing ranges up to 225 feet, and
sport LEDs for power, signal and output.  The laser beam is visible,
simplifying the process of aligning the sensor.  (Banner Engineering,
Floyd Schneider, 612/544-3164.)

Centronic's New Silicon Photodiode Eliminates Distortion
     Newbury Park, Calif.-based Centronic Inc. unveiled a large area
silicon photodiode designed for easy insertion into standard "vector"
board PCBs.  The QD100-5T-COW, eliminates distortion, light loss and
crosstalk, and is aimed at customers involved in laser beam position
detection, target acquisition, machine controls and encoders,
officials said.  It is priced at $37.50 in quantities of fewer than
100.  (Centronic, Yuval Tamari, 800/700-2088.)
     Remember to send your new product info and other news to Sam
Silverstein, fax 301/424-0176.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
SENSOR BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

CAR BUYERS BECOMING AWARE OF SIDE-IMPACT AIRBAGS; SOME ARE DEMANDING
THEM ALREADY

     There are indications people shopping for high-end automobiles
may begin to expect side-impact airbags by late this year.  That is
when Cadillac and Mercedes-Benz will join Volvo in offering the safety
systems as standard equipment on all their models.
     For 1996, several Mercedes models offer the side airbags.  Most
people do not yet know about side airbags, so few purchasing decisions
are likely to hinge on their presence for now, said Len Logue, who
sells Mercedes vehicles in Silver Spring, Md.
     The situation at Volvo is different.  The Swedish automaker--long
associated with "safety" in car buyers' minds--was the first
manufacturer to offer the equipment, and an official said side airbags
are growing increasingly important to prospective customers.
     "People with one- and two-year-old Volvos want to trade their
cars in for cars with the side airbags," Volvo District Sales Manager
Robert Brissie told us at the Washington, D.C., International Auto
Show last week.
     That could be a sign that well-heeled car buyers are beginning to
conclude that side airbags add a significant measure of safety, even
as they realize widespread availability is still in the future.  Once
several manufacturers offer the technology as standard equipment,
others are likely to follow quickly, in a manner similar to the way
front airbags proliferated after automakers discovered many buyers
consider them essential.

  ...Truck Buyers See it Differently 

     Even as some luxury car buyers are eager to buy cars equipped
with the latest safety gear, it appears demand for the equipment
depends, in part, on perception, perhaps even more than on hard facts. 
One salesman told us people looking for pickup trucks are sometimes
convinced the size of the vehicle makes airbags unnecessary.
     "In the past year, I don't think one customer has asked me if the
vehicles have airbags," he said.  Some buyers inquire about safety
features after the sale, he said, underscoring the dichotomy between
buyers of different types of vehicles when it comes to safety issues.
     Still, federal regulations will compel at least a driver's side
airbag to be installed in all trucks sold in the United States within
the next few years.
     All passenger vehicles will come with two front airbags standard
not long afterward.  The burgeoning demand for airbags--front systems
as well as side-impact units, is good news for airbag makers Bosch,
Siemens, TRW and Breed Technologies.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-27</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B018-257</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/mg18.html 205.156.212.5 19970122034413 text/html 111973
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:42:00 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:50 GMT
Content-length: 111785
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/mg18.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>FROM THE EDITOR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(850 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INDUSTRY OVERVIEW</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>BULL NAMES BENDER V.P.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(143 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>SALES UP AT MERIX</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(94 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>SOLECTRON 1Q SALES UP 36%, NET 50%</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(194 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>SM SENSOR KEEPS TRACK OF FISH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(330 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>MICRON CMS EXPANDS SMT CAPABILITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(276 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>JAPANESE ELECTRONICS TO LOOK UP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(151 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>VOLUME KEY TO SUCCESS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(976 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>COMPONENT & PACKAGING TRENDS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>WORLD'S FIRST SM RESETTABLE FUSE FOR TELECOM EQUIPMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(208 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>AVX ADDS 2 MLCC LINES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(210 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>MLCC MATERIAL DEVELOPMENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(120 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>ATC RAMPS UP FOR MLCC DEMAND</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(78 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>CAPACITOR NETWORKS ON THE RISE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(400 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>POROUS SILICONINCREASES CAPACITOR PERFORMANCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(199 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>PCMCIA DESIGN REQUIRE FLEXIBILITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(664 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>HARRIS TO STICK TO X86S</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(128 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>INTEL SHIFTS TO PLASTIC PACKAGES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(118 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PCB DESIGN & CAD</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>OLE 2.0 AS A BRIDGE BETWEEN ECAD & MRP II </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(477 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>DESIGN TOOLS TARGET BGA AND PCB APPLICATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(270 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MATERIALS FOR SMT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>TITANIUM OXIDE FILM BINDS IC LAYERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(777 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>LASER MACHINING OF PCBS TO BE RESEARCHED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(129 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>CHANGES IN TODAY'S PCB MARKET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(643 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>ELECTROLESS PALLADIUM: A SURFACE FINISH FOR INTERCONNECT TECHNOLOGY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1242 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>HANDLERS, DISPENSERS & SCREEN PRINTERS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>PRECISION STENCILS FOR SMT ASSEMBLY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(263 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>AMISTAR INTRODUCES TP-12</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(160 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>DIE-TECH INTRODUCES NEW SUBSTRATE HANDLING SYSTEMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(338 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>MASK TECHNOLOGY SIGNS CROSS LICENSING AGREEMENT WITH KOKI</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(308 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PLACEMENT EQUIPMENT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>WHO WHAT IN PLACEMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(269 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>BGA BONDING UPGRADE KIT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(172 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>SOLDERING EQUIPMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(126 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>FLIP CHIP ATTACHMENT WITHOUT SOLDER </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(325 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INSPECTION EQUIPMENT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>SMT INSPECTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(814 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>BEYOND CFC</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(235 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>TEST TECHNIQUES & EQUIPMENT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#34"><LI>MEASURING PATTERNED IC LAYERS </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(168 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#35"><LI>IRDAS DETECTS DEFECTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(543 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#36"><LI>NO-CLEAN FLUX CREATES BOARD-PROBING PROBLEMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1869 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#37"><LI>SMTA TO REVISE TESTABILITY GUIDELINES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(127 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>REPAIR STRATEGIES & EQUIPMENT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#38"><LI>BGA REWORK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(358 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#39"><LI>ASIAN MARKET STILL GOOD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(680 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#40"><LI>METCAL OFFERS TO CUSTOMIZE TIPS </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(139 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

FROM THE EDITOR


Rich Heintz, a new member of our staff, compiled a lot of
information about the various segments of the SMT equipment
market for this issue.  We appreciate the help that all of  you,
who have been contacted, have given Rich.  Gathering
information can be a hard job because people in the industry
don't see the payback to themselves for taking the time to talk. 
Rich is a good interviewer, and thorough, which means that
talking to him often helps a person clarify his or her own
thinking about the nature of the market and the dynamics
within the market.  Like any good dialogue, a conversation
with Rich can increase your enthusiasm and your knowledge
of the market.  We do not just take information when we talk
to people; We try to give it back  as good as we got it.  

In talking to manufacturers in the electronics industry, we get
the feeling they do not expect 1996 to be quite the year 1995
was.  In particular, people don't seem to think the U.S.
personal computer industry can sustain the growth of last year. 
We're not saying things look gloomy, only lest robust.  We
believe, though, that there are some hopeful signs in this
market, especially for people working with the expertise and
equipment devoted to SMT.  While the market for portable
computers has remained more sluggish than experts predicted
a couple years ago, we still feel that the potential for this
market is great.  The big factor, we feel, is price.  We kept
hearing that prices on portables were going to come down at
the end of last year.  Acer's entrance into the U.S. market was
supposed to help this.  It did not happen.  If it happens this
year, portables could cause the entire PC market to perform
better than expected.  In addition, the European market for
PCs will probably be better this year than last.  Companies
able to take advantage of this market will benefit.

The other area that we've been keeping our eyes on, which we
think has good potential for SMT people in 1996, is the
wireless communications industry.  Some people are saying
this market will not do as well in 1996 as it did in 1995, but
we're of the opposite opinion.  Much work with high-
frequency components, along with the development of two
standards--code division multiple access (CDMA) and
personal communication services (PCS)--, promise, we feel, to
help the 1996 U.S. market for wireless devices outperform the
1995 market.  The Yankee Group (Boston, MA) projects
cellular growth will be up from $70 million in 1995 to around
$100 million in 1996.  The cellular partnership formed by
Nynex, Bell Atlantic, U.S. West and AirTouch
Communications placed a $600 million order for new phones
from Motorola Inc., Nokia Oy of Finland and Audiovox Corp. 
This represents three million analog cellular phones over a
one-year period.  PCS carriers will generate approximately
$10 billion in annual revenues by the year 2000, and $18
billion by 2005 according to Economic and Management
Consultants International (New York, NY).  These new
networks will translate into multi-billion dollar expenditures to
infrastructure providers such as AT&T, Motorola, Northern
Telecom, Ericsson and the many contract manufacturers who
work with these larger companies to produce subassemblies. 
While the U.S. market will be good for wireless
communications, developing countries, such as China will be
very good targets for wireless sales because of the lack of
traditional communications infrastructure.  Now, with the
development of wireless equipment, some experts are
predicting that this traditional type of communications
infrastructure will never be installed in developing countries.


Wireless, or non-tethered, communications devices range from
cordless telephones to mobile cellular phones to fashion-
coordinated pagers.  The big news in cordless phones is the
migration of digital systems operating in the 900-MHz range
using spread-spectrum technology.  Manufacturers expect to
ship more than a million such units by midyear.  In the United
States, cellular telephone systems are beginning to migrate to
digital technology, but there appears to be a few more years of
life remaining in analog mobile phone service.  Cellular
Digital Packet Data is just now being introduced as a way to
piggyback digital data onto existing voice-band systems. 
Growth for analog cellular will remain strong throughout the
year.

Somewhere between full-blown cellular systems and in-house
cordless phones, is Personal Communications Services (PCS),
which caused a big stir last year when the Federal
Communications Commission held auctions to sell spectrum
space in major cities.  During 1996, PCS systems will finish
their initial build-outs and begin offering services that compete
with both cellular and wire-line telephony.  In Europe, the
digital cellular system called GSM (Global System for Mobile
Communications) is already a hit.  Well over one million GSM
handsets have already been sold.

In South America, Africa, Asia, and many island countries,
cellular and PCS phones are the only solution because an
infrastructure of wired communications services does not
exist.  Almost half of all new sales of two-way wireless
equipment will be in these areas.  These wireless systems can
be set up quickly and work well.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

BULL NAMES BENDER V.P.


Bull Electronics (Boston, MA) named Louis P. Bender its new
V.P. of Marketing & Business Development.  Bender's most
recent position was a V.P. of Worldwide Sales for Avex.  In
his new position, Bender will have full responsibility for all
Bull's external sales and marketing efforts, especially on the
company's aggressive efforts to grow its high-end circuit board
business for regional, national, and multi-national customers. 
Bull's president, Brian Byrne, said:  "Louis has outstanding
skills and experience, both as an executive in the contract
manufacturing business and in a variety of senior marketing,
sales, and business development positions.  We are very
pleased to have him on our team and expect him to make a
rapid impact on our growth objectives."

Next month we'll talk to Bender about what enticed him away
from a top position at Avex in America's southern
manufacturing belt.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

SALES UP AT MERIX


Merix Corp. (Forest Grove, OR), who finalized the acquisition
of Hewlett-Packard's PCB facility in Loveland, CO, reported
2Q96 sales grew 35% to $33.6 million from $24.8 million in
2Q95.  Net income for the quarter ended 11/25/96 rose to $2.9
million, or 45 per share, from $2.6 million, 42 per share, in
the same quarter a year ago.  Merix also reported six-month
sales rose 29% to $61.3 million versus $47.6 million during
the same period a year ago.  Net for the six months was $5.6
million, or 86, versus $4.6 million, or 75.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

SOLECTRON 1Q SALES UP 36%, NET 50%


Solectron Corp., who completed its acquisition of Hewlett-
Packard's PCB assembly operation in Boeblingen, Germany, 
reported 1Q96 sales grew 36% to $691 million from $506.7
million in 1Q95.  Net income for the quarter ended Nov. 25,
1995, which was up 50% to $27.3 million, or 52 cents per
fully diluted share, from $18.2 million, or 38 cents per fully
diluted share.  Annualized return on equity was said to be
19.7%.  Operating income was $40.8 million versus $28.7
million in the year-ago quarter.  We talked to one of
Solectron's competitors a few days ago and, when we
mentioned the company, he said:  "They are one of the stars of
the industry."  A few years ago, we had the chance to sit and
talk with Koichi Nishimura, the president of Solectron.  At one
point, we asked him to what he attributed Solectron's success. 
Without hesitation, he replied:  "Our people."  We like a
person who answers are quick and short.  We explored this
area with Mr. Nishimura and found that Solectron invested a
lot in their employees, offering training and opportunities for
them to participate in the decision making that goes on in the
company.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

SM SENSOR KEEPS TRACK OF FISH


Star Oddi (Rykjavik, Iceland) wanted to monitor cod and
Atlantic salmon in the Islandic waters.  A device was designed
to periodically measure and record pressure and temperature. 
The data is used to compare growth of fish in different
environments.  The device, the DST 100, had to be small
enough to be placed internally and externally without causing
problems to the fish.  In order to produce the DST 100, a
surface mountable pressure sensor, the Model 1431, was
created by EG&G IC Sensors (Milpitas, CA).  The Model
1431 pressure sensor consists of a micromachined silicon
pressure sensor chip mounted on a ceramic substrate.  A
ceramic lid is bonded to the ceramic base to provide
mechanical protection for the sensor element.  The pressure
sensor chip is formed by chemically etching hundreds or
thousands of thin diaphragms into a 4 in. silicon wafer.  Later
in the manufacturing process, a glass wafer is electrostatically
bonded to the silicon wafer under vacuum, sealing a vacuum
reference within the sensor.  Once this has been accomplished,
the wafer is sawed apart to create individual sensors.

Boron impurities are implanted in selected regions of the
silicon diaphragms to form piezoresistors--resistors that
change their electrical resistance in response to changes in
strain.  Multiple resistors are interconnected into a Wheatstone
bridge circuit so that a change in diaphragm strain results in a
proportional change in sensor output voltage.  After
fabrication is completed, individual chips are tested to verify
that they are functioning properly.  The chip is then attached to
a ceramic substrate, wire bonds are made to form electrical
connections from the chip to the package, and a ceramic lid is
epoxied to the ceramic substrate to provide mechanical
protection for the sensor chip and the wire bonds.  Pressure
enters the sensor through an opening located at the base of the
top cover.  After a conventional IR reflow process, solder on
the bottom of the ceramic substrate forms the electrical
connection to the board, or hybrid circuit.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

MICRON CMS EXPANDS SMT CAPABILITY


Micron Custom Manufacturing Services Inc. (Micron CMS)
began as an onsite division of Micron Technology in 1984,
providing board-level product design, assembly, and testing. 
Micron CMS began offering contract manufacturing to
vexternal customers in 1989, and established its current
autonomous location in 1990.  The operation became a
subsidiary in March, 1992, and became ISO-9001 certified in
February 1993.  In 1995, Micron CMS, Micron Computer, Inc.
and ZEOS International Ltd. entered into a merger to form
Micron Electronics, Inc.  Micron CMS is currently expanding
its contract manufacturing services by adding several SMT
lines.  The expansion is taking place in its Boise, ID and
Durham, NC plants.

The Boise facility consists of 92,000 square feet in two
adjacent buildings.  Over 550 employees operate seven fully
automatic surface mount manufacturing lines, which operate
24 hours a day, seven days a week to meet customer demand. 
The Boise facility is scheduled to have an eighth line up and
running by February 9 of this year. 

The Durham facility, established in January 1995, began with
an initial investment of approximately $10 million.  It has 75
employees and its third SMT line began operation on January
17 of this year.  A fourth line is scheduled for delivery in mid-
march, 1996, to be in production by April 1996.  The new
lines in Durham  increase the floor space there from 30,000
square feet to 60,000 square feet.  The Durham facility expects
ISO 9002 certification in April 1995.

MCMS said:  "Beyond the quality and competitive pricing all
customers expect, we believe the significant factors in contract
assembly are technology, service and cycle time.  Location is
also becoming increasingly important."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

JAPANESE ELECTRONICS TO LOOK UP


After five years of declines, consumer electronics output will
increase in Japan in 1996 due to the creation of new products
such as car navigation systems and other digital devices,
according to the Electronic Industries Association of Japan,
which represents 600 companies.  Total production of
electronics in 1996 will be $234 billion, up 5.7% over this
year.  Leading the way will be higher production of
semiconductors and components to fuel booming worldwide
demand for chips from makers of computers and mobile
phones.

With the reawakening of the Japanese electronics industry,
there will come renewed capital spending for production
equipment.  Tencor Instruments' sales of in-line inspection
equipment to Japan constituted 16% of the company's total
revenue in 1993, the year Japan began recovering from its
economic slump.  In 1995,  the Japanese market made up 26%
of Tencor's company revenues.  This number is expected to
increase to 28% in 1996.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

VOLUME KEY TO SUCCESS


We received a news release from Pittiglio Rabin Todd &
McGrath (PRTM) about a study they've completed:  1995
High-Performance Factory Benchmarking.  We called PRTM
and spoke to them about the study because it seemed like the
sort of information that our subscribers would be interested in. 
PRTM does multi-client studies for large companies.  This one
was sponsored by AT&T, Compaq, Digital Equipment, GE
Medical Systems, IBM, Nokia Mobile Phones, Nortel, Pitney
Bowes, Sequent and Unisys.  They don't offer the studies for
sale to other companies, but, in part to advertise PRTM, but
also in part as a service to the manufacturing industry, they
release some of the information for the general population.

PRTM's examination of manufacturing processes revealed the
significant impact high volume had on factory costs in 1995. 
For example, median cost per placement for printed circuit
board assembly was 32 for factories with a volume of 25
million placements, 15 for those with 200 million, and only
10 for those with 800 million.  The study indicated that the
high-tech industry has recognized the importance of volume: 
volumes have risen throughout the industry and reduced
overall product assembly costs.  For example, median cost per
placement for printed circuit board assembly declined by 20%
since 1992, from 35  to 28 .  PRTM attributes this to the
decreasing number of low-volume producing, various factory
improvements, and the increasing reliance on outsourced
production.

Though median assembly costs have dropped, typical
companies are still lagging behind the best-in-class
competitors--the top 20%--whose costs are at 7  per
placement.  Figures show, however, that the best-in-class
companies saw no cost improvements during the last few
years.  "Our numbers indicate that the influence of volume
may have topped out for the leading companies," said Raj
Nooyi, a director at PRTM.  "However, though volume is still
key, some of the other cost-related areas companies can
address include plant location [offshore facilities], unique part
numbers manufactured [component mix], PCB assembly
density, and the ratio of indirect [managers] to direct
employees [operators]."

Volume is also a major factor in low material acquisition
costs.  PRTM found that the material acquisition rate--the cost
of acquiring the material as a percentage of material
expenditures--varies from 1% to more than 20%.  Companies
with a volume of $25 million worth of material expenditures
had a rate of 6%, while companies at $200 million were just
over 3%, and those at $800 million were at 2.3%.

"Again, companies buying the most material are obviously
going to have the lowest rates," said Nooyi, "but companies
can still find ways to remain competitive within their volume
categories.  They can improve the efficiency of their
acquisition function by examining the number of suppliers, the
number of parts procured, percentage of material procured
from international sources, and the percentage of material
received without inspection."

In the high-tech arena, where getting to market quickly means
the difference between market leadership and a warehouse of
obsolete inventory, the time required to ramp up a product
from first prototype to full-volume production is critical.

"With the product life cycle under 35 weeks in segments like
personal computers and consumer electronics, the pressure on
companies is tremendous," says Nooyi.  "The median launch
and ramp-up time in the PC industry is only 10 weeks--and
each day the factory operates at less than peak capacity,
hundreds of thousands of dollars in revenue can be lost."

A major factor in a product's manufacturing launch time is the
number of engineering change orders (ECOs), which are
typically brought about by product design quality issues and
difficulties with component sourcing.  Best-in-class companies
speed their development cycle times--and save significant
money--by reducing the number of mistakes made in the
design process.  In fact, best-in-class computer companies
generate 84% less ECOs within the first year of production
than average companies.

Proper management of inventory is also critical for cost,
flexibility and cycle-time performance.  For example, across
all industries, sourcing time (the time to specify and acquire
materials and components) comprises nearly 75% of the entire
source-make cycle-time--but companies that find ways to
reduce sourcing time take a dramatic lead time advantage.  In
addition, companies that improve inventory management gain
cost, flexibility and cycle-time advantages.  The personal
computing industry has proven itself a leader in this area, with
fewer inventory days of supply than every other study
segment.  In fact, PC factories have reduced "work-in-
progress" and "finished goods" inventories to less than one
week of supply each.

"Supply-line management," known in the old days as
"purchasing," has become an important new tool for gaining a
competitive advantage.  PRTM's study reveals that supply-line
practices are changing dramatically, providing companies with
new ways to speed production, save money and improve
quality.  As an example, in 1995, the average computer
company obtained 80% of its material from 22 suppliers, as
opposed to 31 suppliers in 1992.  These companies are also
phasing out cumbersome paper-based ordering mechanisms: 
27% of transactions are now completed by EDI, compared to
12% in 1992.  In addition, companies are replacing time-
consuming inspection efforts with vendor certification
programs:  in 1995, 82% of incoming material lots were
received without inspection, an increase from 65% i 1992. 
Although changes in supply-line practices are industry-wide,
some companies are far ahead of the pack on the issue of
supply-line flexibility.  In the computer sector, best-in-class
companies needed only 20 days to achieve an unplanned 20%
increase in production, while median companies needed 56
days.  These same best-in-class companies can also more
easily adjust to a downturn, sustaining an average 94% order
reduction within 45 days of scheduled product delivery with
no inventory or cost penalty.  The average company can only
sustain a 20% reduction for the same amount of time. 
Companies that can't respond quickly to changes in the
marketplace run the risk of out-of-control inventory and lost
revenue.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

WORLD'S FIRST SM RESETTABLE FUSE FOR TELECOM EQUIPMENT


Raychem's PolySwitch Division (Menlo Park, CA) announced
the world's first surface mount resettable fuse for
telecommunications equipment.  The new PolySwitch TS250
helps protect telecommunications equipment from overcurrent
conditions.  With an installed height of only 3.4 mm and a 9.0
mm by 7.1 mm footprint, the compact TS250 resettable fuse
has a 60% lower profile than previous through-hole
PolySwitch devices for telecommunications equipment.  Like
other SM parts that Raychem manufactures, the TS250 is
supplied in tape and reel that is compatible with standard
industry pick and place equipment in high-volume
manufacturing environments.  The part is designed to be
reflowed onto boards using convection, IR, and hot-air
techniques.  PolySwitch resettable fuses are designed to
operate repeatedly and reliably.  Unlike one-use fuses, they
automatically reset after a fault condition is cleared.  When
short circuits or overcurrent conditions occur, a conductive
polymer, sandwiched between two metal electrodes, increases
in resistance, limiting the current.  In this high resistance state,
the device remains latched until the fault clears.  Resetting
occurs when the power is interrupted and the fault is removed. 
The device then cools and enables the polymer to revert to a
conductive state.  The TS250 is priced as low as $0.35
depending on volume.  Lead times are six to eight weeks.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

AVX ADDS 2 MLCC LINES


One of the mainstay passive components, along with the
resistor, is the capacitor, whose primary responsibility in
today's electronic circuits is as a decoupling device:  a shunt
used to maintain proper voltage levels within the circuit. 
Switching power supplies, ubiquitous elements in an
electronic circuit, are an important application area for
capacitors.  As power supplies increase in switching frequency
and decrease in size, designers are turning to specialized
multilayer ceramic chip (MLCC) capacitors to help them keep
control of the circuit.  The input filter of a high-speed power
supply must provide a high-current burst to the power supply
without generating noise, and must suppress noise generated
by the switch circuitry as well.  Output filtering capacitors
must smooth the ripple effect of the switching circuitry by
absorbing and then discharging energy during the switching
cycle.

In response to demand from designers working with advanced
power supplies, AVX Corp. (Myrtle Beach, SC)  introduced
two surface mount capacitor series:

  1.  SupraCap--high-capacitance MLCCs

  2.  SV--high-voltage radial MLCCs

The SupraCaps offer low equivalent series resistance (ESR) in
the milliohm range and equivalent series inductance (ESI) in
the 1-nanohenry (nH) to 4-nH range.  The SV is for high
voltage, low leakage current, and low ESR applications in a
small package.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

MLCC MATERIAL DEVELOPMENTS


Most of the raw-material cost in multilayer ceramic capacitors
comes from palladium.  As a result of the rising cost of
palladium, many ceramic-capacitor suppliers are considering
alternatives such as nickel.  Ceramics made of nickel, the inner
electrode could now account for as much as 10% of Murata's
ceramic-capacitor business.  Aluminum-electrolytic capacitors,
in heavy demand from power-supply makers, are in short
supply, as is polycarbonate.  New materials that are being
investigated to replace some of those that are in short supply
include polyphenylenesulfide (PPS) and
polyethyleneaphthalate (PEN).  (PPS is used in applications
requiring stability at high temperatures or over a wide
temperature range; PEN is appealing because it can be dipped
in molten solder in the wave solder process.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

ATC RAMPS UP FOR MLCC DEMAND


During the past two years American Technical Ceramics
(ATC) (Huntington Station, NY) saw an unprecedented
demand for multilayer ceramic capacitors (MLCCs),
particularly for commercial and communications applications. 
In 1995 the company made significant investments to upgrade
production and process equipment for manufacturing their
core products--RF/microwave porcelain and ceramic
multilayer capacitors.  End-users of their products include
engineers in industries as diverse as wireless communications,
aircraft radar, navigation systems, satellite broadcasting,
medical electronics, space programs and automotive
electronics.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

CAPACITOR NETWORKS ON THE RISE


New miniaturization demands are forcing many capacitor
houses to turn to integrated, semiconductor-style silicon
networks to achieve further reductions.  Size, performance,
and pricing are becoming increasingly critical, and surface-
mount packaging and thin-film technology are making inroads. 
A sizable chunk of future passives business could go to such
devices, particularly for portable communications and similar
applications where size reduction is critical.  PC manufacturers
want 100% surface mount.  The whole trend in the industry is
to surface mount for PCMCIA.  New high-frequency
requirements for communications and computing are making
such parts more necessary all the time.  Koa Speer has the
CR73 capacitor/resistor chip, a 1206 size for surface mount.

The passive-networks market--made up of various thick and
thin-film resistor-network configurations as well as resistor-
capacitor networks--grew moderately during the early 1990s. 
Venture Development Corp. (Natick, MA) said U.S. shipments
of the products grew from $1993.7 million in 1988, to $250.8
million in 1993.  A resurgence in the computer industry,
coupled with an interest in surface-mount designs, has helped
the passive-networks market maintain modest growth.  The
form factor continues to shrink.  Under development are
QSOPs, TSOPs, and narrow-body SO designs.  Small form
factors mean passive networks are offered, increasingly, in
surface-mount packages.  The mix of surface-mount and
through-hole resistor networks is currently about 50-50.  But
future designs are leaning more toward surface-mount
packages.

The name of the game is reducing size and increasing
frequency.  Performance level of surface-mount devices--in
some cases--has been close to or equal to that of through-hole
technology.  The biggest reason for the shift to surface-mount
is ease of assembly and size.  Applications that require high
levels of integration, such as cellular phones and wireless
communications, can generally be served better by discrete
components.  Traditionally, networks have three or maybe
four major applications:  pull-up/pull-down, termination,
current limiting, and precision analog circuits.  Applications in
which there is a need for low noise and tight tolerances,
however, require thin-film resistor networks, a portion of the
passive-networks market that should gain momentum in the
next few years.

Thin film has room to grow, especially where you can
incorporate a resistor and a capacitor in a single package.  The
market for thin-film resistor-capacitor networks is still in its
infancy, but most suppliers believe it shows great promise.  It
may still be about a year and a half before demand for these
integrated networks begins to generate much activity.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

POROUS SILICONINCREASES CAPACITOR PERFORMANCE


Present-day capacitors suffer several drawbacks.  Electrodes
made of dielectric materials such as polystyrene or SiO2 have a
low surface-to-volume ratio.  Increasing the electrode area by
etching or sintering techniques such as those used for
aluminum or tantalum capacitors suffers the disadvantages of
anodically formed oxides.  The strong temperature and
electric-field dependence of the dielectric constant in ceramic
devices remains a drawback.  To resolve the limitations of
standard capacitors, porous silicon technology has been
developed by Siemens (Munich, Germany) to fashion novel
capacitors by combining an electrochemically enlarged
electrode surface with high-performance dielectric thin-film
layers.  The macroporous silicon, that was used as a substrate
for capacitors, has pores with a diameter in the micrometer
regime and a depth of several hundred micrometers.  Using a
standard microelectronic process, the capacitor structure is
completed with the deposition of dielectric films and a
polysilicon electrode.  In principle, the electrochemical
process allows the pore diameter to be reduced to values close
to atomic dimensions.  Reducing lateral dimensions in this
way would increase the specific capacitance to values around
20 mFV/mm3.  This would surpass the values for the best
tantalum or aluminum electrolytic capacitors without the
polarity and high-ESR drawbacks of these technologies.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

PCMCIA DESIGN REQUIRE FLEXIBILITY


One of the products that helped make 1996 such a good year
for the electronics industry was the PCMCIA card.  Since the
1992 introduction of the first FPGAs, in thin quad flat pack
(TQFP) packages, static RAM-based FPGAs have been used
successfully in hundreds of PCMCIA designs, including
memory cards, I/O cards, and host systems.  The biggest
challenge of PCMCIA card designs is to fit the required
functionality into the available space.  High-integration levels
are needed to meet size and power constraints.  As a result, the
most popular PCMCIA IC technologies feature high
integration levels and include memories, chip sets, custom
ASICs (including gate arrays), and FPGAs.  Application-
specific approaches allow for the customization of the bus
interface and integration of other logic.  Custom IC
development is only feasible, however, when the design is
fixed and fairly large volumes are required.  This is because
such development typically involves lengthy design and
procurement cycles and high engineering costs.

As a result, many designers have turned to FPGAs, which
provide high integration levels without the lengthy
development cycles, design risk, and expenses of custom
ASICs.  Furthermore, the flexible nature of in-system
programmable FPGAs meets the demands of an unsettled PC
card market, with its changing standards, fierce competition,
and short product life cycles.  FPGA densities range from
about 1000 to over 20,000 gates with larger devices coming. 
The CMOS technology of FPGA devices is inherently low-
power.  One benefit of SRAM-based FPGA technology is its
ability to be configured and reconfigured while resident in the
target system.  This flexibility helps shorten development
times and facilitates field upgrades.

SRAM-based FPGAs make the PC Card more adaptable. 
Different FPGA configurations can be applied to the same
hardware design; variations in the FPGA configurations, result
in different adaptations of the same card.  Allowing for the
thickness of the circuit board and card enclosure leaves only
1.2 and 2.0 mm for ICs on double-sided Type I and Type II
cards, respectively.  This imposes severe restrictions on the
IC-package size, and has led to the adoption of TQFP and
VQFP (very thin quad flat pack) packaging for FPGAs. 
TQFPs feature a package height of 1.6 mm, making them
suitable for single-sided Type I cards and single or double-
sided Type 2 cards.  With 1.2-mm height, VQFPs can be used
on all single- or double-sided PCMCIA boards.  (Package
height is defined as the distance from the surface of the board
to the top of the IC package, and is the sum of the package
thickness and its clearance off the board.)  For high-density,
high-pin-count FPGA designs, Ball Grid Arrays (BGAs), just
emerging, offer a nominal height of 2.0 mm, suiting them for
PCMCIA designs.

The U.S. semiconductor market is dominated by
microprocessor and logic manufacturers, both standard logic
and ASICs.  Intel is the largest manufacturer by far.  Some
memory is produced mostly is the form EEPROMs.  Because
of the preponderance of MPUs and logic chips produced in the
United States, there tend to be more QFPs, PGAs, and LCCs
used proportionally, compared to the Asian market, where
there would be a higher proportion of DIPs, ZIPs, SIPs, and
SOIC packages used for memory applications.





                         US Semiconductor Market
                                1995-1999
                             by Product Type
                                $Billion
                                    
                                    
Memory          5.0      6.4       7.1      8.9      10.0
MPUs           20.5     25.6      28.8     36.5      40.3
Logic          11.4     13.6      14.1     16.7      17.2
ASICs          14.1     17.3      19.8     25.0      28.2
Analog          7.0      9.1      10.2     13.0      14.4
Total            58      72        80       100       110
Year           1995     1996      1997     1998      1999
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                         US Semiconductor Market
                                1995-1999
                             by Package Type
                                 Billion
                                    
DIPs            4.0      4.2      4.3      4.5      4.2
SOs            12.5     14.6     15.2     17.9     18.3
LCCs            7.0      8.4      8.8      9.6      8.9
QFPs           11.3     12.4     13.0     13.8     13.9
MCM             6.1      9.7     13.2     19.5     24.8
Array*         16.5     22.6     25.8     34.8     40.2
Total           58       72       80       100     110
Year           1995     1996     1997     1998     1999


*Includes pin grid arrays, chip-on-board, flipchip, ball grid
arrays, and chip-scale packages




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

HARRIS TO STICK TO X86S


Although Harris Corp. (Dallas, TX) was said to be evaluating
the possibility of migrating to the next generations of X86
processors, right now they are still dedicated to their decade-
old 8086 and 286 product lines.  A spokesman said:  "We've
been making these parts for many, many years now, but we're
seeing demand increase to the point that we've had to go back
in and re-allocate fab capacity, and we are investing
significant money in new speed upgrades and package types." 
Including the processors and peripheral devices, such as timer
circuits and direct-memory-access controller, Harris sold more
than 5 million of the 8086 and 286 devices in 1995.  Among
the new package options Harris is adding to its 8086 and 286
product lines, are surface-mount packages.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

INTEL SHIFTS TO PLASTIC PACKAGES


Some years ago one of the pundits we talk to periodically said
that packages of the future, despite what was being said then,
would be eventually be plastic.  Intel went a long way toward
confirming that recently when it made some of  the biggest
news around by saying it will migrate the majority of its
microprocessor product line from ceramic to plastic packages. 
By moving to plastic, Intel will spend $29.50 less on each
microprocessor and be able to reduce the cost of the products. 
As much as 80% of Intel's microprocessors are now packaged
in ceramic.  The move to plastic was made possible by the
superb heat and power dissipation characteristics of Intel's
0.35-micron process.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

OLE 2.0 AS A BRIDGE BETWEEN ECAD & MRP II 


Simple tools are the best tools.  Think of the extremely
qualitative work that can be done by an artist with simple paint
and ordinary canvas.  When two or more pieces of software
can interact in a simple manner it opens a previously narrow
gap by which the operators of the software can move data with
positive consideration for the task.  Consequently, an
individual can more easily motivate himself to take on a more
arduous task.  This in turn helps the overall data stream
between the engineering department and the manufacturing
and/or the administrative departments of a company.  OLE
provides this linkage and widens the gap.

An engineering group can spend a significant amount of their
time trying to get information and documentation about an
assembly to manufacturing.  Perceptively, much of this
information is going to be entered into the company's MRP
software quickly and accurately.  OLE does this without any
manual intervention.  Therefore, an MRP system, having been
defined as an infinite planning system, can immediately
breakout the materials required to start this project into motion
with rapid precision.  Now that the work orders and materials
can be generated, the aspect of more finite costing can be
established.  With this information now assigned a  new role, it
can quickly generate purchase orders and work orders.

A digital circuit board with 20 square inches of real estate can
easily have over 300 discrete parts.  They may not necessarily
all be different, but here must be a bill of materials and they
will all have different reference designators.  Coupled with all
the other information that is needed to define a circuit board
there is a wealth of data needed to clearly define the project to
other persons inside the company and out.  OLE keeps this
data from having to be reproduced.  As in a reference
designator chart of those 300 parts for hand placement, rework
or test.  When this data does not have to be retyped the
engineering staff and the administrative staff can manage a
project more efficiently.  This in turn would benefit by the
lowering the cost of not having to maintain multiple data
bases.  This allows purchasing and scheduling to utilize the
MRP system much earlier in the design cycle.  Manufacturing
can now start to consider what the capacity constraining
resource is and the production path to be taken.

When a single database can be maintained, the allowance for
multiple individuals to access this information with the
perception that it is accurate and updated frequently is
generated.  This is the basis for a concurrent engineering
environment with minimal redundancy.  With all this
happening in rapid succession, the model of the product also
needs to be created, which is why OLE Design and Modeling
is going to be an important factor for the MCAD group to keep
pace with the ECAD systems.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

DESIGN TOOLS TARGET BGA AND PCB APPLICATIONS


Two new physical-design packages from Harris EDA (Fishers,
NY) target ball-grid-array (BGA) and PC-board applications. 
The first product, Encore BGA, is aimed at single- and few-
chip designs using BGA packaging technology.  Encore PCB
is a physical design and layout environment for PC boards. 
Encore BGA was developed in partnership with Amkor
Electronics, a leading packaging supplier.  Users can reduce
design time, improve manufacturability, and reduce
manufacturing costs.  The tool includes automatic, optimized
wire-bound generation and no-net-list, all-angle, filleted trace
routing.

Push-and-shove editing allows engineers to dynamically re-
route traces on the substrate.  All-angle routing and advanced
editing features ensure that all available space is used.  And
Encore BGA comes with a standard set of BGA design rules to
make the tool easy for first-time and casual users, while still
allowing for a high degree of user configurability if desired. 
Encore PCB lets users design, analyze, and optimize PC-board
designs.  User-specified design rules guide floorplanning,
partitioning, and manual placement.  In addition, floorplanning
lets users consider electrical constraints and manufacturability
issues in the early design stages.

Using a physical-synthesis option, users can automatically
derive component placement and interconnect from CAE data
and user-specified constraints.  Partition synthesis
automatically optimizes component groups, partitions, and
individual component assignment.  Placement synthesis
employs placement algorithms that consider constraints such
as clearance rules, voids, and channels, while minimizing
route congestion and interconnect lengths.  Encore BGA and
Encore PCB run on Unix platforms and work with leading
CAE design software, including products from Cadence,
Mentor and Viewlogic.  Encore PCB also works with popular
PC-based design systems.  Pricing starts at $25,000 for each
product.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

TITANIUM OXIDE FILM BINDS IC LAYERS


A lightweight metal best known for its use in advanced aircraft
structures may provide the adhesive needed to hold together
groups of integrated circuits in multichip modules -- and the
layers of material used to build high-speed circuits.  Multichip
modules will facilitate the miniaturization of computer
equipment by allowing several chips to be placed in the same
space now needed for a single integrated circuit. To improve
the operating speed of the circuits and the new modules and
allow use of smaller currents, electrical engineers would like
to use wiring patterns made from high-conductivity metals
such as silver, gold or copper -- instead of standard aluminum.

But those high-conductivity metals are usually difficult to use
in circuits because other electronic materials -- silicon dioxide
and polymers -- do not bond well to them.  Now, researchers
at the Georgia Institute of Technology report that a thin film of
titanium oxide can serve as an intermediary layer to help bond
films of high conductivity gold to the other materials used to
build an integrated circuit.  The research is sponsored by the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
through the U.S. Air Force.

"This will allow us to think about replacing aluminum on
integrated circuits with a more conductive material such as
copper, gold or silver," explained Dr. Paul A. Kohl, professor
of chemical engineering at Georgia Tech. "This process may
be of substantial value in integrated circuit and multichip
module technology."

Aluminum has long been used for wiring in integrated circuits
because it forms a stable insulating oxide to which other
electronic materials readily bond. But metals like gold and
silver -- which are better conductors -- do not readily form
stable oxides and therefore are more difficult to use in layering
the circuits.

Kohl and Graduate Student Kirkland W. Vogt believe they
have solved that problem by depositing a thin film of titanium
metal on top of gold conducting films. The titanium adheres
well to the gold, and is then allowed to form an insulating
oxide (TiO2) on which the researchers can build layers of
silicon dioxide or polymers.

"It's a simple one-step coating process that allows us to switch
back and forth between insulators and metals at will without
having to worry about adhesion for each," explained Kohl. "In
our work with multichip modules, we use this exclusively to
get adhesion. It's a kind of universal adhesion layer for us."

Because it is thin, the titanium film does not alter the dielectric
properties of the insulator surrounding the metal. And because
it does not significantly diffuse into the gold, conductivity is
not degraded.  Vogt analyzed the surface of the titanium layer
with help from Dr. Lawrence A. Bottomley in Georgia Tech's
School of Chemistry and Dr. Brent Carter in the School of
Materials Science and Engineering. Using angle-resolved
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), scanning tunneling
microscopy (STM) and other techniques, he studied the
characteristics of the titanium oxide film and found that its
thickness was critical to the success of the process.

When deposited in layers of between three and 10 Angstroms
thick on the gold film, the titanium forms "islands" which
occupy about 90 percent of the surface -- but do not contact
one another. Oxidation of the titanium metal creates a
continuous film of insulating titanium oxide, which builds up
on top of the titanium islands and provides a bonding surface
for the next layer of the circuit.  A core of titanium metal
remains beneath the oxide to provide good adhesion to the
gold.

If the titanium layer is thinner than three Angstroms, oxidation
does not leave enough titanium to ensure good adhesion, Vogt
found. If the layer is thicker than about 30 Angstroms, the
titanium islands grow together, forming a continuous metal
layer that can become a conductor and short out the circuit. 
Multichip modules will allow the miniaturization of computer
components by allowing several integrated circuits to be
placed into a single package in the space normally required for
just one circuit. 

"This can replace several packages of chips inside a
computer," Kohl explained. "All the interconnection is
provided on the base material, so you end up with a very dense
array of circuits."

Engineers would like to use the higher conductivity metals to
increase the speed of the circuits and to reduce the current they
must carry. Because the chips are closer together, the electrons
carrying signals have less distance to travel; helping them
travel faster would give additional speed to the computing
work. Higher conductivity would also mean less current loss
and less heat to remove from the circuit module.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

LASER MACHINING OF PCBS TO BE RESEARCHED


The Technology Institute for Manufacturing Electronics
(TIME)(Dayton, OH) has awarded a research contract to
demonstrate the feasibility of laser machining of PCB
materials.  Employees of Circuit Center, Inc., Laser Fare, Inc.,
and Mound Laser and Photonics Center employees will utilize
the Dayton, Ohio facilities at Mound under the direction of Dr.
Larry Dosser.  TIME is a nonprofit organization involved in
PCB manufacturing technology development partially
supported via a grant by the Ohio Department of Development
and a loan from the National Center for Industrial
Competitiveness.  Project results are expected to lead to the
commercialization of laser equipment that also subscribes to
environmentally conscious manufacturing principles in which
by-products of present processes will be dramatically reduced. 
Benefits of the technology will be made available to the PCB
industry.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

CHANGES IN TODAY'S PCB MARKET


The printed circuit board (PCB) market, like all the electronics
industry, is in a state of continual evolution.  Some of the
major outside factors that have helped shape that evolution
are:

  1.  The shift from a military and mainframe dominated
market to a commercial product focus;
  2.  The movement away from vertical integration and captive
PCB shops to independent PCB fabricators and independent
contract assemblers;
  3.  The slow but steady move from through-hole technology
to surface mount technology; and
  4.  The rapidly increasing levels of density and integration on
semiconductor devices.

From a technological standpoint, the basic processes used
today are the same that were used twenty years ago.  Clearly
there have been steady improvements in materials, proprietary
chemicals, equipment and our understanding of PCB
processing.  Nonetheless, there has been little change in how
PCBs are processed today compared to twenty years ago. 
Layers are still imaged, etched and laminated.  Next comes
drilling, metalization, imaging, etch and finishing.

It is clear that change will be needed in the future!  The
transition from through-hole to surface mount technology
provided an easy route to increased interconnection density. 
Replacing large holes that served a mechanical and electrical
function with small connection vias freed up routing channels. 
Combined with enhanced dimensional stability of laminates,
smaller line widths and spaces, stiff and accurate drill
machines, fine grained tungsten-carbide drills, and the ability
to scale artwork with raster-based laser photoplotters--large
improvements have been made.  The result has been a five to
ten fold increase in interconnect density over the past twenty
years.  Nonetheless, the easy changes have been made. 
Further enhancements on the present methods of building
PCBs will result in diminishing returns.  The industry is ripe
for a change, but a change to what?

Today it is obvious that the density improvements in the PCB
fabrication industry are not keeping pace with those of the
semiconductor industry.  Semiconductors serve only an
electrical purpose.  Shrinking their geometries usually
improves the electrical properties and results in more die and
more revenue per wafer.  Printed circuit boards serve both an
electrical and a mechanical purpose that is difficult to separate. 
Frequently, the mechanical size is dictated by a form factor,
making it impossible to shrink the overall board size, while at
the same time, the geometries decrease and the cost per square
inch increases.

What is needed is a new PCB technology that allows very high
connection densities (where needed) without driving the cost
of the rest of the package out of sight!  Fortunately, there are
many new technologies that exhibit the potential for greatly
increased interconnection densities.  Some of the most
promising of these new processing methods and materials are:

  1.  Photoimagable dielectrics,
  2.  All organic dielectric materials in which vias can be
chemically or reactive ion etched,
  3.  Electrically conductive pastes for filling vias,
  4.  Lasers that can simultaneously machine thousands of vias,
and
  5.  Lasers that can machine through copper.

Most of these emerging technologies are squarely aimed at
reducing the high cost of via formation when using small drills
for conventional through-board via formation.  Secondary
benefits are that these processes allow the use of much smaller
via pads; They only place vias between the required layer pairs
(opening up routing channels on all other layers), and they
allow the use of optical alignment fiducials for improved
layer-to-layer alignment, further reducing the required via pad
size.

The challenges facing the acceptance of any new PCB
fabrication technology are:

  1.  It must be producible on large panel sizes, i.e., 300-500
sq. in.;
  2.  It must provide reliability that is at least equal to existing
semiconductor packages;
  3.  It must be compatible with existing semiconductor
assembly and packaging processes; and
  4.  Any increased processing and material costs must be less
than the increased density on a per unit area.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

ELECTROLESS PALLADIUM: A SURFACE FINISH FOR INTERCONNECT TECHNOLOGY


With the continuous evolution of interconnect technology a
series of new demands on the  surface finish is emerging.  The
co-planarity of the surface finish is essential for paste printing
accuracy and placement on fine featured SMT devices.  The
finish must be capable of withstanding multiple thermal
excursions in air without loss of solderability.  Preferably the
same finish is also compatible with wire bonding and contact
switching.  Electroless palladium over bare copper can meet
the above requirements.  It is  cost competitive and
environmentally safe.  Electroless palladium eliminates the use
of lead in the PCB manufacturing facility and is compatible
with no-clean fluxes at the assembly end.

Atotech developed a process that uses a novel reducing agent
that produces an electroless deposit of pure palladium that is
free of phosphorous or boron, eliminating variability in the
deposit and its solderability.  An electroless palladium coating
of 5-7 microinches (0.15 microns) over bare copper has 
excellent solderability preserving properties.  It is compatible
with no clean fluxes after  multiple thermal excursions in air. 
At a thickness of 20-24 microinches (0.5- 0.6 microns) with a
gold flash (0.1 microns)  the finish is 100% gold wire
bondable.

Palladium has a density of 12gm/cm and a melting point of
1552oC. Palladium is almost twice as hard as copper; it has a
hardness of 250-290 Vickers as compared to copper at 150
Vickers.  On the same scale gold is at 90 and nickel comes in
at a hardness of 600 Vickers.  Palladium will not form a solid
solution in copper even with prolonged dwell at elevated
temperatures (120 and 176o C for 48 hours).  The metal will
strip in molten solder at a rate of 0.02 microns per second at
250 and 176o  C.  Copper at the same temperature has a strip
rate of 0.12 microns and gold is at 1.3 microns per sec.

Atotech's process consists of four steps:  

  1.  Acid Clean;
  2.  Microetch;
  3.  Activate; and 
  4.  Electroless palladium.  

The activator is highly selective to the copper surface. The
process uses the copper surface as a reducing agent for the
deposition of a thin layer (1.0 microinches) of immersion
palladium.  Activation depends on temperature and chemical
composition.  The system is buffered to the point that pH
control is not required.  A controller maintains the chemical
composition and doses the bath continuously during operation. 
The electroless bath will only deposit on a palladium metal
surface.  This surface is initiated in the activation step. The
deposited metal then acts as the catalytic sight for sustained
plating.  This unique feature renders the bath totally
independent of bath loading.  The thickness of the palladium is 
a function of dwell time beyond this point.  Of course
deposition rate is dependant on temperature, chemical
composition and pH.  A controller maintains the chemistry
within the specified range.  The bath is water clear, odorless
and very stable under operating conditions.  

At the operating temperature and pH the bath is compatible
with all the solder masks  tested to date.  The list includes the
following:  Probimer 52,62; Conformask 2000; Taiyo PSR400;
Enthone 3241LG; Coates XZT15; Vacrel; Epic 200 and
Imagecure XV 501 TSM.  Multiple tests were conducted to
evaluate the solderability of a thin electroless palladium finish. 
Thicknesses tested were 0.2 microns and 0.1 microns. Test
conditions were steam aging, multiple IR thermal excursions
and baking.  Four different assembly fluxes were used  namely
Alpha 350(2%), Kester 951(2%), Kester 922(2%) and Alpha
855(15%).  Soldermasks tested were; Probimer 52, Probimer
71, Enthone 3241ALG and Taiyo 4000.  The finish with a
thickness as  low as 4.0 microinches (0.1 microns) survived
eight hours of steam aging. The resulting surface gave good
hole filling properties when assembled with a 2% no clean
flux in air.  No loss of solderablity was experienced after three
IR thermal excursions.  No loss of solderability was detected
after 24 hours of dry bake at 160 and 176o C.  No clean fluxes
in an air atmosphere were used in all applications.

Boards coated with 0.7 microns of palladium were assembled
using standard reflow and wave procedures.  Cross sections of
the joint were then prepared.  EDX was used to study the
elemental composition at; the solder/copper interface, at 2
microns and at 5 microns into the solder.  EDX analyses were
conducted on; the joint as formed, after baking and after 1000
thermal cycles.  From the data it is evident that  an
intermetallic phase between tin and palladium is set up as the
joint is formed.  This phase then migrates during tempering
into the solder away from the copper. This allows for  the
formation of a copper/tin intermetallic at the copper surface.
The palladium/tin phase forms a neutral solid solution in the
solder away from the copper interface.

A palladium deposit 0.6-0.7 microns thick with immersion
gold flash over bare copper was submitted for gold wire bond
testing.  Coupons with surface mount assembly sites were
used.  The coupons were split into two groups. One group was
assembled through reflow, using water soluble solder paste
followed by aqueous cleaning.  The second group, a control
group, was processed as received.  A bead of die attach epoxy
was placed around the bond site and was cured per vendor
specifications.  All assemblies were then plasma cleaned using
argon gas.

A Hughes Aircraft wire bonder was used.  The bonder
employed a stage preheat.  The gold wire had a diameter of 1.0
mil. Pull strengths were performed per MIL-STD-883B.  The
results show that average pull strength was 8.4 gms with a
S.D. of 0.46 for the control group and 8.2 gms for the
assembled group with a S.D. of 0.43.  The brake per
MIL-STD-883B had a Failure Location Code 1 (wire break at
neck down point).  Additional testing is in progress to
evaluate; alternate assembly equipment, palladium without
gold flash and to optimize wire bonding parameters.  Contact
switch testing was conducted on a 0.2 microns palladium
deposit over bare copper.  Initially 200,000 switches were
performed at a pressure of 80 cN. This was followed by a
dwell in a humidity chamber for 4 days at 85 & 176o C and
85% relative humidity.  An additional 400,000 switches were
then performed at the same pressure. No increase in resistivity
was recorded throughout the testing conditions.

Under normal thermal stress both nickel/gold and palladium
deposits showed no deterioration in resistivity . At increased
stress temperature of 155 and 176o C palladium shows no
significant increase in resistivity for 28 hours.  Nickel/gold on
the other hand showed an increase of 300% after 16 hours. 
Under chemical stress conditions of 10 ppm H2S for 60 hours
no change was recorded for palladium. Nickel/gold exhibited a
30% increase in resistivity.  For the palladium deposit to show
the same rise in resistivity it was necessary to increase the
concentration of the gas H2S to 100 ppm and the dwell time  to
144 hours.

Electroless palladium is an economical, environmentally safe
surface finish. It does not require any modifications to existing
assembly operations. The finish has great versatility and a
multitude of applications.  As a diffusion barrier it may replace
electrolytic nickel for gold tab electroplating applications. 
Can 25 microinches of electroless palladium replace
nickel/gold tab plating and offer a final finish that is
solderable, wire bondable and suitable for contact switching? 
How about electroless palladium on ceramic substrates? 
Electroless palladium offers answers to existing technology
demands and will be at the forefront to meet the challenges of
future technological advancements.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

PRECISION STENCILS FOR SMT ASSEMBLY


A-Laser, Inc. (Beaverton, OR) announced a new service
providing laser cut stencils for the printing of solder paste on
circuit boards (PCBs) when using fine pitch surface mount
components.  The new service takes advantage of laser
technology to manufacture stencils that improve SMT
assembly yields by drastically reducing print errors.

With fine pitch technology becoming more pervasive in
surface mount designs the need for precision stencils is
increasing.  The component solder points for these fine pitch
parts have become so small and closely aligned, A-Laser feels,
that the accuracy needed cannot be met any longer by
traditional chemical stencil manufacturing technology.

A-Laser uses a stencil laser system manufactured by LPKF
CAD/CAM Systems that was specifically developed for
stencil fabrication.  The laser system creates stencil apertures
with very clean, straight walls which allow printing of clean,
precise solder paste islands.  High aperture positioning
accuracy (<15 m) combined with low inner wall roughness
(<3  m) permit trouble-free fine-pitch PCB assembly, for
pitches finer than 250  m (10 mil).

Stencils are generated from common data formats such as
Gerber and HPGL.  The typical stencil is made of flat stainless
steel, up to 60 x 80 cm (24" x 32"), in a range of thicknesses,
typically from 50-250  m (2-10 mils).  Typical turnaround
times are three to five days and the cost starts at $275 per
stencil without frame and about $400 per stencil with frame. 
First time customers receive a 50% discount on their first order
of a standard stencil.  To receive a free information packet,
call (503-641-9428) or FAX (503-643-3662).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

AMISTAR INTRODUCES TP-12


Amistar Corp. (San Marcos, CA) has introduced its new
TrayPro TP-12, a multiple-tray feeder for the PlacePro family
of surface mount assembly equipment.  The TrayPro TP-12 is
capable of handling up to 12 JEDEC trays on two platforms. 
A special feature of this tray feeder is that while the machine
is picking a component from one platform, the other platform
can be re-loaded or re-configured by the operator, saving
valuable time.  The trays can be easily changed out, even
while the machine is in operation.  Utilizing a simple
mechanical latching arrangement, the TrayPro TP-12 offers a
solution to handling large numbers of tray-fed components. 
The TrayPro TP-12 takes full advantage of the PlacePro's four-
head models allowing multiple, simultaneous pick-up of
memory devices.  This efficient methodology means high
production at an affordable cost-per-placement.  The TrayPro
TP-12 is especially effective for manufacturing memory
modules because multiple waffle trays of DRAMs can be
handled very efficiently with the PlacePro machines.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

DIE-TECH INTRODUCES NEW SUBSTRATE HANDLING SYSTEMS


Die-Tech, Inc. (York Haven, PA) has introduced a package
handling system that transfers devices through multiple
operations without the operator having to handle them directly. 
The Model 6502 Substrate Handling system can process quad
flat packs, DIPs, or SIPs in 12" long stainless steel "boat." 
Each boat holds multiple devices, the number depending upon
the size of the component.  There are 10 boats in each
magazine.  The standard unit comes with a double magazine,
and can be equipped with as many as four.  The basic system
includes two vertical travel elevators, which lower the boats
onto the main track of the machine.  Once the substrates
complete the desired processes, the boats are then loaded back
into a magazine by means of the outgoing travel elevator. 
These magazines can then be transferred to other stations for
additional work, such as reflow, trim and form, testing,
marking and inspection.  The system can also be used to
automate wire bonding, epoxy dispensing, paste dispensing,
and component placement.  Pricing for a Model 6502
Substrate Handling System, incorporated into a custom Die-
Tech Model 4602 DIP machine with double magazine, boat
transfer, lead attach and solder paste dispensing, is
approximately $250,000.

1995 was a good year for manufacturers of screen printers for
SMT.  Much of the highest growth in the market came from
contract manufacturers.  End-users are looking for increased
performance features that will make their screen printing more
automatic to stepup throughput.  One of the additions to the
screen printer that is helping to speed up the operation is a
vision system.  Vision systems help insure the proper
alignment of the screen as well as check the completed board
to make sure all patterns have been properly applied.








                       World SMT Screen Printer Market
                                  1995-2000
Sales ($M)       255.6      304.2      359.1      420.6      489.2     564.9
Units             4647       5821      7234        8920      10919     13273
$Growth                      19.0%      18.1%      17.1%      16.3%      15.5%
ASP ($)          55000      52250      49638      47156      44798     42558
Year              1995       1996       1997       1998       1999     2000
                                       
                                       



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

MASK TECHNOLOGY SIGNS CROSS LICENSING AGREEMENT WITH KOKI


Mask Technology, Inc.  (Santa Ana, CA) and Koki  Company Ltd.   (Tokyo, Japan)
announced the signing of a cross licensing agreement relating to the Precision
Pad Technology (PPT) solid  solder deposit  process.   Both Koki  and Mask Tek
will be opening PPT service bureaus in Tokyo and Santa Ana, in addition to the
existing Mask Technology PPT facility in Orlando, FL.  The patented technology
is claimed to improve fine pitch solderability by applying  a solid, reflowed,
macro- planar solder deposit to SMT lands or pads.   The  solid solder deposit
formed is typically  0.002-inch to  0.010-inch, although  thinner deposits are
normally employed for TAB devices.  

Mask Tek has been doing solder masking for nearly a decade and a half.  Their
PPT process grew out of this expertise.  They began obtaining patents for the
PPT process four years ago.  Seven months ago, with their last patent in hand,
they began to push the PPT process as a service.  Initially, the service was
offered only in Orlando.  Now the Santa Ana site as well as the Tokyo site
also offer the service.  What is eliminated by using the service is the
printing of solder paste.  Solder paste printing, like board fabrication, is
ordered by the end-user.  Generally, the entire board is processed, but it can
be just parts of the board, if there are certain hard to place components in a
particular area.

When the processed board reaches the assembler or OEM a flux is applied to the
board, either by dispensing, stencil or spray.  Components are then place and
the board is reflowed.  Peel strength is increased with the PPT process, while
shorts and bridges are virtually eliminated.  The savings in rework, the
company says, justifies the cost of the process.  The PPT cost is typically
$0.05 per square inch of board, plus the cost of the stencil.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

WHO WHAT IN PLACEMENT


Nothing in market research is more vain than trying to
determine marketshare.  It's easy enough to figure out who are
the major competitors, harder by a great deal to determine
exactly what share of the market these major competitors
possess.  In placement the task is even more daunting because
the market itself can be segmented into three, maybe four,
maybe five different categories, based on chip placement
speed (CPS) or cost.  With that caveat, we put forth our ideas
on this dubious area.  We will, over the course of time, refine
these numbers, both as the market shifts and as our
participation in the market deepens and allows us more
accurate perceptions of what is really going on.  Now we must
rely on information that is probably hedged because
marketshare figures are extremely vague unless based on unit
sales, and few SMT placement manufacturers have a
relationship with us, yet, that gives them the confidence to
release these figures.


We include this information because we feel that major
players in the market are important, which is not to say minor
players are not important.  But the research and product
development at a major company is more likely to influence
the nature of the SMT market more than the research and
product development at a minor company.  As always, we are
looking for answers for people actively involved in PCB
assembly using surface mount components.  When, in the
months to come, we discuss work being done at Fuji or
Universal, it will be because we feel as if this work is
something that will benefit you.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

BGA BONDING UPGRADE KIT


The new ball grid array (BGA) kit from Kulicke & Soffa
Industries (Willow Grove, PA) enhances the bonding
capability of the model 1488L turbo automatic gold ball
bonder for handling ball grid arrays and other devices with
large or varying height differentials.  The BGA kit enhances
machine vision capability to focus more clearly on BGAs, for
more accurate and reliable bond placement.  BGA devices
typically have large die/lead height differentials, ranging from
0.41 to 0.56 mm.  By expanding machine vision range to 0.76
mm, the kit provides bonders with a sharper visual image of
BGAs, for clearer bond position targeting.  Stationary optics
eliminate the need for operator adjustments; focusing is
performed with out time-consuming mechanical motion,
maximizing UPH.  A loop trajectory also improves second
bond angle approach for reduced risk of contact with
ground/supply pads.  Greater loop control allows accurate
placement of second bonds in multiple rows for effective fine
pitch.  A new algorithm minimizes wire sweep and reduces the
risk of wires shorting when molding for higher yields.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

SOLDERING EQUIPMENT


The U.S. market for soldering ovens, we feel, is going to
continue to be very healthy through the year 2000.  New
package types will keep end-users looking for good ovens.  In
addition, included in the category are curing ovens which will
find better acceptance during the next few years as the market
for conductive adhesives grows.  Prices will increase because
of added performance needed to provide reliable soldering of
fine pitch devices and dense array packages.




                     U.S. SMT Soldering Equipment Market
                                  1995-2000

Sales ($M)      126.1      155.0     186.9      221.6      258.6      297.4
Units           1681       1968      2261       2552       2836       3107
$Growth                     22.9%     20.6%      18.5%      16.7%      15.0
ASP ($)         75000      78750     82688      86822      91163      95721
Year             1995       1996      1997       1998       1999       2000
                                       




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

FLIP CHIP ATTACHMENT WITHOUT SOLDER 


Solderless flip chip technology is challenging the traditional solder bump
technique.  Solderless flip chip technology involves the deposition of a
screen-printable dielectric polymer onto the silicon chip in wafer form,
leaving the metallized bond pads open.  This process, called advanced wafer
passivation (AWP), utilizes high precision, automatic screen printers with
pattern recognition alignment.  The printer must be able to print the micron
range with acceptable resolution and repeatability.  After the dielectric is
cured, an electrically conductive polymer is stenciled onto the bond pads of
each chip on the wafer to form the interconnect bumps.

A 25 micron layer of dielectric polymer is stencil printed over the entire
surface of the wafer, excluding bond pads and streets.  A printer with vision
alignment is required because the bond pad size is typically 100 microns
square and the spacing between adjacent bond pads is usually 200 microns.  In
the second step of the process, the conductive bumps are formed.  A
laser-etched stencil, with the bond pad array etched open, is aligned to the
wafer bond pads.  The bump height is 50 microns (+/-3 microns).  The
conductive bumps are then cured in an infrared furnace with a nitrogen
atmosphere after which they are ready for assembly. 

A thin layer (0.001") of conductive adhesive is stenciled onto the bond pads
of the substrate.  A high precision printer employing a metal stencil is
mandatory so that interconnect height, volume and diameter can be accurately
controlled.  The flip chip is then aligned and amounted onto the substrate
using a flip chip aligner/bonder.  The bumps of the flip chip are contacted to
the wet adhesive on the metallized substrate pads and 30 to 40 gms is
typically used to adhere the flip chip to the substrate.  A 300X magnification
on the aligner/bonder is used to ensure accurate alignment of the bumps to the
substrate.  This is essential because conductive adhesives do not have the
self-aligning properties exhibited by solder.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

SMT INSPECTION


Inspection is an increasingly important part of the entire PCB
processing when surface mount components are involved. 
Inspection equipment can be one of the most ubiquitous pieces
of equipment on the line.  Inspection equipment can be found
at the head of the line for incoming inspection of both printed
circuit boards and components, after solder paste screen
printing, after component placement, after reflow soldering,
and after cleaning.

An order of magnitudes' escalation in the cost of finding and
correcting a defect at each successive stage in the production
of an electronics system should turn a manufacturing
manager's thoughts to finding defective boards and
components early.  Checking for manufacturing defects in
circuit fabrication and assembly must await performance of the
physical process at issue.  Many component defects, however,
can be found at incoming inspection, when the components
enter the manufacturer's facility.

Probably the most important function of incoming parts
inspection is the detection of oxidation of the PWB traces. 
This is because the boards are exposed most often to
contaminants such as moisture and body oils.  They are
frequently shipped and stored without the packaging
precautions used for paste and components.  Components are
usually received in containers that prevent contamination
caused by handling or atmospheric exposure.  Solder paste
may be refrigerated and kept in sealed containers for use
within a few weeks after receipt.  Boards, however, may be
kept in inventory for several months.  Therefore, inspection for
oxidation should occur not only upon receiving them but also
before the boards enter the assembly process.

Inspection of the application of solder paste is the first step in
ensuring a good solder joint.  After printing solder paste onto
the pads, the process may require inspection of the wet solder
before components are placed.  This level of inspection
ensures that the correct amount of paste is located on the pads
within acceptable tolerances.  The kinds of problems
associated with faulty paste printing include solder bridging,
excessive print deposition, and whether the print registration is
off.  Insufficient solder paste can result in opens.  Unlevel
printing can lead to downline process problems such as
skewing or tombstoning.  Boards not printed to spec can be
removed from the line before there is any more value added. 
Equally important, the cause of the fault is identified so
corrective action can be taken.

After components are placed on the board, the assembly
should be inspected for correct component positional
tolerances including pattern error correction (PEC), lead
inspection, coplanarity inspection, and part-to-pad matching. 
Because of the greater density of these circuits, placement is
much more critical than with through-hole components.

The solder joint inspection process can be broken down into
two categories:

  1.  Pre-solder inspection; and
  2.  Post-solder inspection.

The objective of post-assembly, pre-solder inspection is to find
and replace wrong, misoriented, misplaced, and missing parts
at the most cost-effective point in the process.  The objective
of post-solder inspection is to assure sound solder joints
between component leads and pads on assembled PCBs. 
Some common defects occur after the components have been
soldered to the board.  Solder balls may form if boards are not
properly prepared or if paste is improperly applied.  The defect
is more common to vapor phase soldered boards.  Dewetting
or missing solder are easy to detect visually.  Solder bridges
and cracks are difficult to spot if they occur beneath a
component.

Defects occur which may not affect the performance of the
product immediately but which may degrade the long-term
reliability of the circuit.  Flux residues may cause corrosion or
the failure of a conformal coating.  Voids or pinholes may be
caused by gases formed during reflow or by flux which has
failed to escape from the solder before it hardens.  These will
rarely impede the functioning of the circuit but may affect its
long-term reliability, especially if the assembly is subjected to
vibration.

Included in the SMT inspection equipment market are
automatic and manual inspection equipment.  Manual systems,
which generally involve a microscope, perhaps with 3D
capability and a video camera and monitor, are most often
found at the end of the process line, where they are used to
inspect fully assembled PCBs.  A manual system necessarily
involves a technician whose judgement is used to evaluate the
quality of the board.  Manual systems are still very much in
use not only because of their lower cost but also, with well-
trained operators, they are very good systems for providing
assemblers with go or no-go judgements about boards.  

Automated systems include x-ray, laser, and automated optical
systems.  They involve "golden" board models which are used
to automatically compare boards being processed.  Automated
systems can be found throughout the process line.  Although
automated systems are used widely, because of their ability to
monitor boards during several phases of processing, they are
anything but perfect, and they are often very expensive.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

BEYOND CFC


Last summer when we visited EMPF (Indianapolis, IN), one of
the bits of information we picked up was how many
companies were unaware of the Montreal agreement that lead
to the phasing out of CFC use in PCB cleaning.  The fact is,
we feel, that companies are trying to hold onto their CFC
cleaners as long as possible, and, in many cases, until someone
comes along and tells them to stop using them, they're going to
continue as in the past.  The difference, they are going to find,
is that they will have to recycle the cleaners that they do have,
that no new CFC will be on the market.  In addition, of course,
manufacturers of CFC-based cleaning systems have stopped
making those types of equipment and the market has gradually
moved toward other types of equipment.  There are, however,
other types of solvents that are being used and therefore the
market for solvent cleaners remains.  How long it will remain
depends on how good aqueous cleaners become and how
effective no-clean, fluxless solders become.




                          World SMT Cleaning Market
                                  1995-2000
                               By Product Type
                                   $Million
                                       
                                       
Solvent       93.63     107.7      123.8     142.4      163.8     188.3
Aqueous       120.4     138.4      159.2     183.1      210.5     242.1
Ultrasonic     40.13     46.14      53.07     61.03      70.18     80.71
Others         13.38     15.38      17.69     20.34      23.39     26.9
Total         267.5     307.6      353.8     406.8      467.9     538
Year           1995      1996       1997      1998       1999     2000





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

MEASURING PATTERNED IC LAYERS 


NIST researchers are developing techniques for measuring the
critical dimensions of patterned layers on integrated circuits.
The work involves theoretical projects on the formation of
images in the optical and scanning electron microscopes as
well as experimental and design projects on the construction of
new metrology instruments for the calibration of standards.
The project was initiated about 15 years ago at the request of
the semiconductor industry. 

The ever smaller dimensions on integrated circuits have
created a demand for new and improved techniques of
measurement and their related standards, especially as feature
sizes approach and become smaller than the wavelength of
light used in conventional optical metrology instruments. The
dimensions of present interest range from about 0.5
micrometers to 30 micrometers and will extend to smaller
dimensions in the future. A series of three line width/pitch
Standard Reference Materials for photomasks is presently in
production. Research is in progress to develop new and
improved standards for use in instruments utilizing optical or
scanning electron microscopy. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

IRDAS DETECTS DEFECTS


Test- and quality-oriented engineering research suggests that a
unit under test can be compared to a "golden board" to identify
defective components.  When used in conjunction with
electronic test, this method can reduce the time for
troubleshooting and repairing a circuit.  But it does not address
other issues such as early lifetime component failure, poor
heat sinking or cold solder joints unless thermal output is
significantly different.

At the same time, simple comparison also highlights small
random variations in thermal output resulting from normal
production variations.  As a result, a test person has to make
value judgments to differentiate "acceptable" trouble spots
from real ones.

Motorola Information systems Group (ISG) in Mansfield, MA,
decided to develop a system that could detect circuit boards
that run outside an acceptable temperature threshold despite
passing traditional electronic test methods.  It also wanted a
system that would account for normal variations in thermal
output and thus eliminate arbitrary personal judgment from the
assessment process.  To do this, Motorola built a "model board
image" from the statistical mean of the thermal intensity
images of a large number of boards rather than the image of a
golden board.

The system, called IRDAS, for infrared defect analysis system,
comprises an IR camera interfaced to a UNIX workstation
(SUN Sparc 10/50 with Ethernet interface).  It uses General
Imaging Corp.'s software based upon that company's
ProtoPIPE Object-Oriented Grahical Programming
Environment.  The high-performance IR camera and
sophisticated signal/image-processing software have made this
technology available for the factory floor.

Motorola ISG tested the IRDAS system by developing mean
intensity images for each product type.  The IRDAS system
interfaces a fixture holding the test assemblies to the camera
and powers the assembly to ensure that images are captured at
precise times for analysis.  Three LEDs in the fixture shine
through tooling holes in the circuit to register the board images
during analysis.

The system imaged 30 electrically proven assemblies and
incorporated each pixel into a composite image of this mean-
intensity model for average operational boards.  Then design
data for a particular assembly was downloaded into the system
to create an overlay of components specific to the assembly
being tested.  The LED alignment positions, the template
images for each image time (10, 20, and 30 s) and CAD data
were used to create a test-control file specific to the circuit
assembly being tested.

To test boards from the factory, a baseline thermal reference
image was taken prior to automatic power-up and then the
boards were imaged in the factory-run mode.  The baseline
was subtracted from each image to eliminate random thermal
fluctuations.  The system compared the images taken at each
time to the template for that time, calculated any differences in
thermal intensity and determined statistical significance.  The
system "passed" the assembly if no excessively hot or cold
components were found.  In a "failed" unit, cold areas were
displayed blue and hot areas red.

According to Motorola, analysis shows that IRDAS detects
nonfunctional components by identifying the absence of
thermal output resulting from open circuits or excessive
outputs resulting from shorts, damage or misaligned parts. 
The company is currently trying to determine the limits of
detectability including out-of-specification resistances,
parametric shifts in output and other faults.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "36"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

NO-CLEAN FLUX CREATES BOARD-PROBING PROBLEMS


Environmental agencies are prohibiting the use of
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) because it's commonly believed
that they affect the ozone layer.  Since traditional circuit board
assembly processes relied heavily on CFCs as solder flux
solvents, a replacement process was desperately needed.  One
alternative to cleaning PCBs with solvents is the use of no-
clean fluxes.  While no-clean solder flux solves the
environmental problem, it creates a new problem for test
fixturing, because it leaves a thick layer of residue on the unit
under test (UUT).  Although this "benign" residue will not
affect how the UUT operates, many test probes have trouble
penetrating it; also, nonconductive solids in the residue can act
as insulators and keep test probes from making a good
electrical contact.  There are various techniques  you can use
to alleviate this headache.

Standard test-fixture probes frequently cannot perform
adequately on a UUT coated with flux residue, so probe
manufacturers have developed new models that work in the
no-clean flux environment.  Single-needle probes can usually
penetrate the flux, and they are a popular choice for many
applications.  But the probe tips need to be replaced
frequently.  Even though the normal tip material--beryllium
copper--is a hard material, the tips still wear down prematurely
because of the high forces used to break through the flux.  An
alternate tip material is steel:  It is nearly twice as hard as
beryllium copper and, hence, lasts up to twice as long.  Single-
needle probes are ideal for solder-filled holes or pads, but if
you try using them for through-hole applications, you will get
slipping and side loading, which lead to inconsistent results
and bent tips.  For through-hole applications, you'll find tri-
needle, crown-shaped, or aggressive multifaceted tips to be
more appropriate.  Some probe manufacturers recommend
using rotating probes.  With these probes, the tip rotates
(usually 90 degrees) upon contact with the UUT, drilling
through contamination and making a good electrical
connection.  One obvious problem with this aggressive
solution is that it can damage the UUT; another problem is that
the debris produced by probe operation can clog the rotation
mechanism and disable it, so increased maintenance is
required.

In addition to selecting the optimum tip, you'll also need to
select the right probe spring pressure.  The normal range of
pressure, usually between 4 oz and 8 oz, may not be high
enough to penetrate the layer of residue.  You may need to
experiment with forces of 10 oz or greater.  Increased probe
pressure requires increased upward force on the UUT, which
may create vacuum leak problems.  Here are a few ways to
prevent leaks:

  1.  Use a high-capacity vacuum pump.  A minimum of 25 in.
of Hg and 40 CFM is suggested.  Use a dedicated vacuum
pump for each test area.

  2.  Vacuum volume can be just as important as vacuum
pressure.  Try to use a 10-15 gallon vacuum surge tank for
each test fixture.  This can improve test performance and
reliability by providing faster fixture actuation, which causes
both a better initial seal and a better electrical contact.

  3.  For maximum efficiency, avoid any plumbing restrictions. 
All pipes and hoses should be the largest practical size, and
valves and fittings should have the same inside dimensions as
the pipes, if possible.

Ideally, vacuum alone is all you need to actuate the fixture and
hold the UUT inplace.  If you use many high-force probes,
though, vacuum alone will not do the job, and the UUT may
become deformed or even become damaged because of
unbalanced forces.  To prevent such damage, you must use a
type of overclamp or hold-down gate.  The simplest solution
uses pressure fingers to hold the UUT firmly on the fixture and
to compensate for uneven test probe pressures.  Sometimes,
you'll need to isolate all or part of the UUT from the vacuum,
such as when there are open vias (multilayer feedthrough
connections) or large holes on the board.  Isolating open vias
and large holes minimizes contamination of the vacuum
system by flux residues, but it also exacerbates the uneven test
probe pressure problem, since the vacuum forces are not
present to counteract probe forces.  The probe plate could
deflect if the pressure is excessive; you may need to use a
thicker plate to reduce deflection.  Stress analysis can
determine which fixture components need strengthening. 
Loaded board lids, or vacuum boxes, are becoming more
common; these eliminate the vacuum isolation required when
using oveclamps but do not allow access to the UUT.  A
concentration of high-pressure probes without counterforce
from pressure fingers can distort the UUT, possibly causing
trace fractures or causing surface mount devices to pop off. 
Try to distribute probes evenly, but if you can't, allow space
on the top of the UUT above dense probe areas for pressure
fingers.  Work with the board designer to ensure that there is
space left for the pressure fingers.

The no-clean flux process generates much more residue than
conventional wave soldering, so new preventative
maintenance standards are needed to reduce downtime.  No
single maintenance schedule will work for all test fixtures.  If
you think your test conditions are not too severe, start by
cleaning or replacing probes every 25,000 cycles.  Fixtures
should be cleaned and seals and gaskets serviced every 20,000
cycles.  Be sure to inspect everything more frequently than
20,000 cycles, though, and adjust the replacement interval as
needed; some probes may need replacement after only 3000
cycles.  Try to minimize the impact of no-clean flux on testing
by fine-tuning the soldering process:  allow the board more
time to be heated; control solder paste application; raise the
temperature slightly during reflow; monitor the results; and
adjust all aspects of the process as required to minimize
residue on the test pads.  If possible, work with the designer to
ensure that:

  1.  Vias are not left open and the number and size of holes
are minimized; by attending to these details, you'll prevent
problems with vacuum leaks and eliminate the need for special
test probe tips;

  2.  Test points are evenly distributed over the UUT if
possible, especially on high-density boards;

  3.  The target pads for test probes are big enough to be
accessed repeatedly without special fixturing; and

  4.  There is adequate space for pressure fingers when they are
needed.

You should also work with the fabrication and inspection
groups so they know what types of errors to watch out for. 
You don't want to suddenly have a test point with no
continuity because of an undersized pad or an inaccurately
drilled hole.  Remember that the source of a testing problem is
often somewhere back up the production line.  With proper
design and fabrication, production problems can be
minimized.  There is no magic solution to test fixturing in a
no-clean flux environment.  The more you control a board's
design and manufacturing processes, the easier it will be to
design a fixture and perform a proper test; you'll uncover more
real failures and have fewer false failures due to fixturinig and
probing problems.  After years of fighting to get engineers to
design testable products, test engineers finally saw progress: 
designers began to design boards with enough space between
test points to allow easy and effective board probing.  Now,
the need to make circuits even smaller is causing test
engineers new problems.  But with proper planning, you can
ease the way you test assemblies that use a dense array of
small devices with fine-pitch leads.

Not only are designers shrinking the size of components, but
they are also increasing the number of pins on each
component.  As a result, lead pitches, or the distances between
leads, are becoming finer than ever.  The definition of "fine
pitch" depends on whom you ask.  Some engineers define
"fine pitch" as spacings of less than 0.040 in.  You can even
find some IC packages with lead pitches of only 0.010 in! 
When circuit leads are that close, it is difficult to build a robust
test fixture.  Nevertheless, there are several ways you can help
a product-development team improve the testability of
assemblies that incorporate fine-pitch components:

  1.  Encourage your designers to add boundary-scan
capabilities that will aid interconnect testing.  Boundary-scan
testing was developed to address the problem of circuit
density.  Testing the interconnects of an assembly with
boundary scan requires access to only four test points.  For
boundary scan to be effective, it must be designed into an IC. 
Look for off-the-shelf ICs that have boundary-scan capability,
and ask your designer to put boundary-scan circuits in custom
ICs.  Fortunately, most EDA vendors provide tools that let
designers insert boundary-scan circuits into custom designs. 
You also need a modern ATE that can drive boundary-scan
chains and evaluate test results.  ATE vendors supply test-
development tools that automate the test-program
development.

  2.  Make sure to set the design rules properly in your printed-
circuit board (PCB) layout program.  Most layout programs let
you set design rules and check for rule violations once the
design is complete.  Be sure the settings match the types of
testing you plan to do.

  3.  Add test points that you can probe.  In general, test points
should be in centers that are at least 0.020 in. apart, and the
farther apart you can place them, the better.  Adding test points
lets you better probe a printed-circuit board, but it also may
increase the size of the board or reduce the density of the
circuitry o the board. 

  4.  Pay special attention to fixture design and probe selection. 
Some newer probes let you probe test points on 0.010 in.
centers.  You must, however, handle these probes very
carefully, and you must design and build the fixture so the
probes can maintain their probe-pointing accuracy.  To
maintain the point accuracy, drill the probe's mounting holes
in a very accurate and straight manner.  Other factors that
contribute to pointing accuracy include straightness of the
plunger, clearance between the probe and the barrel, retained
length of the plunger, and extended length of the plunger.

  5.  Send assemblies directly from manufacturing to functional
test, shipping the manufacturing defect test stages.  The
disadvantage of using this approach is that you will have to
rely on your functional test to find manufacturing defects.  If
you select this approach, you should analyze failures carefully. 
When a manufacturing defect causes a failure, quickly send
the failure information back to the manufacturing engineers.

  6.  Use moving-probe testers to probe circuits that you can't
test with fixed-probe fixtures.  Moving-probe test systems are
often the solution of last resort, because they can be expensive,
and they don't test points as rapidly as a fixture with 100 test
points can.  Models are available that let you probe test points
as small as 0.002 in.  Manufacturers of moving probe testers
supply software that uses your printed-circuit board's layout
data to control the prober.

Even if your assemblies have not been designed for testability,
you still have test options.  You should, however, talk to your
designers and persuade them to add testability features to their
designs.  By adding the ability to adequately test products, the
engineers make it easier for you to set up tests and design test
fixtures.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "37"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

SMTA TO REVISE TESTABILITY GUIDELINES


The Surface Mount Technology Association has undertaken
the revision of its popular publication TP-101A, Testability
Guidelines.  According to Tom Borkes, SMTA Vice President
of Technical Programs, the SMTA Board of Directors decided
that "our members would best be served by revising TP-101 to
bring it up to date" and "by providing a road map to help our
members establish a test strategy for their particular
applications."  The new Testability Guidelines will update and
expand the document's scope and reorganize the material into
a more user-friendly test handbook format.  The contents will
include sections on developing a general test strategy,
establishing a specific product test protocol (including a
discussion of ESS and burn-in), digital and analog testing,
boundary scan and capacitive characterization methods, and a
glossary.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "38"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

BGA REWORK


OK Industries (Yonkers, NY) announced the all new BGA-
2000 series, BGA rework system.  Ed Zambrowski told us that
the BGA-200, which has a base price on the unit was $11,000,
is like having a small reflow oven at your fingertips.  The
system has been engineered to allow safe, efficient rework of
BGA components.  Utilizing a microprocessor profile
controller, the operator simply selects the appropriate removal
or replacement profile and starts the rework sequence. 
Removal and replacement profiles can be stored, recalled and
edited with the touch of a button, or to guarantee process
control, the profiles can be locked to eliminate operate
adjustment.  The BGA-2000's exclusive Micro Oven design
encapsulates the BGA being reworked ensuring that a constant
temperature controlled environment is maintained throughout
the reflow cycle.  The Micro Oven's proprietary PCB seal
combined with its elevated nozzle vents protect surrounding
components from adjacent heating damage normally
associated with non-focused convection heating devices.  The
BGA-2000's exclusive dual path heater module, bypasses the
heater chamber during cool-down ensuring a controlled, rapid
cool-down protecting solder ball integrity.

The closed loop temperature control feed back system
maintains the Micro Oven temperatures at +/-5o C, protecting
delicate components and ensuring accurate reflow process
control.  The BGA-200 offers 2 modes of operation:

  1.  Removal--with 5 pre-programmed removal heating
profiles; and
  2.  Placement--with 15 pre-programmed reflow profiles.

The BGA-2000 provides four temperature controlled zones in
each profile:

  1.  Subzone/Pre-heat;
  2.  Soak;
  3.  Peak; and
  4.  Cool-down.

Each of the profiles parameters (time/temperature) is digitally
displayed on the BGA-2000's front panel.  Operators can store
an additional 25 removal and 55 replacement profiles in the
BGA-2000's on-board profile storage locations.  An optional
RS-232 interface allows the operator to display, edit, monitor
and run profiles on the BGA-2000 directly from a PC.  An
additional thermocouple input is provided for remote
monitoring (i.e., under the component for profile set-up), and
is displayed on the BGA-2000 front panel or on the PC
through the RS-232 interface.  In addition to BGAs the BGA-
2000 can also rework QFPs, PLCCs and many other SMT
components, utilizing the full range of FCR SMT nozzles.  




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "39"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

ASIAN MARKET STILL GOOD


The Asian market for SMT repair equipment has always been
different than the U.S. market.  Here boards, destined for
military or aerospace applications, for example, were
expensive and repair a necessity.  Asian manufacturers were
interested in boards destined for consumer electronics.  They
worked very hard to get their lines running as efficiently as
possible and when mistakes were made, the boards were
simply discarded.  The Asian market was, traditionally,
dominated by the Japanese.  When the Japanese market
slowed down, the market for SMT equipment generally
slowed down too, except that at about the same time the
Japanese market was slowing down, the Korean market, in
particular, was heating up.

In terms of the attitude of Asian manufacturers toward SMT
repair equipment, we found in talking to SMT repair
equipment manufacturers that the nature of the market was
still about the same.  These are still high volume
manufacturers and they spend less time repair boards than U.S.
manufacturers do, except that with an increase in the use of
some advanced packages, such as multichip modules and
BGAs, there is a slight improvement in the amount of repair
work being done.  The more significant change in the market
is, though, geographical.  Whereas the Japanese market
dominated the area tremendously five years ago, now the
Korean market, particularly, is very good, along with the
market in Taiwan and Singapore.

Additionally, with the growth of Asian markets outside Japan,
there has been a great deal of prototyping work which has
drawn in a lot of rework equipment from the United States. 
Altogether U.S. manufacturers were finding the Asian market
as good as it ever was or much better.  One company saw their
equipment being bought in part as a means to help
manufacturers improve their processing lines rather than just
to repair boards.  When problems began occurring, boards
could be examined with the rework station and the cause of the
problem determined.  Sales in Asia often came through Asian
reps although some sales to Asia originated in the United
States with U.S. companies that have manufacturing facilities
in Asia, particularly in Singapore.

While the trend toward automation was evident to most
manufacturers, there was the feeling that much of the market
was still interested in semiautomatic and manual equipment. 
Machines designed for BGA work were the ones that got the
company's name in the trade journals, but customers were
mostly interested in equipment that allowed them to quickly
remove and replace SOICs and other less glamorous
components.  But the market for BGA repair equipment is
definitely here and growing.  Sales are coming from larger
manufacturers right now, since these are the companies using
BGA packages the most.  As much as 20% of the larger
manufacturers are probably buying BGAs and repair
equipment for PCBs with BGAs.  By the end of the years,
however, the market for BGA repair equipment, it's felt, will
have spread to larger contract manufacturers.




                         Asian SMT Rework Market 
                               1995-2000 
$Sales       75.1       90.7       110.1      135.6      169.8      216.9
Units        6530       7511        8684      10186      12147      14778 
$Growth                 20.8%       21.4%      23.2%      25.2%      27.7%
ASP          11500      12075       12679     13313      13978      14677 
Year         1995       1996        1997      1998       1999       2000

Chipmaster Simplifies BGA Rework 

The Chipmaster from A.P.E.  (Key Largo, FL) is another system designed for BGA
rework.  Jim Dornan told us the unit was developed for work at Motorola and
was sold as part of Metcal's line.  The unit sells for $3,800 and provides a
single station BGA and SMT repair solution.  The Chipmaster organizes the
rework environment while addressing the problems of BGA and SMT component
repair, by providing better process control and less maintenance.  With the
Chipmaster, the replacement consumables are limited to a simple vacuum cup.
The Chipmaster X-Y table dictates and creates the reflow and placement
topography and becomes the "engine" which drives the bench allowing an
ergonomic arrangement of bench management.  With the Chipmaster being the only
true BGA machine designed for Motorola at an equipped price of $3,800, it
represents a sensible cost effective answer to tomorrow's components today.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "40"></A>Copyright
SMT TRENDS via NewsNet
January 1996

METCAL OFFERS TO CUSTOMIZE TIPS 


The Metcal (Menlo Park, CA) Custom Talon Tip Program ensures that Talon
users can get custom tips in a fraction of the time of a normal custom tip
program or production release.  The program fills in the gap for the majority
of end-users with customized tip requirements between readily-available
standard tips and those with highly specialized configurations.  There is no
minimum order for custom tips; however, it order to achieve time and cost
goals, certain limitations have been placed on the program in terms of
guidelines.  For example, tips must meet certain dimensional requirements,
must be for 2-sided component removal only, and be in the 500 and 600 series
temperature ranges.  Other requirements and restrictions apply.  Custom tips
which fall outside the shape, temperature range, or other guidelines can be
accommodate, but not as part of the program.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-28</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B018-293</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ml18.html 205.156.212.5 19970122034454 text/html 93226
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:42:34 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:46 GMT
Content-length: 93039
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ml18.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet <BR>
January-March 1995<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>COMMENTARY . . .</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>"Composites represent what  may really be the last opportunity for the USA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(296 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>NACFAM OBSERVATIONS ABOUT TRP . . .</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(155 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>RUSSIA:  QUITE ADVANCED IN COMPOSITES TECHNOLOGY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(131 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>NIST SELECTS 15 ATP AWARDS FOR COMPOSITES MANUFACTURING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(530 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>COMPANIES MAKING THE NEWS . . .</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>%     Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. is studying filament-wound composite</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(95 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>%     McDonnell Douglas Aerospace (Huntington Beach, CA) has signed an</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(149 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>%     Akzo Nobel NV (headquartered in Arnhem, The Netherlands) is investing</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(72 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>%     Ford Motor Co. (Dearborn, MI) has signed a two-year cooperative</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(83 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>%     As Hexcel Corp. (5794 W. Las Positas Blvd., Pleasanton, CA  94588;</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(262 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>%      Sale of Hercules' aerospace operations -- including its Composite</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(144 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>%     Weatherability of polyurethane construction adhesives and sealants</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(62 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>%     The FRP Supply Division of Ashland Chemical Co. (P.O. Box 2219,</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(56 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>%     AlliedSignal (Morristown, NJ) has received a NIST ATP award as part</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(41 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>%     Enjoying growing market acceptance for its prepregs, film adhesives,</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(38 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>%     ViaTech Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of Simula Inc. (401 W.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(60 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>%     Plastics Design Library (PDL, PO Box 443, Morris, NY  13808;  phone:</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(46 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>%     With the recent acquisition of Fairchild Space & Defense Corp. by</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(104 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>HOT OUT OF THE AUTOCLAVE. . .</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>%     While the new Republican Congress will not be voting any large</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(196 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>%     The DoD has revised its policy regarding ISO 9000.  The ISO standards</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(85 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>%     If the U.S. government allows the merger of Lockheed and Martin</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(95 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>%     The Air Force Materials Directorate has announced that the 1995</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(112 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>%     The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Lab. has been awarded a</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(79 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>%     The Israeli Arrow anti-tactical ballistic missile, which makes</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(62 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>CALTRANS:  COMPOSITES FOR BRIDGE REHAB/RETROFIT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(673 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>NHTSA ACTION WILL IMPACT USE OF CARBON/EPOXY  NGV TANKS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(379 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>SURFACE TRANSPORTATION MATERIALS ROADMAP DEVELOPED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(336 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>NATURAL GAS VEHICLES (NGVS) ARE OFF AND RUNNING . . .</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(438 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>R&D OPPORTUNITIES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>%     Manufacturing Composite Structures is a new focus areas for the</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(100 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>%     ARPA, the Advanced Research Programs Agency of DoD, is soliciting</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(105 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>%     The Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Program provides small</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(173 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>BOOK REVIEW . . .  CARBON FIBER COMPOSITES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(150 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><A HREF = "#32"><LI>HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE SAMPE TECHNICAL CONFERENCE&nbsp;(October 18-20, 1994;  Atlanta, GA)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1680 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEW PRODUCTS...</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>%   Grid-Lock( is a unique sandwich structure developed by Tolo Inc. (2401</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(136 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#34"><LI>%   EX-1515 is a new prepreg system available from Bryte Technologies (new</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(178 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#35"><LI>%   TEPEX* (Thermoplastic Engineered Preforms) is a family of</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(88 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#36"><LI>%   PPG Industries (One PPG Place, 32 West, Pittsburgh, PA  15272;  phone:</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(52 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#37"><LI>%     ICI Fiberite (2055 E. Technology Circle, Tempe, AZ  85284;  phone:</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(83 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#38"><LI>%     More products are reaching the market to upgrade the hand layup of</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(78 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#39"><LI>SAMPE WORKSHOPS ON COMPOSITES, ADHESIVES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(302 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#40"><LI>LASC PRESIDENT SPEAKS ON "RE-ENGINEERING/LEAN MANUFACTURE OF COMPOSITES"</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(258 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#41"><LI>SPACE APPLICATIONS NEW</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(308 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#42"><LI>UPDATE:   THE CARBON-PHENOLIC  SITUATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(203 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#43"><A HREF = "#43"><LI>ALERT . . .&nbsp;Stripping coatings from Composites</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(90 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#44"><A HREF = "#44"><LI>THE DoD PLAN FOR SPACE LAUNCH MODERNIZATION&nbsp;Composites Likely to Play Important Roles</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(285 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#45"><LI>COMPOSITES FOR SERVICE AT HIGH TEMPERATURES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(314 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#46"><LI>NEWS FROM OVERSEAS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(219 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#47"><LI>NDT IN THE NEWS . . .</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(336 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#48"><LI>NOTEWORTHY . . .</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(526 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#49"><LI>COMING EVENTS . . .</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(474 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

"Composites represent what  may really be the last opportunity for the USA

"Composites represent what  may really be the last opportunity for the USA to
achieve a world-wide dominance once again in a manufacturing area."
-- Brandt Goldsworthy (Plastics Hall-of-Famer and winner of the
SPE Hyatt Award and the SME Composites Manufacturing Award)
This is why we want to encourage innovation and judicious risk-taking. . . .


     We applaud the NIST Advanced Technology Program (see Page Three) for
that reason.  Take for example the program awarded to the team led by DuPont
to develop composites manufacturing for large structures for civil
infrastructure applications.  This effort will be largely directed to
construction and retrofit of bridge structures -- an area of great need.
The approach will be to use an embryonic technology involving resin
infusion, with the prospect of reducing costs by at least 30% while
producing high-quality structures.  Further, according to J. Michael Bowman,
DuPont V.P., the plan is to reduce time to market by at least 50%.  This
will be accomplished by concurrently developing and validating the
processing technology and rapidly deploying it to large commercial
structures.
     Another good example of innovation and willingness to take risk is the
recent award of a $750,000 contract to Textron Specialty Materials by the
Dept. of Energy.  TSM will develop and fabricate "in a cost-effective
manner," high-strength hot-gas filters with "greatly enhanced durability."
The approach is to modify TSM's continuous fiber-reinforced ceramic
composite (nitride-bonded SiC).  The goal:  the next generation of hot-gas
filters for use in combustors and power-generation systems.
     NIST and Dept. of Energy, as well as the contractors involved, deserve
our praise. (As one reader observed, we might contrast these efforts with
the limited commitment to composites made by ARPA in its TRP program;  see
Vol. 10, No. 4, Page Two.)
                                        -- George Epstein, Editor




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

NACFAM OBSERVATIONS ABOUT TRP . . .

     The National Coalition for Advanced Manufacturing (NACFAM), a
non-profit, non-partisan association of companies, technology centers, trade
associations, and technical education associations, seeks to raise the U.S.
industrial base to world-class levels of productivity, quality, and
competitiveness.  As such, it was a strong supporter of the legislation that
created the Technology Reinvestment  Project  (TRP).
     In its analysis of the TRP program to date, NACFAM addressed the
successes and failures.  "The awards have gone to a series of worthy
projects. . . .  However, experience in the first year of the "RP has also
pointed to some problem areas that need to be worked out."  These include
the need to revise the costly proposal writing process;  acceleration of the
contracting process;  and broader participation by small business. -- We
agree, and hope that ARPA  takes these observations seriously, recognizing
that this constructive criticism is meant to make the TRP a more valuable
program for the U.S.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

RUSSIA:  QUITE ADVANCED IN COMPOSITES TECHNOLOGY

     In connection with McDonnell Douglas Aerospace's agreement with the
Russian Central Research Institute, Ken Drake of The Aerospace Corp. had the
opportunity to view some composite structures developed in Russia, including
a 4-ft. diam. interstage adapter.  It "had a very crisp lattice structure
and showed a high degree of advancement in manufacturing technology," he
told us; and he cited potential weight and cost savings of 25-50%.  Drake
noted that the Russians typically do extensive development before starting
production;  and they require robust designs and processes.  Once the item
is released to production, it is built to drawing or it gets scrapped. --
This policy avoids a lot of the paperwork and concomitant costs related to
non-conforming hardware, that is typical in U.S. defense and aerospace
programs. -- Editor






<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

NIST SELECTS 15 ATP AWARDS FOR COMPOSITES MANUFACTURING

The National Institute of Standards and Technology of the U.S. Dept. of
Commerce has announced the selection of 15 awards from the 53 proposals
submitted for its Manufacturing Composite Structures program.   The
announcement was made on November 18, 1994, by Commerce Secretary Ronald H.
Brown.  Objective is to support R&D on cost-effective design and
manufacturing technologies to encourage the commercial use of affordable,
high-performance composite materials for large structures such as bridges
and off-shore oil platforms, and mass-produced products such as automobile
structural components.  The total investment will amount to $109 million, of
which NIST will fund $52.5 million.  Participants are required to
cost-share. Cooperative research agreements are being prepared with the
following organizations:

     AlliedSignal (Morristown, NJ) -- Low-Cost Automotive Manufacturing with
Injection-Molding PET Composites (development of a highly controllable and
cost-effective process to replace steel automotive components);  Budget:
$4.408 million.
     Amoco Production Co. (Houston, TX);  a joint venture of Amoco
Performance Products,  Brown & Root USA,  Brunswick Composites,  Conoco,
Hercules,  Hydril, Shell Development,  Stress Engineering Services,  and
Univ. of Houston -- Composite Production Risers (reduce weight and cost;
for offshore oil operations);  $7.168 million.
     Automotive Composites Consortium -- Chrysler, Ford, and GM (Dearborn,
MI) --Development of High-Volume Manufacturing Technology for Automotive
Composite Structures (based on structural reaction injection molding, SRIM;
for large structural parts of pickup trucks);  $6.68 million.
     Composite Retrofit Corp., subsidiary of XXsys Technologies (San Diego,
CA) -- Low-Cost Manufacturing and Design/Sensor Technologies for Seismic
Upgrade of Bridge Columns;  $2.744 million.
     Dow-United Technologies Composite Products (Wallingford, CT) --
Manufacturing Composite Flywheel Structures (for use in electric vehicles);
$1.038 million.
     DuPont,  Brunswick Technologies,  Hardcore Composites,  Dow Chemical,
and The Johns Hopkins Univ. -- High-Performance Composites for Large
Structures (for civil infrastructure applications);  $13.465 million.
     DuPont Fibers and Cambridge Industries (Lapeer, MI)-- Thermoplastic
Composites for Structural Applications (for applications in the automotive
industry); $19.509 million.
     Ebert Composites (San Diego, CA) -- Synchronous In-Line CNC Machining
of Pultruded Lineals (to develop composite-based "snap-and-build" systems
for rapid construction of large segmented structures such as power
transmission towers); $1.335 million.
     GenCorp (Akron, OH) -- Structural Composites Manufacturing Process (for
automotive applications);  $8.455 million.
     Morrison Molded Fiber Glass (Bristol, VA) -- Innovative Manufacturing
to Produce Large phenolic Composite Shapes (for applications in the
infrastructure);  $3.153 million.
     New Venture Gear (Troy, MI), Hercules Aerospace (Wilmington, DE), and
Quantum Consultants (E. Lansing, MI) -- Polymer Matrix Composite Power
Transmission Devices (for use in automobiles);  $6.186 million.
     Spoolable Composite Tubing Venture (Amoco,  Dowell Schlumberer,  Elf
Atochem No. America,  Hydril,  Mobil Exploration & Producing Service,
Phillips Petroleum,  Shell Chemical,  Shell Development,  Dow Chemical,  and
The Univ. of Houston);  to develop low-cost, long, continuous lengths of
composite tubes for deepwater oil operations;  $5.015 million.
     The Budd Co. (Troy, MI) -- Develop Manufacturing Methodologies for
Vehicle Composite Frames (to increase fuel efficiency);  $3.312 million.
     U.S. Electricar (Santa Rosa, CA),  Advance USA (E. Haddam, CT)  and
CIBA Composites (Anaheim, CA) -- Low-Cost Advanced Composite Process for
Light Transit Vehicle Mfg.  (for large automotive components;  avoid
painting; recyclable);  $21.785 million.
     Westinghouse Electric/Marine Div.,  ABB Vetco Gray,  Hercules,
Offshore Technology Research Ctr.,  Reading & Bates Development, and
Texaco/Deepstar Project -- Manufacturing Composite Structures for the
Offshore Oil Industry; $4.814 million.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. is studying filament-wound composite

%     Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. is studying filament-wound composite
spherical pressure vessels and structures using thermoplastic matrices.
According to Dr. Jerry Zakrzewski  (0/73-14, B150, P.O. Box 3504,
Sunnyvale, CA  94089;  phone: 408/742-4703), materials being investigated
are AS-4 carbon fiber/PPS for pressure vessels,  and fiberglass/PPS for
structures.  Also, investigations are underway of low-moisture-absorption
systems for  dimensionally stable space applications.  3M's PR500-2 (a
fluorene-epoxy system) looks promising for selected applications, he
reported;  also of interest are controlled-flow modified cyanate esters.
Toray's M60J carbon fiber provides the highest compressive strength,
especially attractive to space systems designers.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     McDonnell Douglas Aerospace (Huntington Beach, CA) has signed an

%     McDonnell Douglas Aerospace (Huntington Beach, CA) has signed an
agreement with Russia's Central Research Institute for Special Building in
Khotttkovo, near Moscow, involving composite structures and various
composite materials and fabrication processes.  The agreement is part of a
program to build relationships with Russian organizations, according to Dr.
Leslie J. Cohen, Director, Program Development, Russia (Mail Code 11-3, 5301
Bolsa Ave., Huntington Beach, CA  92647;  phone:  714/896-3311).
     McDonnell Douglas also is developing composite payload fairings (PLF)
for its Delta launch vehicle and a new program, STARS II, for Sandia
National Labs.  The previous  PLF for STARS I is too short and too heavy for
STARS II.
     The company is making a major investment for the future in composites
processing.  New facilities include a 40-ft. autoclave capable of operating
at 800 degrees F, automated stitch preform (for RTM), ply cutting, and
waterjet cutting equipment, and automated ultrasonic inspection.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     Akzo Nobel NV (headquartered in Arnhem, The Netherlands) is investing

%     Akzo Nobel NV (headquartered in Arnhem, The Netherlands) is investing
in a major expansion of its Fortafil carbon fiber business located in
Rockwood, TN (Fortafil Fibers, Inc., P.O. Box 357, Rockwood, TN  37854;
phone: 615/354-4120).  According to Roger Prescott, General Manager for
Fortafil Fibers, fiber production will triple, bringing Fortafil's capacity
to almost 5 million lbs./year -- "the highest capacity and lowest cost
carbon fiber production unit in the world!"




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     Ford Motor Co. (Dearborn, MI) has signed a two-year cooperative

%     Ford Motor Co. (Dearborn, MI) has signed a two-year cooperative
agreement with NASA-Langley Research Center  to transfer NASA-developed
technology to the design/engineering of Ford vehicles.  Composites materials
and manufacturing processes are included.  According to Dr. Woodrow Whitlow,
director of the NASA Critical Technologies Div., this effort should "enhance
the competitive advantage  of a major U.S. industry."  This agreement is the
first broad technology transfer process between NASA and any automotive
manufacturer.  After the two-year period, Ford may continue development if
appropriate.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     As Hexcel Corp. (5794 W. Las Positas Blvd., Pleasanton, CA  94588;

%     As Hexcel Corp. (5794 W. Las Positas Blvd., Pleasanton, CA  94588;
phone: 510/847-9500) prepares to emerge from Chapter 11 bankruptcy (see last
issue), business continues.  Of special interest to our industry, a search
is underway for a permanent CEO to replace John J. Lee who was asked to
serve in that capacity since January 1994 during the reorganization.  (Lee
will likely remain as a director of the company and serve as a consultant
for strategic planning.) For the third quarter ending Oct. 2, 1994, Hexcel
incurred an operating loss of $7.3 million (compared with a loss of $44.6
million for the same quarter in 1993).  This loss includes an $8 million
provision for costs associated with its joint venture with Dainippon Ink &
Chemicals,  in which Hexcel owns a 50% interest, for the production and sale
of advanced composites, nonmetallic honeycomb, and decorative laminates for
the Japanese market.  DIC-Hexcel is to be either restructured or liquidated.
With the sale of its Chandler, AZ plant to Northrop Grumman in November (see
last issue), Hexcel will now concentrate the majority of its U.S. honeycomb
manufacturing at the Casa Grande, AZ, plant.

     Texas Almet Inc. (Arlington, TX;  phone:  817/649-7056) will become a
specialized distributor of Hexcel's honeycomb materials throughout  North
America.   Almet  will  focus on small  and expedited orders without minimun
quantity requirements.  Hexcel will directly support customers for large
volume orders.  (Note:  Texas Almet produces machined honeycomb parts for
overhaul and repair of aircraft.)   Also, Hexcel is exploring the sale of
its resins business, which will help provide operating cash .




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%      Sale of Hercules' aerospace operations -- including its Composite

%      Sale of Hercules' aerospace operations -- including its Composite
Structures operations -- to Alliant Techsystems (Hopkins, MN) is expected to
close during the first quarter of 1995.  Hercules will retain its composites
materials business.  (See last issue for details.)  Hercules will transfer
eight major U.S. facilities, employing 5700 people.  These units had
combined revenues of $660 million in 1993. Operating profit was $105
million.  Alliant Techsystems supplies defense and marine systems to the
U.S. government and its allies.  For the fiscal year ended March 31, 1994,
Alliant had sales of $775 million and operating profit of $39 million;  it
employs 4500 people.  The transaction is valued at $412 million,
representing a premium of $66 million to book value of the Hercules' assets
acquired.  Hercules will receive $300 million in cash and will own
approximately 30% of Alliant Techsystems' outstanding common stock.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     Weatherability of polyurethane construction adhesives and sealants

%     Weatherability of polyurethane construction adhesives and sealants are
being studied by Dow Chemical Co. (Midland, MI  48674;  phone:
517/636-6361). According to Kim McLean, No. American Product Manager,
"domestic demand continues to be strong due to increased business in the
segments involving adhesives, sealants, and automotive applications. . . .
Automotive builds and housing starts are key factors driving this growth."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     The FRP Supply Division of Ashland Chemical Co. (P.O. Box 2219,

%     The FRP Supply Division of Ashland Chemical Co. (P.O. Box 2219,
Columbus, OH 43216;  phone:  614/790-4272) has become the exclusive U.S.
distributor of HALAR non-woven fluoropolymer surface veil (manufactured by
Ausimont, USA).  The veil provides a forming and support layer that is more
chemically resistant than resin-rich surfaces for FRP structures, extending
operating life.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     AlliedSignal (Morristown, NJ) has received a NIST ATP award as part

%     AlliedSignal (Morristown, NJ) has received a NIST ATP award as part of
the general competition, for "Low-Cost Elastomeric Composites with
Application to Vehicle Tires."  Estimated project budget is $4.152 million,
including $2 million from NIST. (See also Page Three.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     Enjoying growing market acceptance for its prepregs, film adhesives,

%     Enjoying growing market acceptance for its prepregs, film adhesives,
and syntactic foams, Bryte Technologies, Inc. is moving to a new 17,000 sq.
ft. "world-class manufacturing/R&D facility" at 2025 OUToole Ave., San Jose,
CA 95131;  phone:  408-/434-9809.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     ViaTech Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of Simula Inc. (401 W.

%     ViaTech Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of Simula Inc. (401 W.
Baseline, Tempe, AZ  85283;  phone:  602/752-8918) has signed a contract
with Conejo Bicycles (Phoenix, AZ) to design and manufacture advanced
composite frames for the new "Stealth" full-suspension, all-terrain bike
(ATB).  ViaTech will produce ultra-lightweight, one-piece monmocoque carbon
fiber/epoxy frames using its proprietary High Pressure-Hollow Process
manufacturing technology.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     Plastics Design Library (PDL, PO Box 443, Morris, NY  13808;  phone:

%     Plastics Design Library (PDL, PO Box 443, Morris, NY  13808;  phone:
607/337-5000) and RAPRA Technology Ltd. (Shawbury, Shrewsbury, Shropshire,
SY4 4NR, England;  phone:  0939-250383) have agreed to co-distribute their
books and software products.  These include data on chemical resistance,
creep, weathering, and temperature effects.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     With the recent acquisition of Fairchild Space & Defense Corp. by

%     With the recent acquisition of Fairchild Space & Defense Corp. by
Orbital Sciences Corp., we can look for increased applications of composites
in small satellites.  OSC (21700 Atlantic Blvd., Dulles, VA  20166;  phone:
703/406-5000) has distinguished itself as the developer  of fast-response,
cost-effective launch vehicles for small payloads, making wide use of
composites (see Vol. 9, No. 2, Page 12).  According to CEO D. W. Thompson of
OSC, the incorporation of Fairchild's spacecraft capabilities will faciltate
OSC's goal "to achieve the same level of success in small satellites."  With
the acquisition of Fairchild, OSC's staff will nearly double to about 2000
people.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     While the new Republican Congress will not be voting any large

%     While the new Republican Congress will not be voting any large funding
increases, there will be no major spending cuts in the DoD programs for
FY'95. Even before the election in November, the joint Senate-House
appropriations conference committee had passed a bill that retains all major
DoD programs. Based on the original budget, there will be some spending cuts
which will be spread across the programs.  The final appropriations were
$820 million below the Clinton Administration's request but $3.5 billion
higher than the FY'94 spending level..  The F-22 advanced tactical fighter
will receive $2.35 billion; the Navy's F/A -18E/F fighter gets $1.34
billion;  the V-22 tilt-rotor aircraft receives $467 million.  The bill
appropriated $607 million for the Milstar satellite program that had been in
danger of cancellation.  The Army's Comanche scout/attack helicopter will
receive $495 million.  All of these make extensive use of composites and
adhesive-bonded structures.  In addition, the bill appropriates $550 million
for the DoD Technology Reinvestment Program (TRP;  see Vol. 10, Nos. 3 and
4). There had been some hope of a TRP budget of $625 million.  Also,
Congress has called on DoD to place special emphasis on the TRP program.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     The DoD has revised its policy regarding ISO 9000.  The ISO standards

%     The DoD has revised its policy regarding ISO 9000.  The ISO standards
now may be used in lieu of MIL-Q-9858A (quality requirements) and
MIL-I-45208A (inspection) on all defense procurements.  A new document,
MIL-HDK-9000 has been issued as a guideline.  Also, NASA plans to use an
augmented ISO 9000 for its programs.  Over 90 countries have adopted the ISO
standards.  About 50,000 companies, worldwide, have been registered for ISO
9000.  DoD contractors will benefit because this provides more opportunity
to expand their markets overseas.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     If the U.S. government allows the merger of Lockheed and Martin

%     If the U.S. government allows the merger of Lockheed and Martin
Marietta, the U.S. will be left with  only two major U.S.-made
satellite-launch vehicle manufacturers, and the new Lockheed-Martin Corp.
would dominate the industry. Competitors, including McDonnell Douglas who
manufactures the Delta launch vehicle (uses strap-on solid-rocket motors
made of filament-wound composites), have raised antitrust arguments against
elements of the proposed merger.  With combined DoD contracts of over $18
billion in 1993, Lockheed-Martin would far outstrip its nearest competitors:
McDonnell Douglas -- $6.9 billion, Northrop-Grumman -- $4.7 billion, and
GM/Hughes -- $4.1 billion.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     The Air Force Materials Directorate has announced that the 1995

%     The Air Force Materials Directorate has announced that the 1995
Advanced Composites Review will be held September, 1995 -- rather than
February as was customary.  This reflects the recent merger of the
Thermoplastic Matrix Composites review and the Advanced Composite Structures
Advanced Development Program Office review.  Objective is to facilitate the
exchange of technical developments in advanced composite materials
technologies. Contact:  Tia Benson Tolle, WL/MLBC, Bldg. 654, WPAFB, OH
45433;  phone: 513/255-9065.
        Also, in October, Tolle addressed the Air Force-Contractor Team  for
the AF Space & Missile Systems'  Manufacturing Problem Prevention Program,
to discuss the Air Force's plans for expanding its efforts in developing
advanced composites for space systems applications.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Lab. has been awarded a

%     The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Lab. has been awarded a
one-year, $199,500 contract by the Naval Surface Warfare Center for "Design
Equations for FRP Ship Hulls," as part of the NSWC project on Organic
Composites Ship Structures.  Purpose is to develop empirical design
equations to predict failure of composite ship hull structures, including
solid laminates, sandwich panels, and rib-stiffened panels.  Principal
investigator is Dr. Jack C. Roberts (JHU/APL, Johns Hopkins Rd., Laurel, MD
20733;  phone:  410/792-6268).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     The Israeli Arrow anti-tactical ballistic missile, which makes

%     The Israeli Arrow anti-tactical ballistic missile, which makes
extensive use of composites, has successfully completed a series of tests
over the Mediterranean near Israel.  A joint U.S.-Israel program, the Arrow
is a high-altitude weapon for theater missile defense.  The U.S. Ballistic
Missile Defense Organization and the Israeli government are funding the
program;  prime contractor is Israel Aircraft Industries (Lod, Israel).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

CALTRANS:  COMPOSITES FOR BRIDGE REHAB/RETROFIT

     On November 4, 1994, the California Department of Transportation
(Caltrans) held a special kick-off meeting to inform industry of its new
program entitled "Caltrans Program for the Evaluation of Fiber-Reinforced
Plastics for Seismic Retrofit and Rehabilitation of Structures."  According
to Mohsen Sultan, Chief of the New Technology Management Branch at Caltrans,
Division of Structures (P.O. Box 942874, Sacramento, CA  94274;  phone:
916/227-8247), the primary focus will be seismic retrofit  and methods for
strengthening bridge structures. The program is planned as a cooperative
partnering effort between Caltrans and the industry, with likely
participation from other government agencies.
     Among the approximately 100 people in attendance were representatives
of the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), the Univ. of Calif. at San
Diego (UCSD is a key participant in the ARPA and FHWA bridge programs),
aerospace companies, SPI/CI, SACMA, as well as both U.S. and foreign
companies (Japan and Canada). Sultan made it clear that foreign
participation will be welcomed as long as it contributes to the success of
the program.
     Jim Roberts, Director of the Caltrans Engineering Service Center, noted
that Caltrans has had several limited studies underway on seismic
retrofitting, which suggest the potential of composite wrapping around
concrete columns.  This new program is intended to develop a generic
specification  reflecting the need to replicate the design and process in
the field and performed under field conditions;  it will establish design
guidelines and ensure repeatability and consistency.  The approach is to
apply composite material around concrete bridge columns to provide
restraint, thereby confining the column so it won't explode under load.
Composite wrapping will be competing with the current approach which uses
heavy steel jacketing.  (Steel jackets are now being installed as part of
the seismic strengthening program in California.  However, installation is
difficult and costly.  Sections are welded together, resulting in joints
that are difficult to inspect and are subject to corrosion.)
     There are a number of issues that must be addressed in establishing the
specification for seismic retrofit/rehabilitation:  materials selection,
processing, and design;  standardized testing methods to verify performance;
quality control/assurance;  and system performance criteria -- to ensure
long-term durability and performance under all environmental highway
conditions. The program  also will develop data as well as design guidelines
that can be applied on a nation-wide basis.  Caltrans expects the program to
serve as a "springboard" for other applications of composites in highway
construction.
      According to Ray  Zelinski, Chief, Seismic Technology, Bay Bridge
Design Group, there are about 4500 state and local bridges that require
retrofit;  it is hoped to complete the task in about five years.  He sees
this program as providing means for bridge repair.  Every earthquake leaves
some bridge structures in need of "quick repair," he said.  Other states
also have need for bridge strengthening.  In addition to bridge columns,
there is need for strengthening of superstructures, for which composites
might be applied.
     Caltrans plans to have the USAF Advanced Composites Program Office at
McClellan Air Force Base, and The Aerospace Corp. (El Segundo, CA) as key
members of the government team.  In addition, Caltrans is establishing
academic and engineering consultants advisory panels.
     %   Industry presentations were made by a number of organizations.  Dr.
Gil Hegemier of UCSD described his team's related efforts and offered to
make the information available for the Caltrans program.  Japanese companies
have made a sizable investment and are already applying composites in
building and highway construction, although to date only a little work has
been done in retrofit of bridge columns.  Representatives of several foreign
companies discussed their capabilities and experience -- including Bayex of
Canada;  and Mitsubishi Chemical, Obayashi Corp., and Sumitomo Corp. of
Japan.
     Ed Fyfe,  president of Hexcel-Fyfe, reviewed his company's efforts  in
wrapping of bridge columns.   He noted that wrapped columns had been tested
at the Univ. of Calif., San Diego laboratory, demonstrating their
effectiveness in improving the ductility of the concrete.  A number of
bridge columns, he said, are already in operation in California.  Several
materials manufacturers and prepreggers briefly described their companies'
products that might be useful in these applications.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

NHTSA ACTION WILL IMPACT USE OF CARBON/EPOXY  NGV TANKS

     The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) of the Dept.
of Transportation (DOT) is planning to increase the burst safety factor for
carbon fiber-reinforced composite tanks.  These tanks are being used for
storage of compressed natural gas for natural gas vehicles (NGV).
     In March, NHTSA plans to issue Standard 304, Compressed Natural Gas
Containers, which will require a burst safety factor of 3.33;  whereas the
currently accepted ANSI/AGA NGV2 standard and ISO/TC 58 SC 3/WG 17 drafted
in 1993 specify a value of 2.25.  This increase would result in substantial
weight and cost increase -- possibly forcing carbon fiber composite tanks
out of the market for NGVs in the U.S., according to Peter Plate, No.
American Sales & Marketing Manager, EDO Canada Ltd. (1940 Centre Ave., N.E.,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2E 0A7;  phone:  800/361-8265), one of the major
manufacturers of such tanks.  He stated that  weight savings through the
successful certification of these tanks has "opened new markets for NGVs,
particularly buses and lightweight passenger cars, which had previously been
hampered by the excessive weight of metal and fiberglass tanks."  (Note:
The EDO tanks use a seamless thermoplastic liner, over which the carbon
fiber/epoxy composite is filament-wound.)
     The burst factor of 2.25 was developed by the NGV industry working with
the American Gas Association, and approved by the American Standards
Institute. Tests are required to verify ability to withstand severe impact,
damage (cuts), puncture by gunfire, extreme temperatures, exposure to
corrosive gas contaminants, exposure to fire, and repeated pressure fills.
Acceptance of the 2.25 burst factor is supported by a number of
organizations, including the Federal Transit Administration, the Dept. of
Energy, the Calif. Highway Patrol, the Texas Railroad Commission, and the
National Fire Protection Association.
     Apparently the NHTSA is anxious to ensure that only safe vehicles will
be put on U.S. roads, and lacks confidence in the reliability of the carbon
fiber composite tanks.  Note:  Carbon fiber composite tanks are not
vulnerable to sulfuric acid which had caused the rupture of two
fiberglass/epoxy composite tanks. (See Vol. 11, No.1, Pages Eleven and
Twelve.)  Meanwhile, foreign manufacturers likely would not be impacted by
the higher safety factor.  Unless amended or postponed because of industry
protests, the new standard is scheduled to take effect on March 27, 1995.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

SURFACE TRANSPORTATION MATERIALS ROADMAP DEVELOPED

     In response to Dr. Mary Good, Undersecretary for Technology, U.S. Dept.
of Commerce, an ad hoc industry committee has developed a technology
insertion plan for the application of advanced materials (especially
composites) in surface transportation.  Objective is low-emission, lighter,
and more fuel-efficient vehicles at dramatically reduced cost.   The
committee consists of 14 private sector organizations, chaired by Jerry
Fields, Vice President of Atlantic Research Corp.  (Other members:  Alcoa
Composites, American Flywheel Systems, Amoco Performance Products, Detroit
Diesel, Dow Chemical, Eno Transportation Foundation, General Electric, GHL,
Hardcore Composites, Lanxide, Materials Sciences Corp., Northrop, and TMA
Int'l.).
     The committee's efforts are intended to complement and support related
Federal initiatives, especially the Advanced Technology Transit Bus (ATTB --
see Vol. 9, No. 4, Page Seven), the Partnership for a New Generation of
Vehicles (PNGV), the DoE Transportation Sector Materials Technology Program,
the NIST  Advanced Technology Program (ATP) on Manufacturing Composite
Structures, and the ARPA Electric and Hybrid Vehicle Technology (EV/HEV)
program.

%   A Well-Conceived Approach
     The approach recommended by the industry committee calls for an orderly
introduction of advanced composites into successively larger-scale surface
transportation applications.  Purpose is to demonstrate feasibility in a
variety of highly visible applications so as to instill confidence for both
the vehicle manufacturers and end-users, and promote a robust advanced
materials manufacturing infrastructure that will grow as markets expand
and/or emerge. Key is the selection of composite materials application
targets:  near-term (1-3 years) -- light-duty electric vehicles, bus frames
and bodies, rail car components, locomotive cab structures, truck trailer
beds, automotive seat frames, and marine fenders;  mid-term (3-6 years) --
brakes and suspension components, CNG fuel tanks, automotive drive train
components, flywheel energy storage systems, passenger rail cars, trailer
frames, glazing, a fifth wheel, and an electric vehicle chassis;  and,
long-term (6-9 years) -- automotive engine components, design methodology
and standards, Class-A finish body components, monocoque automotive
structures.
     A 45-page preliminary report has been issued.  Contact:  Tom Goldberg,
GHL Inc., 1090 Vermont Ave., N.W., Suite 800, Washington, DC  20005;  phone:
202/408-6892.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

NATURAL GAS VEHICLES (NGVS) ARE OFF AND RUNNING . . .

     Having resolved the concerns resulting from the ruptures of two
composite NGV tanks (see Vol. 11, No. 1, Pages Eleven and Twelve;  and Vol.
10, No. 4, Pages Four-Six), the automotive industry is moving ahead with
plans to introduce more NGVs into the market. In addition to General Motors
with 2500 NGV pickup trucks on the roads, Ford and Chrysler are offering
fully warranted NGV trucks and vans;  and, for the 1996 model year, Ford
will offer a Crown Victoria NGV car. Also, NGV buses are already in
operation in many cities in the U.S., with composite tanks generally mounted
on the vehicle roofs to avoid loss of passenger space.
     Southern Calif. Gas and San Diego Gas & Electric now have 70 NGV
refueling facilities in So. California; hundreds more will be available in
the next five years.  Ultimately, about 10% of all service stations will be
able to deliver compressed natural gas.  Travelers at Los Angeles Airport
(LAX) will soon be able to ride (in comfort) on NGV Super Shuttle vans.  The
company is in the process of converting its entire L.A.-area fleet of 145
vans to natural gas. Mesa Corp., the Texas natural gas producer owned by
Boone Pickens, is putting up NGV refueling stations at both LAX and John
Wayne Airport in Orange County, Calif., to serve both the Super Shuttle
fleet and the public.
     Meanwhile, the Applied Physics Lab. at Johns Hopkins Univ. has designed
an advanced NGV car under an $800,000 contract from the Dept. of Energy, the
Gas Research Institute, and several gas companies.  The new design will
permit the car to travel 300 miles without refueling -- whereas the current
vehicles are limited to about 150 miles.
     The Natural Gas Vehicle Coalition estimates that 5 million NGVs --
trucks, vans, buses, and cars -- will be on the U.S. highways by the year
2000!

%   Advantages Are Significant;  Few Disadvantages
     NGVs have important advantages over conventional gasoline-powered
vehicles: Key is much lower pollution, satisfying most state vehicle
emissions requirements.  Natural gas is readily available in the U.S.  NGVs
lend themselves to standard automotive industry assembly-line production.
Fuel cost per mile is about one-third less than gasoline.
     A major challenge is developing the infrastructure to handle the
refueling and servicing of NGVs.  NGVs are somewhat heavier in order to
accommodate the storage of compressed natural gas.  To the extent that tanks
are stowed in the trunks, less trunk space is available.  Current NGV costs
are as much as $4500 more than comparable gasoline-powered vehicles.
Improvements in storage space and lower costs are expected as the industry
becomes more mature.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     Manufacturing Composite Structures is a new focus areas for the

%     Manufacturing Composite Structures is a new focus areas for the
Advanced Technology Program (ATP) of the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) of the U.S. Dept. of Commerce.  The Government will make a
five-year investment of $160 million.  It is expected that the cost-sharing
program will lead to new/improved world-class products and manufacturing
processes.  Initial awards were announced in late November;  see Page Three.
       Two additional competitions are planned.  Proposals for the next
competition likely will be due in July 1995.  Contact:  Advanced Technology
Program, NIST, Rte. 270 & Quince Orchard Rd., Gaithersburg, MD  20899;
phone: 800/ATP-FUND.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     ARPA, the Advanced Research Programs Agency of DoD, is soliciting

%     ARPA, the Advanced Research Programs Agency of DoD, is soliciting
proposals under its Advanced Materials Partnerships program.  Approximately
$15 million has been allocated.  This program is separate from the
Technology Reinvestment Project (TRP) program.
       As part of its TRP program, ARPA has announced the Technology
Development Focus Areas for which proposals will be invited.  These include
"Affordable Polymer Matrix Composites for Airframe Structures" and "Ceramic
Material Applications:  High-Performance Ceramics and CFCCs."  Solicitations
are expected to be announced in February;  and proposals will be due March
17, with selections in May 1995. Contact:  TRP, ARPA, 3701 N. Fairfax Drive,
Arlington, VA  22203;  phone: 800/DUAL-USE.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     The Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Program provides small

%     The Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Program provides small
businesses with opportunities to compete for Federal R&D awards.  SBIR is
intended to stimulate commercialization of technology to the benefit of both
private and public sectors of the U.S.   Eleven agencies of the federal
government participate in making awards.
       Closing dates for upcoming SBIR solicitations of special interest:
Jan. 11 -- Dept. of Commerce;  Jan. 13 -- Dept. of Defense;  March 1 --
Dept. of Energy;  May 2 -- Dept. of Transportation;  June 6 -- NASA;  and
June 12 -- National Science Foundation.
      Topics of interest to DoD include:  Durability of fiber-reinforced
ceramic-matrix composites;  Engine composite blade and vane repair;
Automated composite machining for curved structures;  Reinforcing fiber and
interfacial coating process;  Advanced structural concepts;  Aging systems
NDE; High-temperature structural materials for advanced Air Force systems;
Structural integrity analysis of failed composite components;  Composite
manufacturing process control;  Composite shelter manufacturing;  and
Low-cost composite structures.
     Contact:  Small Business Administration, MC 6470, 409 Third St., NW,
Washington, DC  20416;   phone:  SBIR Hotline at 407/791-0720.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

BOOK REVIEW . . .  CARBON FIBER COMPOSITES

     by Deborah D. L. Chung (Director of the Composite Materials Research
Laboratory at the State Univ. of New York at Buffalo);  published by
Butterworth-Heinemann (313 Washington St., Newton, MA  02158;  phone:
617/928-2500).  Publ. 1994. 225 pages.  Price:  $89.95.
     This book is a significant contribution to our industry, covering all
types of carbon fiber-reinforced composites.  Major emphasis is on materials
technology; although there are a few notable omissions -- e.g., cyanate
ester resins and rayon-based carbon fiber used in high-temperature
applications.  More discussion would be desirable on composites processing,
joining, repair, and inspection. Applications are discussed to a limited
extent.
     Nevertheless, this book is a valuable resource, providing a wealth of
information and data on various types of carbon fibers;  surface treatments
and fiber-matrix bonding;  and properties of polymer-matrix, metal-matrix,
carbon-matrix (carbon-carbon), ceramic-matrix, and hybrid composites.  Each
chapter contains numerous literature references that makes the book even
more valuable.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE SAMPE TECHNICAL CONFERENCE
(October 18-20, 1994;  Atlanta, GA)

%    Composites:  Growing in Aircraft;  Future is Attractive -- But . . .
       At a special plenary session on "Advanced Materials Applications,"
Dick Hadcock, vice president of RNH Associates (6 Sue Circle, Huntington, NY
11743; phone:  516/271-7037) reviewed the evolution of composites in
aircraft structures.  Starting in 1940 with glass fiber-reinforced polyester
radomes and drop tanks, aircraft structural applications have grown steadily
in both variety and quantity.
       Glass/phenolic firewalls were introduced in 1944.  It was in 1952
when glass/epoxy became available and has since been used extensively in
radomes, rotor blades, floors, doors, control surfaces, empennages, wings
and fuselages. Glass/polyimide radomes, firewalls, and high-temperature
ducts were introduced in 1960.  By 1969, aircraft were using boron/epoxy
composites in stabilizers, rudders, reinforcements and patches for repair of
other structures. That same year, carbon fiber/epoxy composites were
introduced in stabilizers, wings, fuselages, air brakes, control surfaces,
spoilers, doors, floors, inlet ducts, cowlings, and thrust reversers.
Kevlar/epoxy was introduced in 1971 in radomes, fairings, and
leading/trailing edges.  Carbon fiber/polyimide engine inlet ducts and flaps
were produced in 1974.  Carbon fiber/BMI composites in wing flaps, strakes,
wing/fuselage skins, stabilizers, engine casings, and thrust reversers were
introduced in 1978.  Carbon fiber-reinforced thermoplastics were first
introduced in stabilizers and wing ribs in 1988.
       Concomitantly, composite structural weight in U.S. aircraft has
experienced a dramatic rate of growth.  In 1960, use of composites on the
A-6A was just 200 lbs.  By 1970, the F-14A was introduced with 521 lbs. of
composites.  The F/A-18A had 1320 lbs. in 1978;  the AV-8B used 1615 lbs. in
1981.  Currently the F/A-18E/F is using 2820 lbs.  And the F-22A will soon
be in service with 5680 lbs. of composites.
       Foreign military aircraft have likewise taken advantage of composites
structures.  According to Hadcock, the French Dassault Mirage F1 used 150
lbs. of composites when it went into service in 1976, increasing to 1200
lbs. in the Mirage 2000 in 1978;  and then 3200 lbs.in the Rafale C/M in
1991. Russia has also used composites in its aircraft;  the Mikoyan MiG-29
fighter, introduced in 1977, uses about 1000 lbs. of composites in the
empennage and control surfaces. The Swedish SAAB Gripen fighter, which first
flew in 1989, uses 1250 lbs. of composites for wings, canards, control
surfaces, and doors.
       Military  transports and bombers use large quantities of composites.
The Ukranian Antonov An-125 heavy transport (1984) uses 12,000 lbs. of
composites; and the McDonnell Douglas C-17A (1991) uses 15,000 lbs. for
control surfaces, fairings, doors, and nacelles.  Composites usage in
bombers has grown from 10,000 lbs. in the bomb bay doors, fairings,
longerons, and nacelles of the Rockwell B-1B (1984) to about 50,000 lbs. in
the wing skins, control surfaces, and doors of the Northrop B-2A (1989).
       The growth in airliner applications is also quite remarkable.  The
Boeing 757 was introduced in 1982 with 3800 lbs. of composites. The
McDonnell Douglas MD-11 (1990) uses 11,000 lbs. and the new B-777 is using
about 30,000 lbs. per vehicle!  Since 1983, Europe's Airbus usage of
composites has grown from 9900 lbs. on the A310 to 25,000 lbs. on the new
A330 and A340 (1991).
        In 1988, the French/Italian ATR-72 became the first fully certified
airliner with a CFRP wing.  (Note:  This is the aircraft that  recently was
involved in the American Eagle Flight 4184 crash in Indiana during a severe
rain storm, killing all 68 people on board.  Initially, there was some
speculation that the composite structure may have been at fault;  however,
icing is considered the most likely cause. An earlier version, the ATR-42
was known to have icing problems.)

%   The Future is Bright
       In terms of world-wide aircraft production, Hadcock expects that
military and civil aircraft will require over 6 million lbs. of composites
in 1995.  He predicts usage will approach 15 million lbs. by the year 2010.
Civil aircraft will account for 80-90%.
       Hadcock's data was part of a study conducted for the NASA Langley
Research Center, Advanced Composites Technology (ACT) Office, to chronicle
the lessons learned during the past 25 years while composite structural
components for aircraft were being developed, produced, and put into
operation.
       Conclusions:  Composites are accepted as alternatives for metals in
aircraft structures.  Advantages include weight savings and improvements in
corrosion and fatigue resistance.  Use of composites will expand, but
composite parts do cost more than aluminum;  special skills are required for
maintenance and repair;  and there is need for standardized materials and
processes specifications.

%   A Changing Environment
       Chairing the plenary session on "Advanced Materials Applications," Cecil
Schneider, Manager of the Advanced Structures & Materials Division of Lockheed
Aeronautical Systems (Marietta, GA), discussed some of the changes taking place
in the aircraft industry that are bound to have a profound effect on materials
technology, including composites and adhesives.
       "Affordability," he said, "is the key design driver for future DoD
systems."    For commercial aircraft, "life cycle and direct operating costs
are the key design drivers," he added.  This means reductions in fabrication
cost, development time, and operations and support costs, in addition to
lower materials costs.
       Challenges to materials technology include weight reduction,
increased fatigue life, and higher structural temperatures.
       Schneider called for a "paradigm shift in design philosophy."  In the
past, contractors treated almost everything as proprietary;  there was
little sharing of data.  The trend is for increasing collaboration with
government agencies and other companies in the industry, including teaming
up on important programs.  From this, he expects there will be important
spin-offs of the aerospace technology to commercial applications -- such as
buses, autos, Maglev rail transportation, shipping, and construction.

%   Barriers to Composites Applications
       Dr. Andy Pickard, Vice President of Engineering at Rolls-Royce (Atlanta,
GA),        addressed the barriers that composites must overcome in order to
realize new applications in commercial and military markets.  For composites to
gain acceptance in aircraft gas turbine engines, with which his company is
concerned, the customer needs to have confidence that the technology will
satisfy his requirements.  Key issues are predictable and consistent
performance, integrity and reliability (including cyclic life), maintainability
and customer support, repairability,  environmental friendliness, and low cost
of ownership.
       The cost  barrier includes material cost, processing cost (of
particular concern for metal-matrix composites), evaluation cost, and the
high cost associated with usage of "niche materials" that are produced in
low volume.  On the other hand, Pickard noted that system cost reductions
may be possible by reducing weight in many applications.  This would be a
special advantage for composites in competing with other structural
materials.

%   NIST Advanced Technology Program Will Grow
       Another special plenary session at the SAMPE Technical Conference
focused on technology transfer.  Speakers representing the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Sandia National Lab., the
Washington Technology Connection, NASA, and the Air Force Wright Labs.
described their respective organizations' efforts to transfer technology
from aerospace/defense to commercial applications.
       Dr. John P. Gudas, program manager for NIST's Advanced Materials
Advanced Technology Program (ATP), expects that NIST's budget will steadily
increase over the next few years:  $199.5 million for FY'94;  $431 million
for '95;  $543 million for '96;  and $744 million for '97.  NIST has
committed $150 million over the years 1995-1999 to invest in its ATP
designated "Manufacturing Composites Structures."
       Areas of interest include composites in offshore applications,
automotive and infrastructure.  To be placed on the NIST mailing list,
phone: 800/ATP-FUND.    The objective is to support industry efforts in
high-risk areas which can lead to U.S. economic growth, Gudas explained. All
ATP programs are cost-shared.  Funding is not provided directly to
universities, federal labs., or non-profit organizations.

%  Expert System for Adhesive Selection
       The American Joining Institute (AJI, 10628 Dutchtown Rd.,  Knoxville,
TN 37932;  phone:  615/675-2150) is computerizing adhesive bonding
technology.  In 1991, the firm was awarded a Phase I SBIR program from the
Naval Research Lab. which led to the development of an expert system for
selecting adhesives for 44 different adherends, "almost every type of
engineering material joining need," according to Robert B. Allen of AJI.
Twenty-six different adhesive families are included.  JOINADSELECT will
identify the primary and secondary adhesive materials to satisfy the user's
requirements.
     Co-authored by Allen and Hans H. Vanderveldt of the American Welding
Institute, the paper describes how the effort has now advanced into the next
phase with additional support from ARPA  to develop JOINEXCELL (Joining
Expert Manufacturing Cell).  This is a computer-aided software tool to
facilitate joint design and will consist of expert systems that interact
with the user and a series of databases to accomplish various tasks within
the joining sequence. Expert systems include the Joining Scheduler, Joint
Selection, Joint Designer, Adhesive Selection, and Curing Process Selection.
Efforts are underway to collect adhesive test data for incorporation into
the databank.

Environmental Regulations Can Have Serious Impact
       Environmental, health, and safety (EHS) regulations are having a
major impact on processes used in the aerospace industry.  Speaking at a
session on Adhesive Bonding/Surface Preparation/Composite Repairs, SAMPE
president Susan Ruth of The Aerospace Corp. (El Segundo, CA) explained that
"development of a substitute chemical or elimination of a process will not
be a trivial matter in many instances."  Part of the problem is deciding how
best to qualify a substitute material or process.
       She described an example of a program impact:  A subcontractor had
developed an assembly using an adhesive system that relied on methylene
dianiline (MDA), a hazardous air pollutant (HAP).  During development a new
health and safety regulation was issued which necessitated a change.  There
were two alternatives.  One approach would require compliance with the
regulation, for which the cost would be about $250,000.  The second
approach, which was deemed preferable, was to switch to an adhesive and
primer system that do not contain MDA.  Specifications were modified
accordingly to accommodate the new materials, and process validation was
initiated.  However, problems soon emerged "with the ability to reproducibly
generate the required mechanical properties," necessitating further process
development.  Not only was there a schedule delay of approximately 10
months, but further work also had to be done by both the adhesive
manufacturer and the company  "to make the material and the process
production-ready."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%   Grid-Lock( is a unique sandwich structure developed by Tolo Inc. (2401

%   Grid-Lock( is a unique sandwich structure developed by Tolo Inc. (2401
S. Pullman St., Santa Ana, CA  92705;  phone:  714/261-8656).  It uses
tongue-and-groove joints along with adhesive to attach machined or molded
cores to metal or composite skins.  The skin-to-core bonds in the interfaces
become shear joints, and thus are substantially stronger than conventional
filleting-type honeycomb core-to-skin bonds.  Claims:  greater damage
tolerance; improved dynamic response (harmonic suppression) and structural
stability; simplified quality assurance, ability to incorporate attach
points, flanges, edge close-outs and end fittings;  and greater design
flexibility.  Some recent and potential applications:  antenna mast
supports;  AV-8 bulkhead; telescope/mirror support structures;  and modular
assemblies.  The technology is covered under U.S. Patent No. 5,273,806.
     Note:   And we believe this type of sandwich structure could be ideal
for space applications to avoid the necessity for venting.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%   EX-1515 is a new prepreg system available from Bryte Technologies (new

%   EX-1515 is a new prepreg system available from Bryte Technologies (new
address:  2025 O"Toole Ave., San Jose, CA  95131;  phone:  408/434-9809)
using a toughened cyanate ester resin matrix that can be cured at 200
degrees-250 degrees F.  Claims: outstanding resistance to microcracking; low
moisture absorption/outgassing; and radiation resistance. Recommended for
space applications requiring dimensional stability.  Available with various
fibers in both prepreg tapes and fabrics.  The neat resin has a glass
transition temperature of 274 degrees F (350 degrees F when cured at 350
degrees F).  Based on same resin chemistry are EX-1516 film adhesive
(4000-psi lap-shear) and EX-1502-1 paste adhesive  (6000 psi).
       Another interesting new product from Bryte Technologies:  BryteCor
EX-1541 is a cyanate ester syntactic foam with low dielectric loss
(desirable for radomes and antennas) and low moisture absorption/outgassing
(important in many spacecraft applications).  It is being used as a core
material in conjunction with resin transfer molding as well as in more
conventional sandwich constructions.  According to Scott Unger, Bryte
Technologies' VP, EX-1541 can be used at temperatures up to 450 degrees F.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%   TEPEX* (Thermoplastic Engineered Preforms) is a family of

%   TEPEX* (Thermoplastic Engineered Preforms) is a family of
fabric-reinforced thermoplastic composites available from DuPont Advanced
Material Systems (Chestnut Run Plaza, P.O. Box 80702, Wilmington, DE  19880;
phone: 302/999-4779).  Also available:  Moldable Composite Sheet, MCS*,
using discontinuous fibers and thermoplastic matrix.  These are available
with various fibers and matrix materials.  Demonstration applications for
TEPEX:  a bicycle frame and a helmet.  Potential applications for MCS  are
cited in the "cost-driven automobile market,"  and semi-structural aircraft
components to replace metals.  Parts can be thermoformed in less than sixty
seconds!




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "36"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%   PPG Industries (One PPG Place, 32 West, Pittsburgh, PA  15272;  phone:

%   PPG Industries (One PPG Place, 32 West, Pittsburgh, PA  15272;  phone:
412/434-2945) has developed continuous strand fiberglass mat for pultrusion
applications. MatVantage*-P will provide U.S. pultrusion molders a domestic
source, according to PPG marketing manager  Thomas Wagner.   A new line has
been built at PPG's Shelby, NC  fiberglass manufacturing plant.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "37"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     ICI Fiberite (2055 E. Technology Circle, Tempe, AZ  85284;  phone:

%     ICI Fiberite (2055 E. Technology Circle, Tempe, AZ  85284;  phone:
602/730-2234) is offering a variety of composite armor materials for
ballistic protection.  Potential applications include body armor, and
vehicular and logistic shelters that require armoring for ballistic
protection.
     Note:  The ICI Fiberite brochure states that composite/ceramic armor
was developed "during the past several years."  As a matter of fact, this
technology was developed and used as far back as the early 1960s, based on
studies conducted at Aerojet-General  Corp., Azusa, CA.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "38"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

%     More products are reaching the market to upgrade the hand layup of

%     More products are reaching the market to upgrade the hand layup of
composite plies and tooling verification.  Recently we received an excellent
brochure from Vertek Vision (150 Industrial Ave., Lowell, MA  01852;  phone:
508/459-5330) describing LaserEdge* ply alignment system.  It combines 3-D
CAD laser projection technology with "innovative optics" to reduce assembly
time and improve dimensional accuracy.  The system can also verify the
placement and orientation of each ply, and check the accuracy of the
tooling.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "39"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

SAMPE WORKSHOPS ON COMPOSITES, ADHESIVES

Chapters of the Society for the Advancement of Materials and Process
Engineering are helping industry to find new applications for
aerospace/defense composites technology.

%     On January 26, 1995, the Northern Calif. Chapter will hold a workshop
on "Tapping the Markets for Industrial Applications" in Sunnyvale, CA.
Keynote address will be "Technology Transfer:  Turning Spears into
Plowshares," by Dr. Roger W. Werne, Associate Director for Engineering and
Technology Transfer, Lawrence Livermore Lab.  Other speakers include Bruce
Leonard (McDonnell Douglas) -- "Advanced Materials for the Delta Clipper;"
John Hart-Smith (McDonnell Douglas) -- "Surface Preparations for Ensuring
that the Glue will Stick in Composite Structures;"  Jeanne Anglin (Boeing)
-- "Advanced Materials Usage in the B777;"  Alan Miller (Lockheed Missiles &
Space) -- "Composites: Bridges to the Future;"  Dr. Charles E. Kaempen (KCL
Projects Ltd.) -- "Application of Composite Materials in Building and
Transportation Systems;" Leslie Cooke (C3 Int'l) -- "An Update on Composite
Fuel Tanks for Natural Gas." A special presentation also will be given on
spin-offs of NASA thermal protection materials technology.
     Dr. Clem Hiel of NASA Ames Research Center is the  Technical Chairman.

Contact:  Carroll Bergdahl, 6235 Rainbow Dr., San Jose, CA  95129;  phone:
408/446-4680.

%     To encourage wider usage of sandwich structures in
non-aerospace/defense applications, the Southern Calif. Chapter of SAMPE
will sponsor its First Annual Workshop on Sandwich Structures, March 7,
1995, at the Gateway Holiday Inn, Torrance, CA.  General Chairman is Ashok
Munjal, Composites Specialist of The Aerospace Corp.   Program Chairman is
Andy Marshall ("Mr. Honeycomb Sandwich") of Marshall Consulting (Walnut
Creek, CA), with Dr. Paul Cheng of TRW as his Associate Program Chairman.
The program will focus on recent developments in materials, processes,
design, repair, and applications of sandwich structures.
        Contact:  Ken Drake (M4-919), The Aerospace Corp., Box 92957, Los
Angeles, CA  90009;  phone:  310/336-0705.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "40"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

LASC PRESIDENT SPEAKS ON "RE-ENGINEERING/LEAN MANUFACTURE OF COMPOSITES"

James A. Blackwell, president of Lockheed Aeronautical Systems Co.
(Marietta, GA) was the keynote speaker at the recent SAMPE Technical
Conference in Atlanta, GA.
     Our aerospace/defense environment is changing.  There are no major
powers threatening world stability.  The defense budget is shrinking;  and
military aircraft manufacturers are consolidating.  (Prior to 1945 there
were 14 U.S. prime military contractors.  With the proposed Lockheed/Martin
merger, 1995 will leave just 5 prime contractors.)  In order to survive, the
remaining contractors must establish a lean enterprise--focusing on selected
markets;  re-engineering the organizational structure; overhaulng the core
processes;  developing advanced technologies;  and achieving reductions in
total costs.  Expected benefits:  greater customer satisfaction;  best value
products;  and greater shareholder value.
         LASC is organizing by  business lines to co-locate personnel on a
project basis;  and the management structure is "being flattened" (25%
reduction).  Programs are being organized to implement integrated product
teams. Computer integrated systems are being applied to overhaul the core
processes, including materials, design, fabrication, assembly, and business
systems.  Lean fabrication is concentrating on focused factories to include
composites, fiberglass/honeycomb, welding, wiring, painting,  tubing,
machined parts, small extrusions, and bench assembly.  Also, the factory
will use a paperless shop order system.  These and other  changes are expect
to be completed in 1997.

        The composites focused factory will co-locate all relevant processes
and include updated equipment such as automated ply cutting and
laser-projection for ply layup.  Improved quality and cost reductions are
already being realized. ---- "Look ahead where the horizons are absolutely
unlimited."  ---  Robert E. Gross, founder of Lockheed Aircraft




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "41"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

SPACE APPLICATIONS NEW

     McDonnell Douglas Aerospace (Huntington Beach, CA) is continuing to
work on the Delta Clipper (DC-X) vehicle to demonstrate technology for a
reusable, single-stage to orbit launch vehicle.  Responsibility for the
program has been transferred to NASA.  The current one-third scale model
will be upgraded to a two-thirds model -- making even more extensive use of
advanced composites for significant weight savings.  If all goes well, the
next step would be a full-size flight model.
       The composite aeroshell was damaged in a recent test when an
accumulation of vapors from the propulsion system caused an explosion.  The
aeroshell is being repaired in preparation for further tests.
     Meanwhile, NASA has announced plans to award a $24 million, 13-month
contract to study the X-33, a heavy-lift vehicle intended for both
government and commercial payloads.  McDonnell Douglas is expected to team
up with Boeing;  the other contenders are likely to be Lockheed and Rockwell
International.  If the X-33 program continues as planned, NASA would fund a
second phase in 1996 for the construction and test of an X-33 prototype.
Over $600 million would be allocated for this effort.
     Subsequently, industry would be expected to make the heavy investment
to produce a fleet of the vehicles.  To a large extent, this decision would
be made based upon whether DoD would use the X-33 for military missions.

%   Potential Conflict with DoD
     Recently the Air Force announced plans to upgrade the currently
available expendible launch systems -- the Titan, Delta, and Atlas --  into
a single family of launch vehicles.  The Air Force would invest as much as
$2 billion for this effort.
     According to Richard del Bello, Assistant Director for Aeronautics and
Space Policy for the Administration, these programs represent no conflict.
The DoD effort would serve medium-term needs for the military; the NASA X-33
program looks to the long term.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "42"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

UPDATE:   THE CARBON-PHENOLIC  SITUATION

     The  problem is still serious because of its potential impact on launch
vehicles that are essential to U.S. defense systems, but a solution appears
to be at hand.
     There is a single source, with limited capacity,  for the
Aerospace-grade rayon fiber qualified for conversion into carbon fiber
suitable for use with phenolics in high-temperature propulsion system
components.  Fortunately, the situation has been somewhat ameliorated by the
downturn in the aerospace industry so that available supplies are adequate
for at least several years.
     For the long term, the plan (and hope) was to use readily available
PAN-precursor carbon fiber as an alternative.  After considerable R&D by the
NASA Solid Propulsion Integrity Program, it was indicated that low-fired PAN
may be suitable.  Accordingly, tests were conducted last year using large
subscale motor firings -- but the PAN-based materials did not perform well.
Considerable "pocketing" occurred.
     Still hopeful, it was then decided to retest the PAN-based carbon
material with the same phenolic resin.  But this time, several processing
modifications were evaluated.  Parts made with lower-resin content prepreg
performed well! Thus it was demonstrated that, with suitable M&P
optimization, low-processed PAN-based carbon fiber can provide a relatively
low-cost and stable supply replacement for the Aerospace-grade rayon.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "43"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

ALERT . . .
Stripping coatings from Composites

     Environmental and safety regulations have virtually eliminated the use
of chemical strippers for removal of paints/coatings.  Increasingly,
industry is resorting to dry mechanical stripping processes such as blasting
with solid beads or powders.  For both composites and metals, blasting with
either plastic beads/powder or wheat starch has been found to be quite
effective.

       However, plastic media are more aggressive and can damage the surface
of composites -- esp. resin removal, leaving fibers exposed.  Wheat starch
is quite effective and less prone to cause damage to composite substrates.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "44"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

THE DoD PLAN FOR SPACE LAUNCH MODERNIZATION
Composites Likely to Play Important Roles

       Lt. General Thomas S. Moorman, Jr., head of the Air Force Space
Command, recently briefed key government and congressional committees on the
results of a study requested by Congress as part of the FYU'4 Defense
Authorization Act. The study was considered necessary because space launch
is regarded as a critical issue for America's future in space.
       Four options are offered -- ranging from merely sustaining the
existing system (the least costly) to developing a reusable launch vehicle
(the most costly but of the greatest long-term value).  Among the most
significant findings and recommendations: %   The DoD core space launch
technology is significantly underfunded. %   A number of areas need to be
addressed for cost reduction, including improving the reliability (the high
cost of failure) and reducing operations costs. %   A heavy-lift launch
vehicle capability is required for the foreseeable future. %   There is a
general concensus on the potential  benefits of a new, reusable system --
but there are widely divergent views on timing, approach, cost, and risk.  A
cooperative DoD/NASA technology maturation effort is recommended. %   DoD
and NASA space launch programs need to be better coordinated.  The study
recommends DoD be responsible for expendable vehicles and NASA take the lead
for a reusable system.
%   DoD should continue to monitor the development of small launch vehicles
but let the commercial market take the lead.
%   Lightweight structures and reusable launch vehicle technologies are
areas of special interest that need to be addressed.
       These findings and recommendations  translate into more emphasis on
composites technology for weight savings;  heat-resistant composites;
life-cycle cost reductions (including manufacturing costs);  improved
reliability and quality control (especially robust designs, in-process
controls, and non-destructive inspection);  more standardization;  and
repair technology.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "45"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

COMPOSITES FOR SERVICE AT HIGH TEMPERATURES

       The NASA Advanced High-Temperature Engine Materials Technology
Program (HITEMP) is developing extensive technology on advanced composites
for high-temperature applications.
       During FY'94 and FY'95, NASA  plans to spend $13 million on R&D in
this area, including 49 contracts to industry and 13 university grants, as
well as in-house efforts.  In addition, NASA has funded a large
interdisciplinary grant program with Pennsylvania State University as part
of its HITEMP project.
%    The 7th Annual HITEMP Review was held October 24-26, 1994, sponsored by
NASA Lewis Research Center. Presentations emphasized polymer matrix
composites for use up to 600 degrees-700F, metal-matrix composites up to
2200 degrees F, and ceramic-matrix composites for use up to 3000 degrees F.
       Of special interest, Textron Lycoming (Stratford, CT) and Brunswick
Composites (Lincoln, NE) are collaborating to apply composites as
replacements for metal components in turbine engines to save weight and cut
cost.  To date, the team reports a 30% weight savings and 10% cost
reduction;  much of this was achieved by reducing the number of detail parts
in the assembly.  Current efforts are directed at the fabrication of a
net-shape compressor case by filament winding using a polyimide resin with
S-2 fiberglass and carbon fiber reinforcements for the inner skin (exposed
to hot gases) and a carbon fiber/epoxy outer skin, adhesive bonded to a
polyimide honeycomb core.
       A report also was presented on the Metal-Matrix Composite Life
Cooperative effort.  Participants are Allison Engine, AlliedSignal, GE
Aircraft Engines, Pratt & Whitney, Textron Lycoming, and Williams IntUl,
along with NASA Lewis Research Center and the Air Force Wright Laboratory.
Working through the Ohio Aerospace Institute, a joint Air Force/NASA
contract has been received; and the cooperative is working with the
University of Texas, San Antonio, to obtain a NASA grant. The team hopes to
develop a system for predicting the operating life of titanium metal-matrix
composites as structural components in gas turbine engines.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "46"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

NEWS FROM OVERSEAS

     Nippon Oil Co., Ltd. (NOC) and Nippon Steel Corp. (NSC) are planning to
join forces to form a new carbon fiber manufacturing organization.  Both
companies separately have been developing pitch-based carbon fiber
technology;  the 50-50 joint venture would take advantage of these
capabilities.  In addition to production of pitch-based carbon fibers, the
new company (name TBD) would produce and market  fabrics and prepregs.  The
fibers will be produced at the NSC Hirohata Works;  also NOC would transfer
equipment from its Yokohama Refinery to Hirohata.  Prepregs would be
produced under contract at both NOC and Nippon Steel Chemical Co. (NSCC).
The decision for go-ahead is expected in time to permit startup in April.
     NOC has concentrated on applications in communication and broadcast
satellites, and the sporting and leisure goods markets.  NSC has developed
carbon fiber materials for applications in the construction market,
including the unique NOMST (Novel Material Shield-Cuttable Tunnel-Wall
System) and repair of civil engineering structures.  Because NOC and NSC are
not competitive in their markets, the joint venture appears beneficial to
both companies.
     The new carbon fibers will be marketed under the designation,"GRANOC."
In the U.S.,  contact is Marshall Consulting, 720 Appaloosa Drive, Walnut
Creek, CA  94596;  phone:  510/945-6051.  In Japan, contact Sakuya Iwai,
Nippon Oil Co., 3-12 Nishi Shimbashi 1-chome, Mimato-ku, Tokyo 105, Japan;
phone: 81-3-3502-9247.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "47"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

NDT IN THE NEWS . . .

%     Congratulations to Laser Technology (1055 W. Germantown Pike,
Norristown, PA 19403;  phone:  610/631-5043) on its transfer of defense
industry NDT technology to the medical field.  Its DH-7000 Digital
Holography System developed for NDT of bonds in metallic and composite
structures, has now been applied to orthopedic implants to detect disbonds
in plasma-sprayed coatings.

%     Even though not visible to the eye, sub-surface impact damage to
carbon fiber/epoxy struts can be detected by ultrasonic C-scan.  Research at
JPL has demonstrated the approach.  Damage was sufficient to significantly
reduce the compressive strength -- as much as 65% for struts on which the
damage was barely visible.  (Contact:  Gun-Shing Chen, JPL, 4800 Oak Grove
Drive, Pasadena, CA 91109;  phone:  818/354-3375).

%     Baird Analytical (125 Middlesex Turnpike, Bedford, MA  01730;  phone:
617/276-6163) is offering equipment for energy dispersive x-ray fluorescence
spectrometry (EDXRF) that can be used to determine glass fiber content in
polymer-matrix composites.  Analyses can be made in a few minutes.

%     RECOMMENDED READING . . .   The October 1994 issue of Quality
magazine (191 So. Gary Ave., Carol Stream, IL  60188;  phone:  708/665-1000)
has a feature on "The Composite Challenge."    The article provides a good
overview of two NDT techniques that are being applied to inspection of
composites:  ultrasonics (esp. acoustic microscopy) and radiography (esp.
3-D x-ray and reverse geometry x-ray).  In its Sept. 1993 issue, the
magazine published a strong appeal for more government-industry -academic
cooperation "to redefine the role of NDT in a rapidly changing economic
environment" so that NDT can "achieve its full potential in a
quality-conscious world."

%     In its October 1994 issue, the newsletter, NDT Update  (Quantum
Publications, 149 Fifth Ave., New York, NY  10010;  phone:  212/677-1800)
reports that the European aircraft manufacturer Airbus Industrie is
introducing infrared thermographic inspection for detecting water ingress in
composite sandwich structures.  The technique is considered more effective
than x-ray for such structures.  The technique was so effective that Airbus
has purchased six IR cameras from Agema Infrared Systems (Secaucus, NJ).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "48"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

NOTEWORTHY . . .

       Our readers are excellent sources of interesting information.  Often
we receive leads for follow up;  frequently the information is worthy of
being passed on directly via the Newsletter.

%   Don Schmidt (the carbon-carbon expert) provided information about
durability of adhesive bonds -- very important!   A recent study at LTV
Missiles (now part of Northrop) sponsored by the Air Force Wright Lab.,
showed that degradation of metal-to-metal adhesive bonds occurs due to
corrosion -- a filiform mechanism between the base metal and the oxide
"grown" by the surface preparation. "Edge-sealing of bonded joints could be
a big factor in preventing loss of bond durability."

%   Ken Drake (the composites expert at The Aerospace Corp.) told us about a
new satellite that will be ALL COMPOSITE!  Forte (Fast On-orbit Recording of
Transient Events) is being developed under the direction of the Los Alamos
National Lab., Sandia National Lab., the Air Force Space & Missile Systems
Center, and NASA/Marshall Space Flight Center. A quasi-isotropic layup of
T50/ERL 1962 carbon fiber/epoxy will be used, based on extensive flight
history. The satellite will be made of composite sections, bonded together
to form an egg-crate configuration.  The payload will be designed to
demonstrate technology for detection of  nuclear testing events to help
monitor treaty provisions.  The Forte is scheduled to be launched by Pegasus
(more composite structures!) in late 1995 or 1996.

IF YOU ARE INTO CARBON-CARBON COMPOSITES . . .
     We recommend that you get a copy of the Summer 1994 issue of Materially
Speaking.  There is an excellent summary of a study of C-C composite R&D in
Europe and Asia.  Author is Dr. Robert A. Meyer of the Univ. of Calif.,
Santa Barbara, Materials Dept.  There is also a very good article on
"Structure-Property Relationships in Carbon/Carbon Composites," by Dr.
Gerald S. Rellick of The Aerospace Corp.
     Contact:   Materials Technology Center (MC 4303), Southern Illinois
Univ., Carbondale, IL  62901;  phone:  618/536-7525.


CONGRATULATIONS TO . . .
%   Mel Schwartz (Sikorsky Aircraft) -- selected for the 1995 J. H. "Jud"
Hall Composites Manufacturing Award from the Composites Manufacturing
Association of SME.
%    NEW SAMPE FELLOWS --  Ed Morris (Luxfer USA);  Dr. Akimitsu Okura
(Kanagawa Institute of Space/Japan);  Dr. George Springer (Stanford Univ.);
and Dr. James Whitney (Univ. of Dayton).


The First International Conference on Composites in Infrastructure
      ICCI T96 will be held January 1996 in Tucson, AZ.   Organized by the
National Science Foundation and the University of Arizona, the conference will
provide a forum to exchange information on advances in the use of composites in
civil engineering construction.
        Call for Papers:  Abstracts are due Feb. 15, 1995;  send to:
Engineering Professional Development, Univ. of Arizona, Box 9, Harvill
Bldg., Room 235, Tucson, AZ  85721;  phone:  602/621-3054.

Next time you are in Atlanta, GA, plan to visit the Cyclorama . . .
     You will step back in history to view the Battle of Atlanta during the
Civil War.  It's a massive circular painting and diorama, vividly displaying
the events during a blistering July day in 1864.  And to make it all seem so
real, the artists have made good use of composite materials.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "49"></A>Copyright
COMPOSITES & ADHESIVES NEWSLETTER via NewsNet
January-March 1995

COMING EVENTS . . .

SAMPE (P.O. Box 2459, Covina, CA  91722;  phone:  818/331-0616) --
     Jan. 26:  Workshop: "Tapping the Markets for Industrial Applications;"
Sunnyvale, CA
     March 7:  Workshop on Sandwich Structures;  Torrance, CA
     May 8-11:  40th International Symposium and Exhibition;  Anaheim
Convention Center,                  Anaheim, CA;  concurrent with the ASM
Advanced Materials/Processes Conference.

%  Jan. 8-12: The American Ceramic Society 19th Annual Conference & Exposition
on Composites, Advanced Ceramics, Materials and Structures;  Cocoa Beach, FL.
Contact:  The American Ceramic Society, 735 Ceramic Place, Westerville, OH
43081;  phone:  614/890-4700.
% Jan. 30-Feb. 1:  Composites Institute/SPI 50th Annual Conference and
Exposition;  Cincinnati Convention Center.   (Includes composites product and
research awards.)
Contact:  CI/SPI, 355 Lexington Ave., New York, NY  10017;  phone:
212/351-5410.
% Jan. 30-Feb. 1: Composites Manufacturing and Tooling T95  Conference and
Exhibits;  Disneyland Hotel, Anaheim, CA.  (Special plenary session by Dr. John
P. Gudas, ATP, NIST;  and Special Keynote Address by Dr. Mary L. Good,
Undersecretary of Technology, Dept. of Commerce.)
Contact:  CMA/SME,  P.O. Box 930, Dearborn, MI  48121;  phone:  800/763-2734.
%  Feb. 2-4:  The 4th International Boatbuilders' Exhibition & Conference
(IBEX);  Greater Fort Lauderdale/Broward County Convention Center, Fl.
Contact: IBEX T95, c/o CMC, P.O. Box 30162, Hartford, CT  06150;  phone:
800/243-3238.
%  Feb. 12-16:  124th TMS Annual Meeting & Exhibition;  Las Vegas Convention
Center.
Contact:  TMS, 420 Commonwealth Dr., Warrendale, PA  15086;  phone:
412/776-9000.
%  Feb. 19-22:  18th Annual Meeting of the Adhesion Society;  Hilton Head, SC.
Contact:  J. W. Holubka, Ford Motor Co., MD 3198 SRL, P.O. Box 2053, Dearborn,
MI  48121;  phone:  313/323-1439.
%  UCLA Extension Short Courses -- Feb. 27-March 3:  Advanced Analysis and
Design of Composite Materials and Structures;  March 20-24:  Composite
Materials -- Selection, Design, and Manufacture for Engineering
Applications.  Contact: UCLA Extension, 10995 Le Conte Ave., Los Angeles, CA
90024;  phone: 310/825-1047.
%  March 6-8:  Course on Fundamentals of Adhesion;  Orlando, FL.  Contact:  Dr.
A. V. Patsis, Institute of Materials Science, State University of New York, New
Paltz, NY  12561;  phone:  914/257-3800.
%  March 27-29:  3rd International Conference on Deformation and Fracture of
Composites;  University of Surrey, Guildford, UK.   Contact:  The Institute of
Materials (C505), 1 Carlton House Terrace, London SW1Y 5DB, UK;  phone:
071/235-1391.
%  April 6-8:  Technology Opportunity Showcase (to facilitate transfer of
technology from Government R&D to U.S. industry);  NASA Langley Research
Center, Hampton, VA.  Contact:  TPOS Implementation Office, MS 213, NASA
Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA  23681;  phone:  804/854-8886.
%  May 2-4:  Seminar on Nondestructive Testing of Composite Materials;
Baltimore, MD.
Contact:  Technomic Publishing Co., Box 3535, Lancaster, PA  17604;  phone:
800/233-9936.
%  May 7-11:  1995 ANTEC of the Society of Plastics Engineers;  Boston, MA.
Contact:  SPE, 14 Fairfield Dr., Brookfield, CT  06804;  phone:  203/775-0471.
% May 10-13:  SPI Annual Western Section Conference;  Ritz-Carlton Mauna Lani,
Hawaii.  Contact:  Society of the Plastics Industry, Western Section, 5001
Airport Plaza Dr., Suite 201, Long Beach, CA  90815;  phone:  310/420-8783.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-29</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B018-357</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ml04.html 205.156.212.5 19970122034529 text/html 81093
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:43:16 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:49 GMT
Content-length: 80906
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ml04.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>SEMICONDUCTORS/ICs</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>Mid-IR Laser&nbsp;Likes it Warm</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(378 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>InGaN LEDs with&nbsp;Quantum Wells</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(264 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>InGaAs Photodetectors&nbsp;Set a Record</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(211 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>Low-Temperature&nbsp;Growth Method</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(306 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>Optical AND Gate in&nbsp;Ge-Doped Silica Guide</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(200 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>Room Temperature Si&nbsp;High-Vacuum Bonding</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(188 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>Thermal Annealing&nbsp;Improvements in GaN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(180 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>Spire Wins Contract to&nbsp;Push GaAs Technology</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(133 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>Heat Treatment for&nbsp;PTCR Barium Titanate</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(199 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>11.4 MHz Transmission&nbsp;Ultrasonic Transducer</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(198 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>AT&T Dials Up New&nbsp;Way to Passivate GaAs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(194 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>Diffusion Barrier&nbsp;Method Patented</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(142 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>Hughes Develops&nbsp;Improved HEMTs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(152 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>SUPERCONDUCTORS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>Hg-Based Superconductors&nbsp;Challenge Researchers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(417 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>OPTOELECTRONICS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><LI>Optical Waveguides of&nbsp;Alumina Thin Films</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(172 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>Lightning Optical Picks&nbsp;Up Two SBIR Contracts</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(325 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><LI>Display Panels Made&nbsp;from Plastic Wrap</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(368 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INKS AND COATINGS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><LI>Brewer offers Unique&nbsp;Ion-Implanted Polymers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(115 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><A HREF = "#19"><LI>New Group of&nbsp;Epoxy Compounds</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(148 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>SOLDERING/JOINING</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#20"><A HREF = "#20"><LI>The Payoff in&nbsp;No-Clean</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(567 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><A HREF = "#21"><LI>Qualitek, Heraeus Intro&nbsp;New Products at NEPCON</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(360 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INDUSTRY NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#22"><A HREF = "#22"><LI>Book-to-Bill Down, but&nbsp;Billings Hit New High</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(270 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><A HREF = "#23"><LI>Commerce Department&nbsp;Reduces Export Controls</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(337 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><A HREF = "#24"><LI>Alpha Metals&nbsp;Acquires SMT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(116 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><A HREF = "#25"><LI>Ultratech, Photronics in&nbsp;Strategic Alliance</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(135 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><A HREF = "#26"><LI>ART Teams with&nbsp;European Firm</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(159 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><A HREF = "#27"><LI>Radiance Process Is&nbsp;Technology of the Year</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(274 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><A HREF = "#28"><LI>Manufacturing Services&nbsp;to Get New SIC Codes</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(215 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><A HREF = "#29"><LI>Group to Set Exit&nbsp;Charge Standards</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(345 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><A HREF = "#30"><LI>IPC Has the&nbsp;Right Stuff</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(156 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PROCESSING</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#31"><A HREF = "#31"><LI>Diamond Nucleation by&nbsp;Gas-Phase Seeding</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(175 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><A HREF = "#32"><LI>Lam Upgrades&nbsp;CVD Systems</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(191 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><A HREF = "#33"><LI>New Ion Implanter&nbsp;From Applied Materials</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(119 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#34"><A HREF = "#34"><LI>Focused Ion Beams&nbsp;Make Smaller Chips</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(171 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#35"><A HREF = "#35"><LI>Curable Printed&nbsp;Circuit Boards</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(142 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>TESTING AND ANALYSIS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#36"><A HREF = "#36"><LI>New Testing&nbsp;Probes Developed</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(190 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#37"><A HREF = "#37"><LI>HYT Debuts New&nbsp;Particle Sensor</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(154 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#38"><A HREF = "#38"><LI>Spectropolarimeter&nbsp;Is Small, Fast</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(179 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#39"><A HREF = "#39"><LI>Product Award to&nbsp;Digital Instruments</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(155 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#40"><A HREF = "#40"><LI>New Defect-Data&nbsp;Management System</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(205 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>HEAT DISSIPATION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#41"><A HREF = "#41"><LI>New Copper&nbsp;Heat Sink Design</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(168 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#42"><LI>BOOKS AND REPORTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(557 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#43"><LI>WORKSHOPS - SEMINARS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(142 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#44"><LI>CALENDAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(233 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Mid-IR Laser
Likes it Warm

A team of scientists from the Naval Research Laboratory and the
University of Houston Space Vacuum Epitaxy Center (SVEC) has
developed a mid-infrared solid-state laser that operates at near
room temperature.

According to Shin-Shem Steven Pei, SVEC's associate director for
research (Tel: 713/ 743-3621, E-mail: spei@uh.edu), lasing was
observed at temperatures up to 285K. "This is by far the highest
operating temperature for an interband transition laser at this
wavelength," he explained. "We now have a device that works with a
compact thermoelectric cooler instead of a unwieldy cryogenic
system, and room-temperature operation is just around the corner."

The new laser is an optically-pumped InAs/GaInSb/AlInSb type-II
quantum-well structure producing light at a wavelength of 4
microns. The device was fabricated from materials produced by SVEC
and then tested at the NRL. The NRL/SVEC team is now optimizing the
material growth and device design for diode lasers that can produce
sufficient power at 3 to 5 microns without cooling. Currently, SVEC
scientists are also testing a more advanced quantum-cascade laser
design, which should produce higher-intensity light with less
electric current while emitting within either of two atmospheric
transmission windows of 3 to 5 microns and 8 to 12 microns.

Lasers emitting in these windows have many important industrial,
medical, and military applications, such as IR radar for vehicle
and air traffic control, medical diagnosis, eye-safe covert
illumination for night vision, free-space communications, and IR
countermeasures.  Further, since many gases absorb strongly in
these windows, these lasers are ideal for remote chemical sensing.
This large class of applications includes pollution and greenhouse-
gas monitoring, drug and explosives detection, chemical process
control, and leak detection.  The projected market for these IR
systems will approach $1.5 billion by 2001 if efficient and compact
IR sources are available.

The semiconductor lasers used in most consumer devices emit at much
shorter wavelengths. Long-distance telephone networks use 1.3 and
1.5 micron lasers in their optical fiber systems, and a 0.8 micron
beam reads music and data from CDs.  (By comparison, visible light
ranges from about 0.4 to 0.7 microns.) However, water vapor readily
absorbs light with wavelengths outside the atmospheric transmission
windows, restricting its range.  Gas lasers operating within the
windows are too bulky and expensive for most commercial
applications.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

InGaN LEDs with
Quantum Wells

Shuji Nakamura of Nichia Chemical Industries Ltd. (Dept. Of R&D,
491 Oka, Kaminaka, Anan, Tokushima 774, Japan), in a paper
presented at the Materials Research Society's Fall Meeting,
reported the successful growth of high-power blue, green, and
yellow light-emitting diodes with quantum-well structures.  The
devices are based on III-V nitrides and were grown by metalorganic
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) on sapphire substrates.

The single quantum-well (SQW) structured LEDs are described in
contrast to InGaN/AlGaN double-heterostructure devices.  The latter
produce high-power output in the blue and blue-green regions with
a broad emission spectrum represented by a full width at half
maximum (FWHM) of 70 nm and output power over 1 mW.

The SQW LEDs feature a thin InGaN active layer, from which a high-
power emission with a narrow emission spectrum is obtained.
Typical FWHM for green LEDs of this type is 45 nm, 20 nm from blue
devices, and 90 nm from yellow devices.  Power output from the same
LEDs were 1 mW, 4 mW, and 0.5 mW respectively, all at 20
milliamperes.  The drop in output power with the emission
wavelength increase from blue to yellow was noted.

One primary goal of the research was to improve the performance of
green LEDs.  Those made from GaP and AlInGaP exhibit emission
wavelengths of 555 and 570 nm and external quantum efficiencies of
0.1% and 1% respectively.  The SQW LED described by Nakamura
achieved a quantum efficiency of 2.1% at a peak wavelength of 525
nm, a pure green emission.  The 555 and 570 nm emissions are
described as yellowish green.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

InGaAs Photodetectors
Set a Record

A record low dark-current operation of InGaAs (1.55 micron) p-I-n
Photodetectors on silicon and GaAs has been reported in Applied
Physics Letters.  The authors, led by F. E. Ejeckan (School of
Electrical Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853; E-
mail: felix@ee.cornell.edu), fabricated the photo conductors by
first bonding the p-I-n epitaxial layers, followed by chemical
removal of the host InP substrate from the p-I-n structure, after
which the photodetector was fabricated on top of the exposed p-I-n
layers.

Bonding of the photodetector to the substrate is done as efforts at
heteroepitaxial growth have not met with success due to the
inherent material defects present in devices grown by this method.
Bonding eliminates these material defects, but the films often are
mechanically weak and thermally unstable.  The technique employed
by the authors of bonding by atomic rearrangement (BAR) avoids this
weakness and obtains a covalently bonded interface free of defects
other than crystallographic misfit.

Under 5 volt reverse bias, dark currents down to 57 pA on GaAs and
290 nA on Si were measured.  A external quantum efficiency of 80%
was deduced from the responsivity at 1.55 microns of 1 A/W, and the
series resistance across the bonded interface was 17 ohms for GaAs
and 350 ohms for Si.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Low-Temperature
Growth Method

A chemist at Washington University (St. Louis, MO 63130) has
discovered a new method to grow semiconductor crystals at
temperatures far lower than ever reported.  The method is the first
to use solution-phase chemistry to grow the micrometer-sized
crystals of indium phosphide (InP), gallium arsenide (GaAs), and
indium arsenide (InAs) at low temperature.  The semiconductors made
by the new method may be used in devices such as light-emitting
diode displays, laser pointers, grocery scanners, compact disc
players, and computer components.  The breakthrough offers
intriguing possibilities for developing integrated devices
consisting of semiconductors and polymers, plastics, or composites.

Present ways of growing semiconductor crystals prohibit combining
other materials with the semiconductors because of the very high
temperatures required to grow the crystals.  Crystals are currently
produced at temperatures of 500 oC-1,200 oC, but the method William
E. Buhro (Tel: 314/935-4269, E-mail: buhro@wuchem.wustl.edu),
associate professor of chemistry, has discovered allows growth at
200 oC.  Buhro's technique, the solution-liquid-solid (SLS) growth
method, is similar to the vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) gas-phase growth
method that has been used for some 30 years.

Buhro and other materials chemists had been stymied by the
nonmolecular structures of the semiconductor materials, which do
not allow crystal growth from conventional solvents at low
temperatures.  Buhro made a solution suspension of indium and
indium-gallium nano-sized metal droplets.  The droplets are the
sites from which the semiconductor crystal compounds InP, GaAs, and
InAs (type III-V semiconductors) nucleate and grow.

Buhro explains, "We refer to this as the solution-liquid-solid
mechanism, a three-phase system where the chemistry occurs in
solution, then elements of the semiconductors are deposited into
the liquid--the molten metal droplets--and the product crystallizes
out as a solid."  An important goal in materials chemistry is to
turn down the heat on solid-state synthesis.  This new method
expands the range of possibility for these semiconductors.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Optical AND Gate in
Ge-Doped Silica Guide

An all-optical programmable AND gate has been fabricated in a
germanium-doped silica waveguide (P.M. Ranon, Air Force Technical
Applications Center/TXO, 1030 S. Highway A1A, Patrick Air Force
Base, FL 32925; E-mail: pmranon@crusher.aftac.gov).  The gate
consists of the Ge-doped silica planar waveguide, a Q-switched and
a mode-locked Nd:YAG laser and coupling two fundamental frequency
beams into different guiding modes of the waveguide along with a
second harmonic beam coupled into one guiding mode.

The waves interfere in the guide, generating a set of semi-
permanent second-order susceptibility gratings that generate second
harmonic light.  When optically programmed, the second harmonic
light behaves as an output of an AND gate with a signal-to-noise
ratio of 17 dB.

The waveguide was produced by ion-beam sputtering of silica and
germanium (6 atomic %) onto an optical grade silica substrate to a
thickness of 2.0 microns.  Indices of refraction were 1.532 and
1.546 at the fundamental (1064 nm) and second harmonic wavelengths
(532 nm), respectively.  The second harmonic of the film had  an
output of 150 mW.  This type of gate is expected to be able to be
extended to other logic functions, with an electronic NOT gate
possibly forming a complete set.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Room Temperature Si
High-Vacuum Bonding

Bonding of 4-inch silicon wafers has been done at room temperature
in ultrahigh vacuum conditions.  After local initiation of the
process, it is essentially self-propagating, with resultant bonded
wafers having bulk-like properties.  According to U. Gosele (Max
Planck Institute of Microstructure Physics, Weinberg 2, D-06120
Halle, Germany; E-mail: goesele@mpi-msp-halle.de), this is in
contrast to the current technological process, which requires
heating to 700oC to reach the required bonding strength.

Commercially available 4-inch (100 mm) Si wafers were etched in
dilute HF to remove the oxide and to make the surfaces hydrophobic.
Two wafers were bonded in a microcleanroom set up at room
temperature and then transferred to an UHV chamber that was pumped
down to 3x10-9 Torr.  The wafers were separated, and the residual
hydrogen volatilized by raising the chamber temperature to 600oC-
800oC.  After cooling to room temperature, the wafers were rebonded
with an estimated bonding speed of greater than 1 m/sec, in
contrast to the bonding speed in atmospheric conditions of 0.01
m/sec.  High-resolution transmission electron microscopy showed the
bonded interface to lack any defects aside from the unavoidable
crystalline mismatch at the interface.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Thermal Annealing
Improvements in GaN

Rapid thermal annealing of GaN in argon or nitrogen at temperatures
up to 1100oC has been shown to improve surface morphology and
photoluminescence in Applied Physics Letters.  Atomic force
microscopy characterization, done by a group led by J. C. Zolper
(Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM 87185-0603; E-mail:
jczolpe@somnet.sandia.gov), showed the average root mean square
surface roughness to decrease from about 4 nm to about 1 nm after
annealing at 1100oC.  Band-edge luminescence intensity was
increased by a up to a factor of four after a 1100oC anneal, which
improves the ratio of the band edge to deep-level luminescence and
also reduces the electron concentration and mobility.

These developments will enhance GaN-InN-AlN materials technology,
with which a number of improved electronic and photonic devices
have been developed.  Reduction in  the electron mobility can be
explained in terms of  two-band conduction mechanism or an
increased compensation ratio.  The improvement in surface roughness
might be attributed to quenching of the high-temperature surface
state, but more work is required to explain the mechanism behind
the improved photoluminescence of GaN with thermal annealing.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Spire Wins Contract to
Push GaAs Technology

Spire Corp. (1 Patriots Park, Bedford, MA 01730-2396; Tel: 617/275-
6000, Fax: 617/275-7470) announced earlier this month the receipt
of a contract from the Naval Research Laboratory for the continued
development of gallium arsenide (GaAs) monolithic complementary
heterojunction bipolar transistor (CHBT) push-pull power amplifiers
and operational amplifiers.  Power amplifiers have applications in
phased-array radar and mobile phone communications, while
operational amplifiers are used broadly in analog electronics that
require high-speed analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog
converters.

The company will use selective metalorganic chemical vapor-
deposition techniques to integrate both Npn and Pnp HBTs on one
wafer in a planer topography. Pascale Gouker, manager of
Microelectronic Structures at Spire, said that though the research
will be done on 2-inch GaAs wafers, 4-inch wafers will eventually
be qualified for use by the developed technology.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Heat Treatment for
PTCR Barium Titanate

Semiconducting barium titanate (BaTiO3) is of interest for a
variety of applications but is difficult to manufacture due to the
necessity of preferential distribution of dopants in the titanate
grains and the sensitivity of the positive temperature coefficient
of resistance (PTCR) performance to the heat-treatment schedule
used to sinter the microstructure of these electronic ceramics.
Prof. Vasantha Amarakoon at Alfred University (New York State
College of Ceramics, Alfred, NY 14802; Tel: 607/871-2497) reports
in the Journal of the American Ceramic Society  the effects of heat
treatment on PTCR behavior.

The PTCR behavior occurs as a result of either doping BaTiO3 with
an aliovalent ion or heating in a low-oxygen atmosphere that
reduces Ti4+ to Ti3+.  Electronic conduction occurs up to the Curie
temperature (about 120oC) where the resistance increases by several
orders of magnitude.  The necessity of achieving uniform
distribution of liquid-phase additives (excess barium, tin) is
dealt with by using a gel-coating process of the grains.  The PTCR
effect is seen to develop when the material is cooled to the
annealing temperature, as the grain boundaries rapidly oxidize when
the liquid phase there solidifies.  Oxygen diffusion continues
during annealing and cooling, which increases the PTCR response.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

11.4 MHz Transmission
Ultrasonic Transducer

Surface micromachining of gold-coated, nitrided, oxidized, highly
doped p-type (100) silicon has been used to fabricate novel
capacitive, ultrasonic air transducers at 11.4, 9.2, and 3.1 MHz.
The transducers consist of circular silicon nitride membranes
suspended above the heavily doped silicon.  Electrostatic forces
attracting the membrane towards the Si are resisted by stresses in
the membrane when a voltage is applied, so the membrane returns to
its original position when a voltage oscillation is switched.  Igal
Ladabaum (E. L. Ginzton Laboratory, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA 94305; E-mail: igal@leland.stanford.edu) and coworkers report in
Applied Physics Letters  that their devices have a bandwidth range
of 5-20%.

Detection of 10 MHz capacitance fluctuations as small as 10-18
farads can be made, corresponding to displacements on the order of
10-3 Angstroms in a bandwidth of 2 MHz and a signal-to-noise ratio
of 20 dB.  The detection sensitivities obtained can withstand more
than 100 dB of signal attenuation, which makes these devices of
interest for ultrasonic imaging, nondestructive evaluation, gas-
flow and composition measurements, and range sensing.  These
properties are a marked improvement over piezoelectrics for air
applications that suffer from a six-order-of-magnitude difference
in acoustic impedances between air and piezoelectrics.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

AT&T Dials Up New
Way to Passivate GaAs

AT&T IPM Corp. was issued U.S. Patent 5,464,664 on Nov. 11, 1995,
for a downstream ammonia plasma gallium arsenide (GaAs) passivation
technique that claims fast, stable, room-temperature operation.
The inventors are Eray S. Aydil, Konstantinos P. Giapis, and
Richard A. Gottscho.

A workpiece with an exposed GaAs surface is passivated by placing
the workpiece in an evacuated chamber and generating an ammonia
plasma between 10 and 30 cm from the workpiece and  causing the
plasma products to flow downstream into contact with the workpiece.
The plasma gas pressure is held between 0.5 to 6.0 Torr, and the
exposure time should be sufficient to increase the
photoluminescence intensity of the gallium arsenide by at least a
factor of 10, which is said to be more than five minutes.

Though the patent abstract specifies a  substrate temperature of
less than 100oC, it also specifically states that the process can
be done at room temperature.  The workpiece should also not be
placed within line-of-sight of the plasma to avoid UV, visible, and
x-ray radiation-induced damage for a time sufficient to increase
photoluminescence intensity from said gallium arsenide by at least
a factor of 10.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Diffusion Barrier
Method Patented

AT&T was issued U.S. Patent 5,468,689 on Nov. 21, 1995, for a
method for preparing a silicon nitride gallium diffusion barrier
for use in molecular beam epitaxial growth of gallium arsenide.
The inventors are John E. Cunningham, Keith W. Goossen, William Y.
Jan, and James A. Walker.

The technique involves reacting nitrogen and silane in a ratio of
less than 300:1 in a plasma-enhanced chemical vapor-deposition
apparatus to form a silicon nitride layer.  This layer is deposited
on a reflowable glass layer previously deposited on a (100) silicon
substrate oriented 3 degrees off axis and bearing a thin film of
silicon dioxide.  Finally, GaAs is deposited by molecular beam
epitaxial growth on the silicon nitride layer.  The technique is
said to be of interest for use in the monolithic integration of
interconnected GaAs/AlGaAs double heterostructures, modulators, and
silicon MOSFET structures.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Hughes Develops
Improved HEMTs

Hughes Aircraft Co. was issued U.S. Patent 5,471,077 on Nov. 28,
1995, for a high electron mobility transistor (HEMT) and a method
for its fabrication.  The inventor is Marko Sokolich.  Improvement
in the device results from alloying the diffusion layer.

The resulting HEMT includes a diffusion barrier, made of titanium
nitride, that prevents gate-metal diffusion into the substrate
during fabrication and a sacrificial platinum alloy layer that
forms the Schottky barrier.  The titanium nitride layer is formed
on a platinum layer, and sufficient heat is applied to cause the
platinum layer to alloy with the gallium arsenide layer forming a
platinum gallium and a platinum arsenide alloy layer and Schottky
barrier.

All the platinum is consumed in this method, so precise control of
the thickness of the gate layer is achieved, and diffusion of the
platinum gate layer into the gallium arsenide layer during later
processing steps is eliminated.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Hg-Based Superconductors
Challenge Researchers

A paper presented by Paul Chu et al (The Texas Center for
Superconductivity and Dept. Of Physics, University of Houston,
Houston, TX 77204; Tel: 713/743-8212) at the fall meeting of the
Materials Research Society focused on research underway on mercury-
based high-temperature superconductors, the homologue series,
HgBa2Can-1CunO2n+2+d [Hg-12(n-1)n or HBCCO] with n = 1, 2, ...7.

They were first found by a Swiss team in Zurich to be
superconducting at temperatures up to 134K.  Later, the Houston
group raised the superconducting temperatures of these compounds to
a record-high temperature of 164K by squeezing the sample, making
it possible for the first time to achieve the superconducting state
by the use of household air-conditioning technology.

These materials exhibit an impressive current-carrying capacity of
up to 1 million amperes per square centimeter at 100K, observed by
the IBM group at Yorktown Heights after making the compound into
the thin-film form.  The figures translate to a theoretical limit
of about 10 million amperes per square centimeter at the liquid-
nitrogen temperature of 77K.

Chu said that because of the simple and subtle crystal structure of
the compounds, specifically the linear Hg-O coordination that
allows a large cation-doping range, scientists are given the
opportunity to peer into the effects of atomic arrangement and
doping on the occurrence of superconductivity at high temperatures.

Some of the experimental results on these compounds have
demonstrated the limits of and the modifications needed in some of
the prevailing models of high-temperature superconductivity.  A
superconducting quantum-interference device (SQUID) was made from
this compound and operated at the unprecedentedly high temperature
of 114K by the IBM group.

However, he added that the mercury-based compounds are rather
unstable.  Usually, they are not easy to make in pure form, and
they decompose easily at the high temperatures required to shape
them into practical forms, such as wires for power transmission and
generators.   This is to say that Hg is lost at temperatures above
350oC.

Recently, progress has been made in this respect.  By doping the
compounds, the synthesis of the materials has been simplified and
the materials so prepared become more stable.  Preliminary success
has been achieved in wire-making.  Small single crystals of the
compounds have been obtained with high enough quality for
scientific study.

However, more material improvements are needed before these new
compounds can become a material of practice. Chu was not available
to elaborate on these topics at press time.  Look for a follow-up
in next month's issue.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Optical Waveguides of
Alumina Thin Films

Alumina waveguides formed by reactive rf magnetron sputtering were
studied by researchers at Massachusetts Insitute of Technology and
Hanscom Air Force Base (Lionel O. Bouthillette, Optoelectric
Components Branch, Hanscom AFB, Bedford, MA 01731-2909) as a
candidate material for optical waveguides.  Use of sputtering to
form alumina films enables it to be deposited in the amorphous
state, removing the necessity of achieving a crystallographic match
with the substrate.  The researchers describe in the Journal of the
American Ceramic Society amorphous alumina films deposited at
temperatures up to 800 oC and varying oxygen flow rates in the
deposition chamber.

The refractive index of the amorphous alumina films averaged 1.65
over a transmission range of 200 nm to 7 microns with reproducible
losses of 1dB/cm at a 632.8 nm wavelength.  A refractive index of
greater than 1.4 is desirable for compatibility with silicon
technology and less than 1.8 for coupling with fibers.  The
chemical inertness, adherence, hardness, wear resistance, and
mechanical durability of alumina films additionally makes these
materials suitable for waveguide applications.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Lightning Optical Picks
Up Two SBIR Contracts

Two Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) contracts totaling
almost $700,000 have been awarded to Lightning Optical Corp. (431
E. Spruce St., Tarpon Springs, FL 34689; Tel: 813/938-0092, Fax:
813/938-9493). Gregory J. Quarles and Arlete Cassanho, director of
research and senior research scientist, respectively, at Lightning
Optical, will head up the programs.

The first is a $600,000 Phase II award from NASA Langley and will
be in support of solid-state laser materials development at NASA
Langley's Flight Electronics Division.  The SBIR is effective
through 1997 and covers the crystal growth of highly-doped
Cr:LiSrAlF6 (LiSAF) for diode-pumping applications.

The program's primary emphasis is for the company to make use of
their proprietary Czochralski fluoride growth technique to develop
and commercialize a reliable source of LiSAF materials.  The
characterization and optimization of the furnace thermal
characteristics and various growth parameters and their impact on
the crystal structure during the growth process will be included in
the development.

Quarles noted that the Phase II award follows a $65,000 Phase I
program completed in July 1994, which proved that the material
could be grown and losses minimized.  Lightning Optical's process
results in LiSAF ingots about 25 mm in diameter and 170 mm in
length.

The second award is a $71,500 Phase I contract from the Department
of Energy and will be in support of component development for Laser
Technology for Chemical Analysis and Nonproliferation Activities
for DOE.  The SBIR is effective from Sept. 1, 1995, to March 23,
1996.

The emphasis of the research will be crystal growth and
characterization of Cr-doped LiSrGaF6 (LiSGaF) for diode-pumped,
solid-state laser applications.  A second focus is on the
development of environmentally rugged ultraviolet coatings for
nonlinear crystals.  The final area of research is the measurement
of thermo-optical parameters and laser efficiencies of Cr:LiSAF and
Cr:LiSGaF under identical conditions.  The purpose of this testing
is to determine which material is more robust and better suited to
the applications.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Display Panels Made
from Plastic Wrap

U.S. Patent 5,469,020 was issued on Nov. 21, 1995, to the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology for a flexible large-screen
display that has multiple light-emitting elements sandwiched
between crossed electrodes.  The inventor is Bradley R. Herrick
(Lincoln Laboratory, Cambridge, MA 02139; Tel: 617/981-3356).  The
resulting panels are especially well adapted to inexpensive flat-
panel TV screens or exceptionally large flat-panel displays whose
geometry is not limited to flat surfaces, but may take on curved or
cylindrical configurations.

The patent abstract explains that active light-emitting components
are integrated into a thin, flexible, plastic-wrap like film to
provide an exceptionally large continuous display in which the film
contains densely distributed light-emitting elements that are
addressed by a grid of transparent conductors.  Inexpensive bulk
processing techniques are used to produce plastic wrap with
embedded components completely through the film to permit
activation via a row-column matrix.  The displays are comprised of
a flexible film having two opposing sides and a pair of crossed
electrodes on either side of the film.  A number of light-emitting
elements are dispersed in the film and extend from one side of the
film to the other, sandwiched between the crossed electrodes.  The
light-emitting elements are small enough to permit numbers of the
elements to exist at a crossover.

The topological layout provides mass redundancy of components,
spatial decorrelation of component yields, and dramatic reduction
in registration problems of metallic interconnects.  The design can
be used for electroluminescent tape in automotive pin striping and
sign applications, for flexible glue-on displays, and for video
displays such as workstations, HDTV, theater screens, and
billboards.

Herrick explained that the patent is based on theory for the time
being, and that no working models currently exist.  He also said
that calculations indicate that the thinner the plastic the better,
and he would initially be working with films in the 10 to 100
micron thickness range.  The concept involves placing up to
hundreds of diodes in a single pixel, making the technology most
suitable to displays larger than 60 inches diagonally and scaleable
to even larger sizes.  He is currently assembling a production team
and says the only real problem is the same one faced industry-wide
-- blue diodes.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Brewer offers Unique
Ion-Implanted Polymers

Brewer Science Inc. (2401 Brewer Drive, Rolla, MO 65401; Tel:
314/364-0300, Fax: 314/368-3318) has developed an ion-implanted
polymer with conductive coating applications.  The product can be
patterned by standard photolithography to form small geometry
features and suspended bridge structures.  Resistivity at 25oC is
variable from 400 ohms/square to 20 megaohms/square, and film
thickness ranges from 500 to 1500 angstroms.

According to Brewer's Joseph J. Schueter, the company is actively
pursuing teaming and/or funding partners in order to take this
product to the commercial market.  He also notes that many of the
product's applications can be demonstrated in-house.  Brewer
Science is a mid-sized specialty chemical manufacturer located
about 90 miles southwest of St. Louis.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

New Group of
Epoxy Compounds

U.S. Patent 5,468,886 was issued to Ciba-Geigy Corp. (Switzerland)
on Nov. 21, 1995, for a group of (cyclo)aliphatic epoxy compounds.
The inventors are Bettina Steinmann, Jean-Pierre Wolf, Adrian
Schulthess, and Max Hunziker.  The epoxies are said to be useful
for the production of coating formulations, adhesives,
photoresists, or in stereolithography.

The new (cyclo)aliphatic epoxy compounds contain at least one
acrylate group in the molecule and at least one cycloaliphatic
epoxy group.  The compounds may also contain a cyclohexyl radical
or a hydrogenated radical, a monovalent to hexavalent aliphatic
alcohol radical, an aromatic-aliphatic alcohol radical, a
monovalent to tetravalent polyether or polyester radical, a
monovalent to tetravalent polycaprolactone radical, a monovalent to
tetravalent polyurethane radical, and hydrogen or methane groups.
The epoxies are said to contain a cohesive homogeneous network and
result in the production of objects having very good green strength
and very good strength properties.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

The Payoff in
No-Clean

Low-residue soldering processes now being used by the electronics
industry in manufacturing military equipment are saving time and
money while reducing pollution, according to a recent task force
report.

Texas Instruments reports that since it received permission to use
low-residue soldering for work done under more than 60 military
contracts, it has reduced its materials-processing costs for
printed circuit boards by 96 percent. Texas Instruments was one of
nine companies and military organizations that collaborated with
the U.S. Department of Energy in a task force evaluation of the use
of such processes for making military components. The task force
was organized by Sandia National Laboratories, a DOE multiprogram
national laboratory.

Conventional processes for soldering printed wiring boards use an
activated rosin-based flux prior to soldering to remove oxidation.
Oxidation also is prevented by doing the soldering in a sealed
nitrogen chamber. The rosin-based flux leaves a tacky residue that
previously was removed with ozone-depleting chlorofluorocarbon
(CFC) solvents. It has been estimated that solvents used to clean
electronic equipment accounted for 24 percent of the consumption of
CFCs in the United States.

Low-residue processes eliminate the need for these CFC cleaning
solvents by using a mild organic acid as the fluxing agent. These
organic agents, such as the common food additive adipic acid, leave
little residue and require no cleaning.

When the Low-Residue Soldering Task Force was organized in 1993,
low-residue processes were being used for commercial applications,
but the Department of Defense required that use of the low-residue
processes to manufacture military equipment be negotiated on a
contract-by-contract basis. The task force was charged with
evaluating these processes for general use in manufacturing
military electronic components.

Sandia researcher Ron Iman (Tel: 505/844-8834) chaired the task
force, which consisted of 17 core members and a team of more than
100 people from 17 companies, three military services, and 12
laboratories and technical centers.

The task force tested low-residue processes at four manufacturing
sites -- Texas Instruments, Hughes Electronics, Alliant
Techsystems, and AlliedSignal's Kansas City Division. Each company
used low-residue processes to produce 80 test printed-wiring
boards. After extensive testing, the task force concluded that
these boards were as good as those manufactured by using rosin
flux.

For confirming the value of the low-residue soldering processes,
the task force was recognized with the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency's 1995 Stratospheric Ozone Protection Award.
Stephen O. Anderson, deputy director of the EPA's Stratospheric
Protection Division, called the task force's findings "one of the
most important soldering reports of the decade."

Besides Sandia and the four companies, other organizations
participating in the task force were the Naval Air Warfare Centers
(China Lake, CA, and Indianapolis, IN); the Army Missile Command
(Huntsville, Ala); the Air Force Materiel Command (Wright-Patterson
Air Force Base); and the Electronics Manufacturing Productivity
Facility.

Jeff Koon, a Texas Instruments process engineer who served on the
task force, says Texas Instruments is now using a low-residue
process in its production facility in McKinney, Texas. Using the
process is saving more than $300,000 annually in materials costs,
Koon says. It also is simpler to use and saves time in the
production process.

Koon says the low-residue process is friendlier to the environment
in several ways. It eliminates the need for CFCs and other noxious
cleaning materials, and it significantly reduces the amount of lead
dross produced during the manufacturing process.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Qualitek, Heraeus Intro
New Products at NEPCON

Qualitek International Inc. (315 Fairbanks St., Addison, IL 60101;
Tel: 708/628-8083, Fax: 708/628-6543) will debut a range of new
solders and solder fluxes at the upcoming NEPCON West '96
conference.  The trade show conference is to be held at the Anaheim
(CA) Convention Center February 25-29.

Fluxes include No. 302, a halogen-free organic product formulated
for mass wave soldering of conventional and surface-mount PCB
assemblies that contains no rosins or resins and only 2% solids.
Also for mass wave soldering is product number 350N, a water-based,
VOC-free, no-clean flux described as allowing exceptionally speedy
solder wetting on virtually all types of metallic substrates
without the use of halide activators.  Finally, product number 360F
is flux specifically designed for high-speed automation.  The
product contains no rosins or resins, only 2.7% solids, and
complies to Bellcore and Joint Industry Standards.

The company will also introduce three new solder pastes: NL 600 is
a lead free, no-clean paste designed to replace Sn63/Pb37,
Sn62/Pb36/Ag2, and Sn60/Pb40 alloys and has a melting range of
188oC to 197oC;  product no. 6701 is also a no-clean paste
formulated for applications requiring greater tackiness, such as
high-speed printing and component placement; and product no. 794 is
a water-soluble paste that offers enhanced tack and extended
stencil life.  See Debbie Liguori in booth 1300.

Also unveiling new products at NEPCON, in booth 1478, will be the
Cermalloy Division of Heraeus Inc. (1506 Old Bethlehem Pike,
Sellersville, PA 18960; Tel: 215/453-8700, Fax: 215/453-1670).  The
company will feature new adhesives and fluxes for surface-mount
applications, as well as provide information about Heraeus' ongoing
research into no-lead solders.

The company's new PD94X family of humidity-intensive, solvent-free,
single-component, thermosetting polymer adhesives will be featured.
The products are designed specifically for mounting components on
printed circuit boards as well as bare boards.  Also to be featured
is Heraeus Cermalloy's SURF10, which is a water-based, no-clean
wave-solder flux for surface-mount, through-hole, and mixed
technologies.  The company says the product offers lower residue
and a wider pre-heat temperature tolerance than competing products.
A SURF10 data sheet and a free 1 gal. sample may be obtained by
contacting Christina Kistler at Heraeus.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Book-to-Bill Down, but
Billings Hit New High

The Semiconductor Industry Association reports its preliminary
book-to-bill ratio for the North American market in December
dropped slightly from November's figure of 1.10 to 1.09.  However,
billings for the month came in at a record $4.43 billion, up 38.4%,
or $1.23 billion, over December of 1994.

Additionally, the book-to-bill ratio also indicates that, despite
the record, bookings continue to strongly outpace billings.  The
ratio indicates that for every $100 billed, the industry registered
$109 in new orders.  Overall, billings rose 0.5% over November's
figures, and bookings declined from the November record of $4.87
billion to $4.82 billion.  Preliminary figures for 1995 show that
billings for the North American semiconductor market rose 39.8% to
$46.9 billion.

Electronic Materials Technology Stock Watch
(as of Jan. 10)

A tough period for most of the group.  While Spire was unchanged,
only Furon Co. and Morton Int. showed gains, both under 5%.  The
rest of the group posted losses ranging from as little as 1.3% to
as high as 15.4% of their value.  Five of the issues lost more than
9%.  Hadco Corp. suffered the second largest loss, 15.3%, which
comes on the heels of last month's 20% drop.

                               This       Last
Company              Symbol    Month     Month      Change

Dexter Corp.         DEX       23.75     26.38       -2.63
Furon Co.            FCY       18.50     17.75      +0.75
Hadco Corp.          HDCO      23.50     27.75       -4.25
Intermagnetics       IMG       19.88     23.50       -3.62
Imtec                IMTC      10.00     10.13       -0.13
Morton Int.          MII       35.25     34.25      +1.00
Premark Int. Inc.    PMI       49.88     51.38       -1.50
Rogers Corp.         ROG       22.25     24.50       -2.25
Sheldahl Inc.        SHEL      16.25     18.75       -2.50
Selectron Corp.      SLR       39.75     41.63       -1.88
Spire                SPIR        2.00      2.00        ----



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Commerce Department
Reduces Export Controls

Action by the Commerce Department to reduce export controls that
create obstacles such as licensing burdens and delays for U.S.
semiconductor companies drew nothing but praise from the
Semiconductor Industry Association (181 Metro Drive, Suite 450, San
Jose, CA 95110; Tel: 408/436-6600, Fax: 408/436-6646).  The new
regulation, which went into effect Dec. 20, liberalizes export
controls on certain semiconductor devices shipped to China, the
republics of the former Soviet Union, and certain other
destinations for civilian end uses.

In a statement released to coincide with the start of the new
policy, SIA President Thomas W. Armstrong said, "This modernization
of export controls on semiconductors will greatly reduce needless
and costly licensing delays and burdensome paperwork.  These
reductions will lead to further export opportunities in areas with
major growth potential over the next decade."

The SIA notes that commercial semiconductors represent one of the
least controllable and most widely available high-technology
products in the world today.  Further maintenance of the old export
controls would have damaged U.S. industry without making any
material contribution to U.S. security.

Armstrong added, "The Commerce Department has made substantial
progress in the reduction of outmoded export licensing
requirements.  Continuation of this export liberalization process
to reflect the end of the Cold war will only stimulate business
opportunities and job creation."

In a related development, SIA also reported that the foreign share
in the Japan market for semiconductors rose more than 3% in the
third quarter to 26.2%.  Though no specific figures regarding the
U.S. share of the increase were available, Armstrong touted the
competitiveness of domestic chip makers as well as the U.S.-Japan
agreement as major factors.  SIA spokesman Jeff Weir said that
indications pointed to a "substantial" U.S. share in the increase.

Armstrong also added that "strong relationships between the U.S.
and Japanese industries are being built," which would not have been
possible without the agreement.  Weir emphasized the SIA's support
for renewal of the pact, due this year, which is meeting some
resistance in Japan.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Alpha Metals
Acquires SMT

Alpha Metals Inc. (600 Route 440, Jersey City, NJ 07304; Tel:
201/434-6778, Fax: 201/434-6548) has acquired Screen Manufacturing
Technologies Inc., a Santa Clara, CA-based producer of chemically
etched stencils.  SMT becomes a division of Alpha Metals, itself a
part of the Cookson Group, a publicly traded, $2.5 billion multi-
national company.

The deal expands Alpha's line of stencil products used in the
assembly of circuit boards.  The company also develops and
manufactures solders, cleaners, preforms, fluxes, and solder creams
in no-clean and water-soluble formulations.  Ian Fleck, product
manager for Alpha, called the acquisition a "natural fit for both
companies.  This enables Alpha to become a single resource for
electronic manufacturers with wide-ranging process needs."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Ultratech, Photronics in
Strategic Alliance

Ultratech Stepper Inc. (3050 Zanker Road, San Jose, CA 95134; Tel:
408/321-8835, Fax: 408/577-3376) and Photronics Inc. (Tel: 203/775-
9000) have signed a strategic alliance for reticle manufacturing.
The companies will collaborate to develop strategies addressing
industry demands for 1X reticles used in advanced integrated-
circuit production.

Under the agreement, Ultratech and Photronics will investigate
technology-development opportunities of mutual benefit.  The pair
will also address customers' requirements for increased
performance, timeliness, and cost effectiveness.  Ultratech
President and CEO Arthur Zafiropoulo explained that the companies
"are known for forging strong relationships with their customers."
He added that the agreement "will provide the vision and
perspective necessary to pursue a unified effort to address
industry's demands."  Ultratech supplies photolithography systems
used in the manufacture of semiconductors and thin-film heads,
while Photronics supplies the required photomasks.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

ART Teams with
European Firm

Advanced Refractory Technologies Inc. (699 Hertel Ave., Buffalo, NY
14207; Tel: 716/875-4091, Fax: 716/875-0106) and N. V. Bekaert S.
A. Hjave signed an agreement to develop and market ART's DYLYN
thin-film coating technology in Europe.  The agreement will result
in commercialization of the technology in Europe via customer-
specific application development.

Under terms of the agreement, Bekaert acquires from ART the
worldwide exclusive right to design, manufacture, and sell DYLYN
deposition equipment to companies licensed by ART to use the
technology.  The equipment will be constructed by Sinvaco (Deinze,
Belgium) which is majority owned by Bekaert.

DYLYN is a family of diamond-like coatings consisting of two
interpenetrating networks, one based on carbon and the other based
on silicon.  The coatings offer low friction, high adherence, and
corrosion resistance.  According to ART's Mary Spohn, the materials
can also be tailored via the addition of metals and ceramics to
provide desired properties such as electrical conductivity or
resistivity.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Radiance Process Is
Technology of the Year

IndustryWeek Magazine has chosen Radiance Services Co.'s (4405
East-West Hwy., Suite 512, Bethesda, MD 20814; Tel: 301/654-0228,
Fax: 301/654-1034) Radiance Process as a Technology of the Year
award winner.  Radiance Services was one of only five companies or
institutions so honored.

The novel system cleans wafer surfaces without the use of
chemicals.  It makes use of a pulsed-laser light source radiating
between 172 and 257 nm and a flowing inert gas.  The energy
imparted by the light lifts away contaminants, which are then
carried away by the flowing gas.  The light's energy is capable of
breaking covalent, ionic, coulombic, dipole-dipole, and hydrogen
bonds holding the contaminants to the surface.  Laminar flow of the
gas is said to provide a stable boundary layer, preventing
contaminant reattachment.

The company recently announced an agreement with Microelectronics
Research Laboratory of the U.S. Department of Defense and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency for the EPA to provide funding to
acquire a Radiance Process wafer-cleaning system for a
demonstration project.  The project is to be managed by the MRL and
the EPA's National Risk Management Research Laboratory.  The EPA
will contribute $335,000 to the construction of the tools as part
of its Environmental Technology Initiative.  The process is
currently being demonstrated at Diffraction Ltd. in Waitsfield, VT,
and at IMEC in Leuven, Belgium.

Radiance Services President Donna Fitzpatrick was delighted with
the award, saying that the publication has proven itself superb at
picking winners.  She added that the award was an acknowledgment of
the recognition Radiance has received from around the world.  She
also noted recent recognition from Solid State Technology for their
innovative marketing strategy.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Manufacturing Services
to Get New SIC Codes

The U.S. Department of Commerce and the Bureau of the Census, in
cooperation with the Institute for Interconnecting and Packaging
Electronic Circuits (2215 Sanders Road, Northbrook, IL 60062-6135;
Tel: 708/509-9700, Fax: 708/509-9798), have developed a new
Standard Industry Classification (SIC) Code for the Electronic
Manufacturing Services Industry (EMSI).

The code, 3679800, establishes the government's recognition of what
has become an $11 billion-a-year industry.  The new description,
codes, and request for data will be published by the Department of
Commerce in their 1995 instruction manual, MA36Q, and will be sent
to EMS providers early this year.

The new code is broken down into seven markets: "Computer and
peripheral printed board assemblies (3679851)"; "Communications
printed board assemblies (3679853)"; "Industrial process control
board assemblies (3679855)"; "Instrumentation printed board
assemblies (3679857)"; "Search and Detection printed board
assemblies (3679859)"; "Consumer electronic printed board
assemblies (3679861)"; and "Other electronics, printed board
assemblies (3679890)."  The previous one-line SIC description for
the industry read, "Receipts for work by contract assemblers, board
stuffers, and related job shops."

Additionally, work continues with the Department of Commerce in the
development of a new North American Industrial Classification
System (NAICS).  IPC is seeking to ensure proper recognition and
clarification of the NAICS codes for printed board assemblies,
printed boards, and laminate base material.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Group to Set Exit
Charge Standards

Electrostatic charges are the cause of a wide array of problems in
semiconductor-manufacturing processes, ranging from circuit damage
and particle contamination to outright equipment malfunctions.  The
industry believes that static-related problems cost it more than
$100 million a year in lost productivity and reduced yields.

Now, a new group has been formed to add muscle to the fight against
static discharge problems.  The Exit-Charge Working Group is made
up of Arnold Steinman of Ion Systems, Julian Montoya of Intel
Corp., David Jensen of Advanced Micro Devices, Michael Yost of the
University of Washington, Vaughn Gross of IBM Microelectronics,
Robert Donovan of Sandia National Laboratories, Steve Silverman of
Meissner & Wurst, Fred Lakhani of Sematech, Al Lieberman of
Particle Measuring Systems, Jay Shideler of National Semiconductor,
and Chris Billat of KLA Instruments.

At the Group's second meeting, held recently in Austin, TX,
Steinman noted that the ESD Association studies the effects of
static charge from and on people but have yet to tackle equipment
issues.  According to Gross, its goal is the development of a SEMI
standard that will "set acceptable levels of static charge for the
purposes of eliminating equipment problems due to ESD events that
produce electromagnetic interference, eliminating equipment
problems due to difficulties in handling charged objects, reducing
the attraction of particles to charged surfaces, and reducing
product and reticle damage due to ESD."

Steinman added that existing SEMI Standard 801-2 does address ESD
immunity levels for equipment only, and it relies on test levels
that are much lower than is actually experienced in operation.
Thus, the standards fall short of protecting both wafers and
equipment at key stages of the manufacturing process.

The Group will focus on the development of a matrix of various
levels of static charge and recommended practices.  A meeting with
SEMI standards officials is set for the Working Group's next
gathering, which will take place in Norfolk, VA, where the
formation of a standards committee on exit charge will be
discussed.  The plan is to have a SEMI standard in place in 1997.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

IPC Has the
Right Stuff

The IPC Printed Circuits Expo, to be held March 3-7, 1996, at the
San Jose (CA) Convention Center, will feature former astronaut
Capt. Wally Schirra as keynote speaker.  His address can be heard
on March 5.

Captain Schirra is the only astronaut to have flown Mercury,
Gemini, and Apollo missions.  In 1962, he piloted the Sigma 7
Mercury craft on its six-orbit mission and later served as Command
Pilot for Gemini 6.  That mission included the successful
rendezvous with Gemini 7.  He also served as Command Pilot for
Apollo VII in 1968, which was the first flight test of the three-
person spacecraft.

The Printed Circuit Expo will feature some 100 technical
presentations, 21 workshops, and will house nearly 650 exhibit
booths.  Further, IPC expects the event to draw some 3,500
attendees to what is the largest trade show and technical
conference in North America exclusively devoted to the printed wire
board industry.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Diamond Nucleation by
Gas-Phase Seeding

Diamond films have been deposited on substrates without
pretreatment by placement of a nickel wire above the substrate by
a group in Germany, led by Ch. Woll (Institut fur Angewandte
Physikalische Chemie, Universitat Heidelberg, INF 253, 69120
Heidelberg, Germany; E-mail: cc1@ix.urz.uni-heidelberg.de),
according to Applied Physics Letters..  The nickel wire was seen to
increase the nucleation density by five orders of magnitude.
Electron microscopy showed continuous diamond films to be produced
with Raman spectroscopy and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
showing the presence of Ni in the diamond phase.

The diamond was grown in a standard hot-filament CVD chamber with
a tungsten hot coil and a resistively heated substrate holder.  The
substrate (100 or 111 silicon or Cu) was heated to 800oC -850oC, 5
mm from the filament.  Growth rates of 0.5-1 micron/hour were
attained in a 0.5% methane, 95.5% hydrogen at a 100 sccm flow rate.
When the Ni wires were placed 0.5-1 mm from the substrate, diamond
was seen to grow preferentially in the area in line with the Ni
wire and the coil.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Lam Upgrades
CVD Systems

Lam Research Corp. (4650 Cushing Pkwy., Fremont, CA 94538-6470;
Tel: 510/659-0200, Fax: 510/572-2935) has announced upgrades to the
company's Integrity PMD (premetal dielectric) and Epic IMD
(intermetal dielectric) chemical vapor-deposition (CVD) tools first
introduced for advanced development efforts in 1990 and 1993
respectively.  The new systems address production-level dielectric
film needs for devices produced with 0.35-micron design rules and
below.

The deep SubMicron (DSM) 9900 deposits insulating films between
metal layers for IMD applications, while the DSM 9800 deposits
dielectric films prior to first metallization in PMD applications.
The 9800 will also handle such applications as SiO2 spacers and
Ta2O5 storage capacitors for 256-megabyte DRAMs.  Lam's Chairman
and CEO Roger D. Emerick noted that both systems have deposited
films on devices with 0.18-micron features, and the 9800 has
deposited films of high quality on 300 mm wafers (EMTN, August).

The company said the new 9000-series CVD tools offer features
developed in cooperation with several leading chipmakers and the
industry consortium SEMATECH.  Changes include footprint
reductions, throughput increases, and newly developed process
solutions for specific film types.  Lam also claims a reduced cost
of ownership for the latest designs.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

New Ion Implanter
From Applied Materials

Applied Materials (Santa Clara, CA; Tel: 408/727-5555) introduced
its Precision Implant xR80 ion implanter that is targeted to the
low-energy implant market.  The energy range is capped at 80 KeV,
but the system performs the delicate task of forming the
transistors on chips with deep submicron design rules.

The new implanter is capable of generating a beam at relatively
high current levels (5 milliamps at 5 KeV).  This boosts throughput
when forming the shallow junctions, as opposed to deep wells, of
DRAM and logic devices built with 0.25- and .18-micron line widths.
The xR80 is tailored to the formation of transistors and differs
from the recently announced Genus implanter, which is more of a
general purpose system.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Focused Ion Beams
Make Smaller Chips

Los Alamos National Lab researchers are trying to make smaller
computer chips using technology first developed for the Ballistic
Missile Defense Organization's now defunct Neutral Particle
program.  Ion beams used in microlithography are focused by
magnetic optics.  This technology offers narrower linewidths than
now possible, which makes more compact and powerful circuits.

According to Tom Mottershead (Tel: 505/667-9730) of Los Alamos,
this technology can achieve a 25-to-1 reduction in beam diameter.
A sharp focus such as this allows the beam to deliver high current
densities for etching the fine lines of microchip circuitry.  The
technology is also useful in probing the surfaces of high-density
microcircuits, inspecting the patterns of photomasks, and checking
for defects.  Data storage is another possible application as
focused beams of gallium ions could read and write data in media
more durable than today's CD-ROM.

Mottershead has proposed experimentation on an in-house basis at
the Lab's Accelerator Operations and Technology Division using an
existing tandem electrostatic accelerator and is interested in
possible collaborations with industry.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Curable Printed
Circuit Boards

Curable flame-retardant resins intended for use as the basic
material in printed circuit boards has been prepared by Gurit-Essex
(Papiermuhlestrasse 155, CH 3063 Ittigen-Bern, Switzerland; Tel:
31/580388) scientists.  Herbert Schriber, Gunter Burkart, and Bruno
Knaus report that the new formulation includes a thermally curable
1-oxa-3-aza tetraline group-containing compound, a curable epoxy
compound, and a flame retardant.  The flame-retardant additive may
be aluminum hydroxide, magnesium hydroxide, elemental red
phosphorus, oxygen acids of phosphorus, inorganic salts of oxygen
acids of phosphorus, polyphosphates, boric acid, or salts of boric
acid.

Although bromine-based flame-retardant additives impart the
required flame retardance to resins used in the manufacture of
printed circuit boards, they can generate poisonous and/or
corrosive gases when exposed to fire.  As a result the Gurit-Essex
researchers sought a nonhalogenated alternative to flame retard the
resins.  U.S. Patent 5,443,911 explains the Gurit-Essex work in
detail.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "36"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

New Testing
Probes Developed

Researchers at the New Jersey Institute of Technology's
Microelectronics Research Center (University Heights, Newark, NJ
07102-1982; Tel: 201/596-3434, Fax: 201/624-2541) have developed
two new types of probes for testing semiconductor chips.  According
to center spokesman Paul F. Hassen, the first device measures the
function of the chip or chip package itself, while the second looks
for hot spots.

The Conformable, HI-Pin-count, Programmable (CHIPP) probe card is
said to offer several advantages over current technology.  The
device can be conformed to match chip pads that may be found on
various levels or a curved surface.  It can also make contact with
closely spaced pads and can be programmed to handle a large number
of chip designs.  The research was funded by NJIT and Pacific
Western Systems Inc.

The heat sensor uses a thermometer probe to measure chip surface
temperatures over distances as small as a few tens of atoms.  Aside
from scanning for the tiniest of hot spots, it can also serve as
the probe tip for scanning tunneling and atomic force microscopes.
Research on this device was funded by Murray Hill Devices Inc. and
Digital Equipment Corp.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "37"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

HYT Debuts New
Particle Sensor

Pacific Scientific's High Yield Technology (HYT) Division (1178
Bordeaux Drive, Sunnyvale, CA 94089; Tel: 408/541-6455, Fax:
408/541-6450) has released the Model 8000 in situ particle-
monitoring system.  The device is designed specifically for use in
the 8310 oxide and 8330 metal etch systems from Applied Materials.

The Model 8000 is an updated version of HYT's Model 8330 turbo
sensor and integrates directly into the throttle valve of these
popular etch tools to provide production-level monitoring in real
time.  The system's sensitivity has been increased to 0.4 microns,
and it features a new thermoelectric cooler to help maintain laser
operating temperature and stable sensor performance. Peter Borden
emphasizes that for process-control optimization "in-situ sensors
are key enablers."

The complete package includes the controller, PC-based software for
data analysis, and hardware for synchronization of particle counts
with the process cycle.  The base price is $20,700, and HYT says it
can deliver in 30 days.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "38"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Spectropolarimeter
Is Small, Fast

Research Corp. Technology (101 N. Walnut Road, Suite 600, Tucson,
AZ 85711-3335; Tel: 520/748-4400, Fax: 520/748-0025) has licensed
new technology to Containerless Research Inc. (Evanston, IL) for
the development of enhanced photo- and spectropolarimeters.  RCT
manages the technology for the University of New Orleans and the
inventor, Rasheed M. A. Azzam.

As a result of the new technology, CRI expects polarization to find
wide use in optical systems such as lasers, modulators,
interferometers, etc.  The company believes the devices could find
use as transducers to monitor coating and film-production
processes, as well as in the development and use of optically
active chemicals, catalysts, and pharmaceuticals.

According to CRI President Paul Nordine (Tel: 708/476-2678, Fax:
708/467-2679), the lack of a simple, portable device for measuring
polarization has limited the development of polarimetry
applications.  He called the new invention a  breakthrough that is
"smaller, lighter, faster, and simpler than conventional
instruments, as well as more rugged, sensitive, and repeatable.  We
envision an accurate device with no moving parts, prisms, beam
splitters, or modulators, capable of real-time resolved
spectropolarimetry."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "39"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Product Award to
Digital Instruments

Digital Instruments (520 E. Montecito St., Santa Barbara, CA 93103,
Tel: 805/899-3380, Fax: 805/899-3392) received the prestigious
National New Product Award by the National Society of Professional
Engineers for the Scanning Probe Microscope tradenamed the
Dimension 7000.  The award will be presented to DI President Virgil
Elings.

According to the NSPE, "The award recognizes companies that are
developing innovative products and advancing technology through
outstanding engineering achievements.  They are given to the
creative minds that establish new products in the marketplace that
benefit the general public and the economy of California."

This is DI's first national award, after being honored by the
California Society of Professional Engineers for the best new
product in three of the last four years.  "This award is
particularly meaningful to us since it is voted on by our
engineering peers," said Elings.  DI's previous winners included
their original Atomic Force Microscope and the Large Sample Stage
SPM.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "40"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

New Defect-Data
Management System

Tencor Instruments (Mountain View, CA; Tel: 408/654-2926)
introduced a defect-data management system tradenamed SwiftAccess
that performs fast, in-line analysis of defect data from a variety
of sources, including the company's new Surfscan inspection system.

Identification of defects and their significance is becoming more
critical to the inspection process.  Although current inspection
systems generate large amounts of defect data, the info is only
valuable if device makers can use it to improve their manufacturing
process.  Therefore, they need a fast, reliable means of viewing,
analyzing, and acting on the defect data generated during
inspection.  SwiftAccess is designed to meet this need.

The system collects and analyzes defect data as it is gathered from
inspection systems, scanning electron microscopes (SEMs), review
stations, and probe and test systems, and then uses the information
to monitor the process, identify process excursions and provide
critical process-control information.  It can distribute data over
mulitple networked nodes, independent of the hardware platform, and
can collect data from the majority of inspection systems.  Designed
for ease of use, SwiftAccess features an X-Windows architecture and
Unix operating system that enable smooth integration into a fab's
existing network.  The system offers high reliability and
robustness, as well as scalability for next-generation
applications.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "41"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

New Copper
Heat Sink Design

Aavid Thermal Technologies Inc. (1 Kool Path, P.O. Box 400,
Laconia, NH 03247-0040; Tel: 603/528-3400, Fax: 603/528-1478) has
added a new heat sink to its extensive lineup designed to cool low-
power devices in surface-mount packages.  The devices use highly
conductive copper in a profile only 0.013 inches thick for use in
tight quarters.

According to Gary Kuzmin, Aavid's director of corporate technical
marketing, the new Thin-Fin product line may be affixed to a
surface-mount package even if heat sink attachment was not
considered in the design process.  The low-profile configuration
requires minimum vertical clearance and allows continued reductions
in system enclosure sizes.

The surface of the heat sink extends beyond the boundaries of the
package, increasing the dissipating surface.  Further, the extended
surfaces are scored to allow for folding of the devices to provide
clearance around other components.  A pressure-sensitive adhesive
is pre-applied.  The adhesive has a low modulus to take up CTE
mismatch and is pliable to conform to surface irregularities.






<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "42"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

BOOKS AND REPORTS

EDN Offers New Guide to
Analog Circuit Design

A part of EDN's Series for Design Engineers edited by Jim Williams,
The Art and Science of Analog Circuit Design, is an interesting and
unusual blend of prose (Art) and how-to (Science).  The 398-page
volume, a follow up to the original Analog Circuit Design - Art,
Science, and Personalities, is sprinkled with anecdotes offered up
by each of its 17 authors, including Williams, so much so as to
make it interesting to read in its own right.  Also included is a
chapter adapted from a commencement address given at Cal Tech by
Richard P. Feynman in 1974, a truly fascinating eight pages.

The book is presented in four parts: Learning How; Making it Work;
Selling It; and Guidance and Commentary.  In its 20 chapters can be
found such topics as design productivity, signal conditioning, IC
development, computer use, and linear IC design.  The volume also
includes a heavy and perhaps necessary, emphasis on economics.
Like it or not, a good design is worthless if it can't be sold.
The book is published by Butterworth-Heinemann (313 Washington St.,
Newton, MA 02158-1626; Tel: 617/928-2500, Fax: 617/928-2620).

Every Aspect
of VCSELs

Vertical Cavity Surface Emitting Lasers, by Terence Edward Sale of
the U.K.-based University of Sheffield, covers the principles,
theory, design, and operation of vertical cavity surface-emitting
lasers (VCSELs).  Semiconductor lasers have advanced a long way
since their first demonstration in the early 1960s and have a large
impact on many devices today.

They act as sources for optical fiber systems and permit the
reading of data from compact discs and barcode labels.  VCSELs have
many advantages over conventional semiconductor lasers.  The most
obvious is the possibility of very large arrays and a narrow
circular output beam, which can be efficiently coupled into the
core of a fiber.  As a result, the author believes that the time
for a book devoted to VCSELs has come.

The first chapter of the volume describes the history and prospects
of VCSELs and the choice of material systems for emission in
different wavelengths.  The second chapter concerns the optical
properties of short vertical cavities, and the quantum-mechanical
processes facilitating optical gain and spontaneous emission
processes are the focus of the third chapter.  Concepts are
developed from basic principles, and the effect of strain on the
optical processes in quantum wells is also covered.  Readers are
introduced to techniques for epitaxial crystal growth and the
fabrication of VCSEL devices in Chapter 4, and Chapter 5 explores
the resistance problems that can arise due to the many
heterojunctions in dielectric reflector stacks.

Chapters 6 and 7 are case studies that describe measurements made
on 2 VCSEL structures, one grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE)
and the other by metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD).
In Chapter 8, experimental data from these case studies are
analyzed using models, and the final chapter describes other
aspects of VCSELs, such as modulation response, arrays, and noise
performance.

The book does a good job of covering the VCSEL field and should be
of value to those experienced in the optics field, as well as to
novices and students.  Vertical Cavity Surface Emitting Lasers is
published by John Wiley & Sons Inc. (605 Third Ave., New York, NY
10158; Tel: 212/850-6336). 1995.  Price: $89.95.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "43"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

WORKSHOPS - SEMINARS

Flotherm Seminars.  Learn the applications of this thermal modeling
software in seminars offered nationwide through June 26.  For
schedule, contact: Ann Singer, Flomerics Inc., 2 Mount Royal Ave.,
Marlborough, MA 01752; Tel: 800/370-9522, Fax: 508/624-0559.

Engineering Short Courses. Three- to four-day courses at UCLA on
MCMs, hybrids, and testing. For schedule, contact: UCLA Extension,
P.O. Box 24901, Dept. K, Los Angeles, CA 90024; Tel: 310/825-3344,
Fax: 310/206-2815.

University Consortium for Continuing Education (UCCE). Seminars and
short courses on a wide range of topics, offered nationwide or on
site. For schedule, contact: UCCE,  16161 Ventura Blvd., M/S C-752,
Encino, CA 91436; Tel: 818/995-2932, Fax: 818/995-2932, E-mail:
ucce@aol.com.

Photolithography and IC Technology. Seminars for technicians and
non technicians, U.S. and Europe. For schedule, contact: Integrated
Circuit Engineering Corp. 15022 N. 75th St., Scottsdale, AZ 85260-
2476; Tel: 602/998-9780, Fax: 602/948-1925.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "44"></A>Copyright
ELECTRONIC MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

CALENDAR

February 8-10, 1996, International Solid-State Circuits Conference,
San Francisco, CA. Contact: IEEE, 445 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ
08855-1331; Tel: 212/705-7900.

February 12-16, 1996, First International Conference on
Microelectronics & Interconnection Technologies, Bangalore, India.
Contact: ISHM, 1850 Centennial Park Drive, Suite 105, Reston, VA
22091; Tel: 703/758-1060, Fax: 703/758-1066, E-mail: ISHM@aol.com.

February 13-16, 1996, ITAP '96, San Jose, CA. Contact: ISHM, 1850
Centennial Park Drive, Suite 105, Reston, VA 22091; Tel: 703/758-
1060, Fax: 703/758-1066, E-mail: ISHM@aol.com.

February 25-29, 1996, NEPCON West '96, Anaheim, CA. Contact: REC,
1350 E. Touhy Ave., P.O. Box 5060, Des Plaines, IL 60017-5060; Tel:
203/964-0000, Fax: 203/964-8489.

March 3-7, 1996, IPC Printed Circuit Expo, San Jose, CA. Contact:
IPC, 2215 Sanders Road, Northbrook, IL 60062-6135; Tel: 708/509-
9700, Fax: 708/509-9798.

March 6-8, 1996, 2nd International Symposium on Advanced Packaging
Materials: Processing, Properties, and Interfaces, Atlanta, GA.
Contact: ISHM, 1850 Centennial Park Drive, Suite 105, Reston, VA
22091; Tel: 703/758-1060, Fax: 703/758-1066, E-mail: ISHM@aol.com.

March 10-15, 1996, Microlithography, Santa Clara, CA. Contact:
SPIE, P.O. Box 10, Bellingham, WA 98227-0010; Tel: 360/676-3290,
Fax: 360/647-1445, E-mail: spie@spie.org.

March 17-20, 1996, Visual Communications and Image Processing,
Orlando, FL. Contact: SPIE, P.O. Box 10, Bellingham, WA 98227-0010;
Tel: 360/676-3290, Fax: 360/647-1445, E-mail: spie@spie.org.

March 18-22, 1996, PCB Design Conference, Santa Clara, CA. Contact:
ARI, 1420 MacArthur Drive, No. 104, Carrolton, TX 75007; Tel:
214/323-0575, Fax: 214/245-8700.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-30</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B019-9</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ml14.html 205.156.212.5 19970122034549 text/html 48876
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:43:50 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:47 GMT
Content-length: 48689
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ml14.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>** REVIEWED REPORTS **</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>TRANSPORT PROPERTIES OF CONCRETE AFFECTING DEGRADATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(84 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>CRACKING IN LARGE-SIZED LONG-SPAN PRESTRESSED CONCRETE&nbsp;GIRDERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(175 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>PAVEMENT AND BRIDGE-CONSTRUCTION RESEARCH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(121 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>CONCRETE PAVEMENTS: EFFECT OF ASPHALT ADDITIVES ON&nbsp;PAVEMENT PERFORMANCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(74 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>ANALYSIS OF A SYSTEM FOR DYNAMICALLY MEASURING ROAD&nbsp;DEFLECTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(169 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>COMPACT HEAT EXCHANGERS: INVESTIGATION OF LOCAL HEAT&nbsp;TRANSFER BY HOLOGRAPHIC INTERFEROMETRY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(204 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>ANALYSIS OF VIBRATION-INDUCED THREAD MOVEMENT IN BOLTED&nbsp;CONNECTIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(217 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>CONTROLLING THE PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF MATERIALS:&nbsp;APPARATUS AND METHODOLOGY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(86 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>PIEZOELECTRIC AND PYROELECTRIC SENSORS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(155 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>COPPER PRECIPITATES AND POINT-DEFECT CLUSTERS IN&nbsp;REACTOR PRESSURE VESSEL EMBRITTLEMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(108 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>RESEARCH ON PRESSURE VESSEL STRUCTURAL INTEGRITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(190 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>PRODUCTION AND EMISSION OF NITROUS OXIDE IN A SEWAGE&nbsp;TREATMENT PLANT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(154 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>CORRELATION OF FRACTURE TOUGHNESS WITH IMPURITY&nbsp;COMPONENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(184 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>METHODS FOR EVALUATING CRACK-GROWTH DATA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(73 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><LI>PROPERTIES AND CREEP RUPTURE BEHAVIOR OF SILICONIZED&nbsp;SILICON CARBIDE AT ELEVATED TEMPERATURES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(145 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>REACTION SYNTHESIS OF FE-AL ALLOYS: EFFECTS OF&nbsp;PROCESSING VARIABLES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(189 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><LI>PLASTICS DECOMPOSITION: THERMAL DEGRADATION, ANALYTICAL&nbsp;TECHNIQUES, AND BYPRODUCTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(115 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><LI>DEFORMATION OF FABRIC-REINFORCED PLASTICS: DESIGN AND&nbsp;IMPLEMENTATION OF A NEW ALGORITHM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(85 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>SELECTED TOPICS ON THE PHYSICAL METALLURGY OF CAST IRON</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(103 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><A HREF = "#20"><LI>PROCESSING AND PROPERTIES OF EXTRUDED TUNGSTEN-HAFNIUM&nbsp;AND TUNGSTEN-STEEL COMPOSITES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(80 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><A HREF = "#21"><LI>IMPROVED DAMAGE-MOTION RELATIONSHIPS USED IN REGIONAL&nbsp;EARTHQUAKE DAMAGE AND LOSS STUDIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(135 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>MANUAL FOR SEISMIC RETROFITTING OF HIGHWAY BRIDGES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(82 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><A HREF = "#23"><LI>CORROSION-RESISTANT STEEL AND ALUMINUM SURFACES BY&nbsp;PULSED ION BEAM SURFACE TREATMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(109 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><A HREF = "#24"><LI>SYNTHESIZING CARBON-FILAMENT-REINFORCED ALUMINUM-MATRIX&nbsp;COMPOSITES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(154 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><A HREF = "#25"><LI>TENSILE DAMAGE PREDICTION FOR CERAMIC-MATRIX COMPOSITES&nbsp;UNDER HIGH TEMPERATURE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(191 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><A HREF = "#26"><LI>USE OF BETA-ALUMINA AS A WEAK INTERFACE IN&nbsp;ALUMINA-FIBER COMPOSITES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(185 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><A HREF = "#27"><LI>PREDICTING THE LIFE OF COMPOSITE LAMINATES: CONSTANT&nbsp;AMPLITUDE AND TWO-STRESS-LEVEL FATIGUE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(186 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><A HREF = "#28"><LI>STATIC FATIGUE OF A NICALON FIBER-REINFORCED SiC&nbsp;COMPOSITE AT ELEVATED TEMPERATURE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(118 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><A HREF = "#29"><LI>THERMOMECHANICAL FATIGUE BEHAVIOR OF CONTINUOUS-FIBER&nbsp;CERAMIC COMPOSITES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(145 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><A HREF = "#30"><LI>DETECTION OF MACHINING DAMAGE IN CERAMICS USING THERMAL&nbsp;WAVE IMAGING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(173 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><A HREF = "#31"><LI>LOW-EXPANSION CERAMICS HAVING STRENGTH RETENTION AT&nbsp;ELEVATED TEMPERATURES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(142 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><A HREF = "#32"><LI>IMPROVED PERFORMANCE OF LINEAR COAL CUTTING IN COAL&nbsp;MINING OPERATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(118 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>MEASUREMENT OF AIR EXCHANGE IN BUILDINGS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(155 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#34"><LI>INTERNATIONAL PETROLEUM STATISTICS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(115 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#35"><A HREF = "#35"><LI>MATHEMATICAL MODELING OF DEFORMATION DURING HOT ROLLING&nbsp;OF STEEL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(131 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#36"><A HREF = "#36"><LI>DEVELOPMENT OF LOW DIELECTRIC ALUMINA-BASED CERAMICS&nbsp;FOR MICROELECTRONIC SUBSTRATES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(307 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

TRANSPORT PROPERTIES OF CONCRETE AFFECTING DEGRADATION

This (NIST) report presents a survey of the current
knowledge of the transport properties of concrete.  The
basic theory and measurement methods are discussed.
Emphasis is placed on transport properties, such as
diffusion, permeability, and capillary flow, that may
play a large role in degradation processes in high
performance concrete.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960101; Feb. 1995, 52 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

CRACKING IN LARGE-SIZED LONG-SPAN PRESTRESSED CONCRETE
GIRDERS

During the production of large-sized long-span
prestressed concrete AASHTO girders in the prestressing
plant, vertical cracks often develop near the mid-third
of the span after the girders have been cured overnight
on the casting bed and before the prestressing strands
are detensioned.  The cracks extend across the top
flange of the girder transversely and penetrate
vertically down through the girder web, reaching toward
the bottom flange.

This (North Carolina State University) report presents
and discusses an investigation to identify the causes
of the problem and recommendations for its remedies.
It includes: a national survey of prestressed concrete
producers to assess the status of the problem; a
literature review of relevant issues; a series of
laboratory and field studies to determine the condition
of concrete and tendon forceS during the curing period;
and an analysis of the girder under-restrained thermal
contraction.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960102; Oct. 1993, 101 pp.  Price: $129.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

PAVEMENT AND BRIDGE-CONSTRUCTION RESEARCH

This (Transportation Research Board) report concerns
fast-track paving, statistically based specifications,
bridge rehabilitation, contracts management, and
automation in hot in-place asphalt pavement recycling.
It covers: the construction and performance of a
fast-track concrete pavement in Kansas; a method to
eliminate the confusion and difficulty in administering
the acceptance testing of various quality
characteristics; the upgrading and recycling of an 1879
wrought-iron pin-connected truss bridge by replacing
the pins; the use of automated equipment for hot
in-place asphalt resurfacing; and breakthroughs that
have been achieved involving real-time data handling.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960103; 1994, 45 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

CONCRETE PAVEMENTS: EFFECT OF ASPHALT ADDITIVES ON
PAVEMENT PERFORMANCE

This (Texas Transportation Institute) report concerns
test pavements constructed in four districts in the
mid-1980s, in order to assess the effectiveness of
asphalt additives in reducing cracking and rutting in
asphalt concrete pavements.  Performance results are
presented, evaluated, and discussed.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960104; Oct. 1993, 71 pp.  Price: $99.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

ANALYSIS OF A SYSTEM FOR DYNAMICALLY MEASURING ROAD
DEFLECTION

This (University of Michigan) report concerns analysis
of a system for dynamically measuring road deflection.
The system configuration consists of an instrumented
tractor-trailer truck to make road deflection
measurements at highway speeds.  The proposed system
utilizes a beam that carries laser distance-measuring
sensors.  The sensors are positioned to make reference
measurements of undeflected surface as well as the
deflected surface.  Signal processing algorithms are
proposed that give the system the potential to
compensate for beam movement as well as random surface-
texture features.  The report presents a complete error
analysis of the system, including suitable mathematical
models for all components as well as all signal
processing steps.  A random and systematic error
analysis is conducted of all components and the
complete system, showing that the system's total errors
are within allowable error-bands for practical
applications.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960105; Dec. 1994, 112 pp.  Price: $139.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

COMPACT HEAT EXCHANGERS: INVESTIGATION OF LOCAL HEAT
TRANSFER BY HOLOGRAPHIC INTERFEROMETRY

Compact heat exchangers are key components for the
development of future aircraft devices.  This
translation from Germany (Technische University)
presents a technique for enhancement of the heat
transfer rate, resulting in a decrease of the heat
exchanger size and, thus, lower weight and lower
investment costs.  An exact knowledge of the
temperature distribution in the boundary layer is
necessary for a specific augmentation of heat transfer.
The holographic interferometry is applied as a
measuring method to enable visualization of the
temperature field without disturbing the flow pattern.
The local Nusselt number is determined from the
isotherms at the wall.  A digital image-processing
system is used for evaluation of interferograms.  The
measuring method is demonstrated for three different
types of geometries for compact heat exchangers, using:
air as the test fluid; plain fin arrangements of
plate-fin heat exchangers; flow in a profile-shaped
duct for tubular matrices; and flow over circular
segment-shaped turbulence promoters.  During the
experiments, the Reynolds number is varied between 500
and 3000, a range where low pressure losses occur.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960106; 1993, 17 pp.  Price: $89.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

ANALYSIS OF VIBRATION-INDUCED THREAD MOVEMENT IN BOLTED
CONNECTIONS

This (Auburn University) report discusses the main
design parameters contributing to the loosening of
bolts due to vibration, and identifies the relative
importance and degree of contribution of each parameter
to bolt loosening.  Vibration testing is conducted on a
shaketable having controlled random input.  Test
specimens are vibrated for a fixed amount of time and
the percentage of pre-load loss is measured.  Each
specimen tested implements some combination of
11  design parameters, as dictated by the design of the
experimental methodology employed.  The 11 design
parameters are: bolt size (diameter); lubrication on
the bolt; hole tolerance; initial pre-load; nut locking
device; grip length; thread-pitch; lubrication between
mating materials; class of fit; joint configuration;
and the mass of the configuration.  Two values of each
design parameter are used, and each combination of
parameters tested is subjected to two different
directions and two different g-levels of vibration.
One replication is made for each test to gain some
indication of experimental error and repeatability, and
to give some degree of statistical credibility to the
data -- which results in a total of 96 tests being
performed.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960107; Mar. 1995, 176 pp.  Price: $199.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

CONTROLLING THE PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF MATERIALS:
APPARATUS AND METHODOLOGY

This (Department of the Interior) patent application,
available for licensing, describes a process-control
system that uses sensors to determine the physical
properties of a material undergoing an in-line process.
The sensors react to the sensed properties in order to
modify the process and, thereby, change the properties
of the material.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960108; Patent application filed Oct.1994, 21 pp.
Price: $99.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

PIEZOELECTRIC AND PYROELECTRIC SENSORS

The pyroelectric properties of the composite
%Ca/Epikote 828, at 50/50 and 60/40 vol %,
respectively, are given in this report from North Wales
(the University College of North Wales).  The report
provides an account of the preparation of pure lead
titanate and calcium modified lead titanate (%Ca) by
the sol-gel process.  X-ray spectroscopic structural
analysis and differential scanning calorimetric studies
of the ceramic grains produced by this technique are
given.  The sol-gel method for preparation of
ferroelectric ceramics can offer many advantages over
conventional processing techniques.  The ceramics
produced via the sol-gel method: show high degrees of
purity and homogeneity; can produce fine powders; are
able to be formed into a variety of structures; and can
be processed at lower temperatures.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960109; Nov. 1994, 10 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

COPPER PRECIPITATES AND POINT-DEFECT CLUSTERS IN
REACTOR PRESSURE VESSEL EMBRITTLEMENT

Embrittlement of reactor pressure vessel (RPV) steels
is believed to arise primarily from matrix hardening
due to the formation of radiation-induced point-defect
clusters (PDC) and radiation-enhanced copper-rich
precipitates (CRP).  This (Oak Ridge National
Laboratory) report discusses a model developed to
investigate the relative importance of PDC and CRP in
RPV embrittlement.  The model is used to determine the
influence of a range of irradiation and material
parameters on the predicted change in yield strength.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960110; Dec. 1994, 50 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

RESEARCH ON PRESSURE VESSEL STRUCTURAL INTEGRITY

This (Oak Ridge National Laboratory) report concerns
technology used to assess the safety of
irradiation-embrittled nuclear reactor pressure vessels
(RPVs) containing flaws.  Fracture mechanics tests on
RPV steel, coupled with detailed elastic-plastic
finite-element analyses of the crack-tip stress fields,
show that: (1) constraint relaxation at the crack tip
of shallow surface flaws results in increased data
scatter but no increase in the lower-bound fracture
toughness; (2) the nil ductility temperature performs
better than the reference temperature for nil ductility
transition as a normalizing parameter for shallow-flaw
fracture toughness data; (3) biaxial loading can reduce
the shallow-flaw fracture toughness; (4) stress-based
dual-parameter fracture toughness correlations cannot
predict the effect of biaxial loading on shallow-flaw
fracture toughness, because in-plane stresses at the
crack tip are not influenced by biaxial loading; and
(5) an implicit strain-based dual-parameter fracture
toughness correlation can predict the effect of biaxial
loading on shallow-flaw fracture toughness.  The
results of experimental irradiation investigations are
also included.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960111; 1994, 17 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

PRODUCTION AND EMISSION OF NITROUS OXIDE IN A SEWAGE
TREATMENT PLANT

This translation from Sweden (the Swedish Environmental
Research Institute) concerns nitrous oxide emissions
from a sewage treatment plant.  Calculations are made
using a `stagnant film' model.  The results show an
increased concentration of nitrous oxide in the
atmosphere above the denitrification zone.  The
concentration is about 25-times higher than the
background concentration in the atmosphere.  The high
concentration in the atmosphere shows evidence that
there is production and emission of nitrous oxide from
the denitrification zone.  This is also supported by
the measured concentration in the water that is
supersaturated, compared with the theoretical
concentration based on equilibrium between the
atmosphere and water.  The report discusses the effects
of active mixing by pumping air into the water at
different zones.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960112; Feb. 1995, 13 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

CORRELATION OF FRACTURE TOUGHNESS WITH IMPURITY
COMPONENTS

This (Los Alamos National Laboratory) report concerns
the phenomenon of stress-assisted diffusion in cracked
structures operating in corrosive environments.  It
discusses work done on extending the existing "Coupled
Thermomechanical Diffusion" theory, to enable
prediction of diffusion of a solute species in stressed
solids in the presence of cracks.  Mathematical
formalism is provided to support the intuitive notion
that a singular solution for the concentration field
can exist in crack tip neighborhoods, driven by
singular solutions for stresses that have been obtained
within the framework of classical linear elastic
fracture mechanics.  It is shown that under certain
limiting assumptions, a singular solution for the
concentration profile emerges from the governing
equations.  Both steady state and transient solutions
are obtained.  A numerical simulation using the
quarter-point finite-element method is carried out, and
the results obtained also indicate the presence of this
singularity. (This 1992 report was only recently
released for public use.)

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960113; Mar. 1992, 45 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

METHODS FOR EVALUATING CRACK-GROWTH DATA

An investigation of five different methods for
evaluating fatigue crack-growth data is presented in
this translation from Sweden (by Statens
Provningsanstalt).  Experimental data from ten
different specimens are used, and the methods are
investigated in connection with the Paris-Erdogan
equation.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960114; 1994, 24 pp.  Price: $89.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

PROPERTIES AND CREEP RUPTURE BEHAVIOR OF SILICONIZED
SILICON CARBIDE AT ELEVATED TEMPERATURES

This (Pennsylvania State University) report
investigates the long-term load bearing capability of
two siliconized silicon carbides for high-temperature
applications (up to 1350 C).  These materials are
Norton NC430 and CS101K.  The NC430 is an earlier
more expensive material that requires an extra
furnacing operation during processing.  Batch-to-batch
variation in the microstructure of CS101K results in
large differences in creep rate and time-to-failure for
that material.  The results clearly show that details
of the rupture of siliconized silicon carbides depend
on the degree of interconnectivity of the silicon
carbide skeletal framework and also the
volume-fractions of the silicon carbide and silicon
phases.  (This 1991 report was only recently released
for public use.)

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960115; Dec. 1991, 182 pp.  Price: $209.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

REACTION SYNTHESIS OF FE-AL ALLOYS: EFFECTS OF
PROCESSING VARIABLES

The effects of alloy composition and reaction
atmosphere on reaction synthesis of binary FeAl alloys
are discussed in this (Oak Ridge National Laboratory)
paper.  Reactions are observed in an open-air furnace,
under static vacuum (in an evacuated quartz tube), and
in a dynamic vacuum furnace.  High-speed videotapes of
reaction syntheses of compacts formed from 45(mu)m Fe
and 10(mu)m Al powders reacted in air and under static
vacuum, reveal that an unusual two-stage reaction
exists in this system under these conditions.  The
first stage of the two-stage reaction lasts several
seconds, and starts at around 650 C.  The second stage
begins at about 900 C, reaching temperatures between
1250 C and 1350 C.  The progress of the reaction to the
second stage is sensitive to the alloy composition and
reaction environment.  The reaction behavior is
explained in terms of thermodynamics and heat transfer,
which control the delicate balance between heat
accumulation and heat loss during reaction synthesis.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960116; 1994, 7 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

PLASTICS DECOMPOSITION: THERMAL DEGRADATION, ANALYTICAL
TECHNIQUES, AND BYPRODUCTS

This report (from Ei Compendex Plus Database) concerns
studies of thermal polymer degradation and
decomposition.  It covers, among other topics:
calometric, spectroscopic, thermogravimetric,
chromatographic, and infrared analyses; properties of
the byproducts; characterization of plastics
degradation; decomposition dynamics; and more.  The
report consists of a collection of abstracts of the
latest available reports, papers, studies, and other
documentation, with references for their acquisition
and extensive indexing to make it easy to find exactly
what you want.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960117; latest 250 citations, updated to the date of
your order.  Price: $319.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

DEFORMATION OF FABRIC-REINFORCED PLASTICS: DESIGN AND
IMPLEMENTATION OF A NEW ALGORITHM

This translation from the Netherlands (Technische
University Delft) presents a mathematical method for
simulating the draping of fabric over an arbitrary
three-dimensional surface.  Not only the
cross-overpoints of the fabric, but also the paths
between these points are mapped to the surface.  The
three-dimensional surface is represented by flat
triangular faces.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960118; Oct. 1993, 70 pp.  Price: $129.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

SELECTED TOPICS ON THE PHYSICAL METALLURGY OF CAST IRON

Based on a review of recent and classical literature,
this translation from Norway (by Selskapet for
Industriellog Teknisk Forskning) presents selected
topics of the physical metallurgy of cast iron.
Solidification of cast iron is given special attention,
nucleation and growth theory is included, and eutectic
solidification is treated in detail.  The primary
phases, and also the eutectic phases, are considered.
C-curve modelling of the solidification process is also
included.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960119; Jan. 1995, 60 pp.  Price: $119.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

PROCESSING AND PROPERTIES OF EXTRUDED TUNGSTEN-HAFNIUM
AND TUNGSTEN-STEEL COMPOSITES

This (Oak Ridge National Laboratory) paper covers a
study to evaluate the processing behavior and
properties of tungsten-hafnium (W-Hf) and
tungsten-steel composites produced by hot extrusion of
canned powders.  The W-Hf composite is consolidated by
extrusion of blended powders with preheat temperatures
of 1100 C to 1400 C.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960120; 1995, 8 pp.  Price: $59.00,prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

IMPROVED DAMAGE-MOTION RELATIONSHIPS USED IN REGIONAL
EARTHQUAKE DAMAGE AND LOSS STUDIES

This (National Center for Earthquake Engineering
Research) report provides improved damage-motion
relationships that can be used in regional earthquake
damage and loss studies.  Three main areas for
modification of the existing ATC-13 damage probability
matrices are investigated.  The first develops detailed
descriptions of the original 90 building classes
defined in ATC-13.  The second approach for modifying
the motion-damage relationships is through the
collection of existing data.  The third modification
considers the development of fragility formulations
based on information from the ATC-13 damage probability
matrices.  A log-normal function is fitted through the
fragility curve to enable easy implementation of the
fragility curves.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960121; Jan. 1995, 110 pp.  Price: $139.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

MANUAL FOR SEISMIC RETROFITTING OF HIGHWAY BRIDGES

This (National Center for Earthquake Engineering
Research) manual is a revision of the Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA) publication "Seismic Retrofitting
Guidelines for Highway Bridges," which was published in
1983.  It describes an evaluation procedure for
retrofitting seismically deficient highway bridges, and
outlines various measures to upgrade these structures.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960122; May 1995, 328 pp.  Price: $349.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

CORROSION-RESISTANT STEEL AND ALUMINUM SURFACES BY
PULSED ION BEAM SURFACE TREATMENT

This (Sandia National Laboratories) report discusses
intense pulsed ion beams, used to melt and rapidly
resolidify Types 316F, 316L and sensitized 304
stainless steel surfaces.  The technique is used to
eliminate the negative effects of microstructural
heterogeneity on localized corrosion resistance.
Type 304 samples sensitized at 600 C for 100 h show no
evidence of grain boundary attack when surfaces are ion
beam treated.  Equivalent ion beam treatments are also
conducted with a 6061-T6 aluminum alloy.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960123; 1995, 10 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

SYNTHESIZING CARBON-FILAMENT-REINFORCED ALUMINUM-MATRIX
COMPOSITES

This (Pennsylvania State University) report concerns
the synthesizing of branched (3-D) carbon filaments
from natural gas in a graphite tube, for subsequent
infiltration with aluminum.  A deposition reactor is
fabricated in which carbon filaments can be grown on
the inside surface of net-shaped parts.  A vertical
arrangement of the furnace is found to optimize
filament growth, and palladium is found to catalyze the
growth of filaments.  The diameter of the filaments
grown from the vapor phase is proportional to the
radius of the metal catalyst particle, and this has an
impact on the structure of the filaments.  The optimum
processing route involves Pd powder deposited on the
surface of a graphite substrate using an alcohol
solution to disperse the powder.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960124; Feb. 1994, 113 pp.  Price: $139.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

TENSILE DAMAGE PREDICTION FOR CERAMIC-MATRIX COMPOSITES
UNDER HIGH TEMPERATURE

This (City College of New York) report documents
experimental and theoretical results obtained in
studying the tensile damage behavior of ceramic-matrix
composites (namely Nicalon/CAS II composites) at room
and elevated temperature.  The composite specimens are
machined into dog-bone shape and polished to increase
the efficacy of observation in the scanning electron
microscope (SEM).  The specimens are placed inside the
chamber of an SEM and subjected to tensile loading at
room and higher temperatures up to 700 C.  At each
temperature, the load is increased until failure of the
specimen; the progression of damage is observed and
recorded from first crack to total failure.  Damage
usually starts with matrix cracking, followed by
debonding along fiber-matrix interface, fiber pull-out,
and finally fiber breakage.  At each load level the
displacement is measured, resulting in a stress-strain
curve having linear and non-linear portions.  Similar
behavior is observed at higher temperatures.
Theoretical models are developed to predict and
simulate the observed behavior.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960125; Feb. 1994, 142 pp.  Price: $169.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

USE OF BETA-ALUMINA AS A WEAK INTERFACE IN
ALUMINA-FIBER COMPOSITES

This (Rockwell International) report presents results
from a three-year study aimed at identifying and
developing suitable inter-phase materials for
oxide-oxide composites that are stable in high
temperature oxidizing environments, yet sufficiently
weak to allow debonding as required for toughening.
Most of the effort is devoted to two systems: LaPO4
(monazite); and beta-aluminas.  Monazite satisfies all
of the requirements for an inter-phase in
alumina-alumina composites (and most likely many other
ceramic matrix-fiber combinations).  It has a high
melting point (2074 C); it is stable with alumina at
high temperature in both oxidizing and slightly
reducing environments; and it forms a sufficiently weak
bond with alumina.  Beta-alumina materials, which
possess weak mica-like planes in their crystal
structures, are phase compatible with alumina, and
their debonding characteristics are adequate.  However,
their use and fabrication temperatures are limited by
morphological instability of the fiber/matrix interface
(i.e, grain growth of the beta-alumina platelets into
the fibers).

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960126; Nov. 1994, 95 pp.  Price: $119.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

PREDICTING THE LIFE OF COMPOSITE LAMINATES: CONSTANT
AMPLITUDE AND TWO-STRESS-LEVEL FATIGUE

A strength-based wear-out model is presented in this
(Wright Laboratory) report.  It is used to predict the
residual strength and life of composite laminates
subjected to constant amplitude or two-stress-level
fatigue loadings.  It is assumed: that the laminate
undergoes proportional loading; that its residual
strength is a monotonically decreasing function of the
number of loading cycles; and that the probability of
failure after an arbitrary number of cycles may be
represented by a two-parameter Weibull function.  The
model also incorporates a cycle-mix-factor to account
for the degradation of strength and life that may be
associated with frequent changes in the stress
amplitude of the loading.  Experimental results from
two-stress-level loadings are used to evaluate the
model's predictive capability for sequencing effects,
as in a low-high or high-low test, and for cycle-mix
effects, as in a low-high-low-high repeating test.
Good correlation between theory and experiments is
obtained for all loadings and laminates studied.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960127; Sep. 1994, 45 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

STATIC FATIGUE OF A NICALON FIBER-REINFORCED SiC
COMPOSITE AT ELEVATED TEMPERATURE

This (Oak Ridge National Laboratory) work concerns
static fatigue tests of a Nicalon fiber-reinforced SiC
matrix composite.  The test is conducted in four-point
bending over a temperature range of 425 C to 1150 C in
air, at selected stress levels.  The composite consists
of a Nicalon cloth with a graphite interfacial coating
and a forced chemical vapor infiltration SiC matrix
composite.  Samples are tested with and without a final
protective SiC seal coat.  Both electron microscopy and
thermogravimetric studies are used to evaluate the
results.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960128; 1994, 6 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

THERMOMECHANICAL FATIGUE BEHAVIOR OF CONTINUOUS-FIBER
CERAMIC COMPOSITES

The thermomechanical fatigue behavior of three
continuous-fiber ceramic composites is examined in this
(NYMA Corp.) report.  The three matrices consist of two
different glass-ceramics and silicon carbide,
respectively.  The matrices of some of the specimens
with the silicon carbide matrix are enhanced to improve
oxidation resistance.  All three are reinforced with
Nicalon fibers having various fiber architectures.  The
thermoelastic properties of the matrix relative to the
fibers, the elastic moduli, and coefficients of thermal
expansion, are different in each composite, providing a
comparison of the effects of these critical properties.
The specimens are tested under in-phase and
out-of-phase cyclic loadings, with respect to thermal
cycling between 600 C and 1100 C.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960129; Mar. 1995, 25 pp.  Price: $69.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

DETECTION OF MACHINING DAMAGE IN CERAMICS USING THERMAL
WAVE IMAGING

Evaluation of the feasibility of a thermal wave imaging
technique for the detection and characterization of
machining damage in ceramics is presented in this
(NIST) report.  A well-defined crack system produced by
Vickers indentation is used to examine the
characteristic response of thermal wave signals to
different forms of cracks (i.e. median/radial and
lateral).  The results clearly indicate that thermal
wave imaging can be used for the detection of surface
and subsurface cracks in ceramics.  Thermal wave
imaging is then conducted on the surfaces of ground
alumina and the cross-section of scratched silicon
nitride.  Careful examinations of the thermal wave
images confirm that this technique can be used to
detect grinding-induced subsurface microcracks.  The
report discusses the limitations of the thermal wave
imaging technique in the detection of small cracks, and
precautions regarding choosing appropriate sets of
imaging parameters.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960130; Mar. 1995, 100 pp.  Price: $129.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

LOW-EXPANSION CERAMICS HAVING STRENGTH RETENTION AT
ELEVATED TEMPERATURES

The development of advanced engines has resulted in the
need for new ceramic compositions that exhibit
thermomechanical properties suitable for the engine
environment, i.e., low thermal expansion, stability to
1200 C, and thermal shock resistance.  This (Oak Ridge
National Laboratory) report discusses a two-phase
research program.  In the first phase, new oxide
ceramics are identified in the AlPO4-beta-eucryptite,
beta-cristobalite, mullite, and zircon systems.  The
research focuses on screening and property
characterization of ceramics in thse four systems.  The
most promising AlPO4-beta-eucryptite and zircon systems
compositions are then further evaluated and developed
in the second phase, with the goal of making them ready
for prototype testing in actual engines.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960131; Sep. 1994, 140 pp.  Price: $169.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

IMPROVED PERFORMANCE OF LINEAR COAL CUTTING IN COAL
MINING OPERATIONS

This (U.S. Bureau of Mines) report presents a linear
cutting system using geometric principles to produce a
nearly constant cut-depth during coal mining
operations.  The new system has been extensively tested
in a synthetic material under laboratory conditions, to
verify mechanical capability and to identify
operational characteristics.  Comparisons between 15-
rpm linear cutting and 50-rpm rotary cutting systems
show significant improvement in respirable dust
entrainment, product size distribution, and energy
usage.  Respirable dust is reduced by as much as 90%,
and average power by 66%.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960132; 1995, 43 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

MEASUREMENT OF AIR EXCHANGE IN BUILDINGS

Air exchange measurements in buildings are important
for testing the effectiveness of the ventilation system
and for characterizing air leakage in the building
envelope when the ventilation is off.  This (Cold
Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory) report
discusses air-exchange measurements in a hospital,
administrative and maintenance buildings, barracks, and
a laboratory.  Using a tracer gas method that entails
releasing a tracer gas in an initial well-mixed
concentration, it then monitors tracer gas
concentration over time.  The faster the tracer gas
dilutes, the greater is the air change rate.  ASTM
standard E741 offers techniques for tracer gas
measurements in single-zone enclosures, but most
buildings are multiple-zone enclosures.  The study,
looks at whether such buildings could approximate
single-zone enclosures for tracer gas measurements.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960133; July 1994, 35 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

INTERNATIONAL PETROLEUM STATISTICS

This (DOE) report presents data on international oil
production, demand, imports, exports, and stocks.  The
report has four sections.  Section 1 contains time
series data on world oil production, oil demand, and
stocks in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD).  Section 2 presents an oil
supply/demand balance for the world.  Section 3
presents data on oil imports by OECD countries.
Section 4 presents annual time series data on world oil
production, oil stocks, demand, and trade, in OECD
countries.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960134; Feb. 1995, 73 pp.  Price: $99.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

MATHEMATICAL MODELING OF DEFORMATION DURING HOT ROLLING
OF STEEL

The deformation that occurs in the roll bite during the
hot rolling of steel, particularly the strain rate and
strain distribution, is mathematically modeled using
finite-element analysis (by EG& G Idaho).  Three
different finite-element models are compared with one
another and with industrial measurements.  The first
model is an Eulerian analysis based on the flow
formulation method; the second utilizes an updated
Lagrangian approach; the third is based on a
commercially available program, DEFORM, which also
utilizes a Lagrangian reference frame.  Roll forces
predicted by the model are compared with industrial
rolling loads from a seven-stand hot-strip mill.

(Order this EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE reviewed
report from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
W960135; 1994, 29 pp.  Price: $69.00, prepaid.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "36"></A>Copyright
EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

DEVELOPMENT OF LOW DIELECTRIC ALUMINA-BASED CERAMICS
FOR MICROELECTRONIC SUBSTRATES

This Doctoral thesis (from Lawrence Berkeley
Laboratory) deals with the development of low
dielectric-constant alumina-based ceramics for use as
microelectronic substrates.  The performance of
high-speed computers depends not only on IC (integrated
circuit) chips, but also on the signal propagation
speed between these chips.  The signal propagation
delay in a computer is determined by the dielectric
constant of the substrata material to which the IC
chips are attached.  This work develops a ceramic
substrate having a low dielectric constant
(k = approx. 5.0).  When compared with traditional
alumina substrata (k = approx. 10.0), the new material
corresponds to a 37% decrease in the signal propagation
delay.

Glass hollow-spheres are used to introduce porosity
(k = 1.0) to the alumina matrix in a controlled manner.
A surface coating technique, involving heterogeneous
nucleation in aqueous solution, is used to improve the
high-temperature stability of these spheres.  After
sintering at 1400 C: the isolated spherical pores are
uniformly distributed in the almost fully-dense alumina
matrix; negligible amounts of matrix defects are seen;
and all of the pores are isolated from each other.
Detailed analyses of the chemical composition find that
the sintered sample consists of alpha-alumina, mullite,
and residual glass.  Mullite is the chemical reaction
product of alumina and the glass spheres.  Residual
glass exists because the current firing conditions do
not complete the mullitization reaction.

The dielectric constant of the sintered sample is
measured and compared with the predicted value, using
Maxwell's model.  Mechanical strength is evaluated by a
four-point bending test.  Although the flexural
strength decreases exponentially with porosity, samples
having 34% porosity (k = approx. 5.0) still maintain
adequate mechanical strength for the proper operation
of a microelectronic substrate.

(Order from T&T Engineering PC, P.O. Box 4864, Silver
Spring, MD 20914; Phone/Fax (301) 434-4014: Report No.
WD502GA; May 1993, 114 pp.  Price: $159.00, prepaid.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-31</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B019-59</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ml05.html 205.156.212.5 19970122034621 text/html 76204
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:44:15 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:48 GMT
Content-length: 76017
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ml05.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>NEW PRODUCTS AND TECHNOLOGIES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>Carbon Nitride: A&nbsp;Designer Abrasive</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(369 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Fibrous Monoliths from&nbsp;Powder Processing</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(749 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>Ceramic Tapes in&nbsp;Rapid Prototyping</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(337 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>Keeping the Troops&nbsp;Safe in Bosnia</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(681 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FIBERS AND COMPOSITES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>Laminated Matrix&nbsp;Adds Toughness</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(792 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>Composite Shaped&nbsp;for Furnaces</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(301 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>Building Insulation&nbsp;That Takes the Heat</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(470 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>Supply Contract&nbsp;for SiC Whiskers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(374 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FILTERS AND MEMBRANES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>3M Cleans Up&nbsp;Coal Fired Plants</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(204 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>Ceramic, Metal Bond&nbsp;for Hot Gas Filters</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(231 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ELECTRONICS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>Heat Treatment for&nbsp;PTCR Barium Titanate</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(203 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>Optical Waveguides of&nbsp;Alumina Thin Films</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(172 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>Actuator Technology&nbsp;Wins Patent Protection</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(671 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>SUPERCONDUCTORS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>HTS Filters for&nbsp;Cellular Market</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(211 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><LI>Hg-Based Materials&nbsp;Challenge Researchers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(415 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>Current Limiter&nbsp;Prototype Tested</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(293 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><LI>Model for Complex&nbsp;Vortex Behavior</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(170 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INDUSTRY NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><LI>DOE Presents Materials&nbsp;Science Awards</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(236 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><A HREF = "#19"><LI>Alcoa to Shutter&nbsp;Packaging Plant</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(150 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><A HREF = "#20"><LI>ART Teams with&nbsp;European Firm</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(160 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><A HREF = "#21"><LI>ATMI Acquires&nbsp;Thin Film Maker</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(162 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><A HREF = "#22"><LI>A.P. Green Acquires&nbsp;Refractories Unit</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(152 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><A HREF = "#23"><LI>Brake Production&nbsp;Facility Starts Up</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(461 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RECENT ABSTRACTS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#24"><A HREF = "#24"><LI>Tensile Properties&nbsp;of CMCs Tested</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(157 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><A HREF = "#25"><LI>Behavior of SiC&nbsp;Fibers in a Matrix</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(165 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>BIBLIOGRAPHIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(481 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>BOOKS AND REPORTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(463 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>CALENDAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(467 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Carbon Nitride: A
Designer Abrasive

Scientists at the Carnegie Institution (Washington, DC) have used
a combination of state-of-the-art physics, supercomputers, and
insight gained from the study of minerals to predict the first
feasibly synthesizable material that is more incompressible than
diamond. Their calculations show that this material, a cubic form
of carbon nitride, C3N4, should be significantly less compressible
than diamond at room conditions.

Inasmuch as low compressibility is correlated with hardness, it is
highly possible that the new material could be harder than diamond
and therefore of significant technological use as a superabrasive
material and for wear-resistant coatings.

These results, reported in the January 5 issue of Science , rest
upon state-of-the-art quantum-mechanical calculations. The levels
of speed and accuracy now attainable in such calculations enable
investigators to design materials by doing experiments on the
computer instead of in the laboratory. Scientists are thus
beginning to rationally design useful materials in a more efficient
manner than by the traditional "shake-and-bake" methodology of
finding new materials.

The investigators in the new work are David Teter and Russell
Hemley, both serving at Carnegie's Geophysical Lab and Center for
High Pressure Research. Teter and Hemley's work grew from
widespread interest in the possibility of finding new low
compressibility materials. Various forms of carbon nitrides had
been proposed as possible superhard materials potentially exceeding
diamond in hardness. Teter and Hemley identified several favorable
candidate C3N4 prototype forms and calculated their energetics,
structures and physical properties. They determined the cubic-C3N4
form to be the most incompressible.

Their calculations indicate that the cubic- C3N4 material can be
synthesized at pressures and temperatures now attainable in the
laboratory. (The material would be formed at high pressure and
temperature, and then quenched stably to ambient conditions.)
Scientists at the Carnegie institution and elsewhere are already
working to accomplish this, employing insights gained from the
theoretical work now reported. Conceivably, the material can
eventually be synthesized at an industrial scale using technology
similar to that now used to synthesize industrial diamond.

Teter and Hemley write that most experimental studies of carbon
nitrides have been carried out at ambient or low-pressure
conditions; their results indicate the importance of high-pressure
synthesis in the search for new carbon nitrides.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Fibrous Monoliths from
Powder Processing

Advanced Ceramics Research Inc. (851 E. 47th St., Tucson, AZ 85713;
Tel: 520/792-2616, Fax: 520/792 2635, email: acr@rtd.com) claims it
has developed a new generation of advanced composites with high
strength, toughness, and non-brittle fracture characteristics.
Called fibrous monoliths, this processing technology can be applied
to polymers, metals, ceramics, and hybrid composites.  The current
development efforts have mainly concentrated on advanced ceramic
composites, with certain hybrid composites being fabricated to
demonstrate the versatility of the processing technology.

The fibrous monolith concept produces--through ordinary powder
processing--dense fired ceramics with graceful failure
characteristics plus strength and toughness values typically
exhibited for more costly continuous fiber-reinforced ceramic
composites (CFCC's).  These composites have been expected to become
main load-bearing components for many lightweight, high-temperature
structural applications - such as gas turbine engine components.

As of this date, CFCC's have found only limited use although
research and development efforts are continuing. Currently CFCC's
major obstacles are limited formability and product repeatability,
although scientists working on CFCC's are confident that they could
solve these problems. However, the problems they consider difficult
to solve are achieving longer life for the components plus both
high starting material and high fabrication costs.

Advanced Ceramics Research believes fibrous monoliths have
commercial potential in applications now targeted for CFCC's
because of their ease of formability, as-fired damage-tolerant
behavior, and inherent low cost (processed entirely with
conventional powder starting materials).

Fibrous monoliths are multi-phase monolithic ceramics consisting of
a primary phase of high aspect ratio polycrystalline cells
surrounded by outer cell-boundaries of secondary and/or tertiary
phase(s) of different polycrystalline materials.  When engineering
design calls for multiple cell-boundaries, usually, the cell-
boundary adjacent to the cell represents regions of lower shear
strength interdispersed with cell regions of high strength.

The engineered micro architecture of a simple cell/cell-boundary
structure has the appearance, in the as-fired materials, of wood;
hence the apt description of "ceramic wood."  The cell-boundaries
of low shear strength will entrap a propagating crack, thereby
inducing crack deflection during fracture.  This process dissipates
large amounts of energy and leads to non-catastrophic failure
behavior.  It must be mentioned again that there are no dense
ceramic fibers incorporated as starting materials.

The fibrous, polycrystalline, micro architecture of an as-fired
body is an exact replica of the ceramic green body.  This green
body is in-turn formed from ceramic powder-loaded polymer fibers
arranged into a desired micro architectural array (uniaxial,
biaxial, woven fabric, chopped fiber) and then laminated into a
rectangular billet or complex-shape part.

"Green" ceramic fibers are the only building blocks of the fibrous
monolith, for they consist of a core of primary (cell)
polycrystalline powder in a polymer binder, surrounded by shells of
polycrystalline powders in a polymer binder.  Powders must be sized
so that they can be processed in standard thermoplastic extrusion
equipment, and they must be thermodynamically compatible.

Preparation of ceramic green bodies proceeds as follows: co-
extruded single filament is either chopped or cut to desired length
and then laid up into rectangular billets, or woven into 3-D mats.
These pre-shapes are then laminated into rectangular billets--a
typical shape in use for process development.

In another micro architectural configuration, co-extruded multi-
filament rods are cut to desired lengths, aligned inside the die
into either 0 uniaxial or 0-90 biaxial arrays, and then
laminated into rectangular billets.  The billets are then loaded
into a hot-pressing die, binder burned out in a controlled-
atmosphere furnace, and the billet(s) hot-pressed under 25 MPa
uniaxial pressure until ram compaction ceases.

After hot pressing, near full density is achieved and the billet(s)
are machined into various test configurations.  These 0-90
biaxial arrays, in the as-fired condition, have the microscopic
appearance of plywood.  Developmental work is under way to use co-
firing techniques (successfully utilized in the ceramic electronic
industry) to sinter both the cell compositions and the cell-
boundary compositions simultaneously. Limited fibrous monolithic
compositions have been co-fired to acceptable final densities. Co-
firing promises increased final shape complexity employing
sintering techniques versus hot pressing.

Government contracts are driving the development of this fibrous
monolith prototype manufacturing for producing small volumes at low
cost using a wide variety of ceramic compositions in a variety of
applications.  Advanced Ceramics Research, Inc. supplies green
fiber and billets, and can debond, hot press, and sinter a limited
number of shapes.

Contract: William J. McDonough, VP technology, Advanced Ceramics
Research, Inc., 851 E. 47th St., Tucson, AZ 85713; Tel: 520/792-
2616, Fax: 520/792-2635, email: acr@rtd.com.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Ceramic Tapes in
Rapid Prototyping

Researchers at the University of Dayton's rapid prototype
development laboratory (RPDL) is one of the first in the country to
use ceramic tapes in rapid prototyping--an advancement because of
the ceramic's ability to withstand temperatures up to 2,000(C
without falling apart. The project is funded by a 3-year $3.54
million program sponsored by the Advanced Research Projects Agency
(ARPA) and the Office of Naval Research.

"This method looks like it's going to be very successful," said
Richard Chartoff, UDRI senior research engineer and principal
investigator.  "There's no shape distortion or shrinkage of the
part when it's processed, but the main advantage is speed.  The
normal processing of high-temperature ceramics takes weeks."

Using a $200,000 laminated object manufacturing (LOM) machine
developed by Helisys Inc. (Torrance, CA), the researchers are
developing a special fabrication technology.  The LOM system
usually builds layered 3-D objects by stacking and fusing thin
layers of paper that are trimmed to shape by a laser.  Instead of
paper, UDRI has developed ceramic powders held together by a
polymer binder to form "tapes" slightly thicker than a sheet of
paper that are fed into the machine.

In the next stage of the project, researchers will reinforce the
ceramic matrix composites with fibers to increase strength, develop
a laser that is more suited to working with ceramics than paper and
help Helisys develop its next-generation LOM machine.

The research team already has used the technology to build ceramic
electrical components and miniature body armor, among other parts,
but Chartoff is most excited about its potential medical
applications. "There is interest in using this method to make bone
replacement shapes," he said.  "The ceramic forms a shell, which
would eventually be absorbed in the body when replaced by new bone
growth. This is an ideal way to make bone structures--particularly
if we are successful in putting fibers in the ceramic to make it
stronger," Chartoff continued.

Contact: Richard Chartoff, University of Dayton Research Institute,
300 College Park, Dayton, OH 45469-1679; Tel: 513/229-2517.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Keeping the Troops
Safe in Bosnia

While ceramics are more often thought of as gifts for the holiday
season, ceramic technology and products are playing a vital role in
protecting U.S. peacekeepers in Bosnia.  From lightweight, easily
installed ceramic armor in aircraft and helicopters to protective
shielding used for tanks, personnel carriers and trucks to personal
body armor for troops in the field--the benefits of advanced
ceramics are quite evident in this important mission.

"Advanced ceramics have the double benefit of being harder than the
bullets and shells fired at them while weighing about half as much
as traditional steel armor," explained Robert Skaggs, a senior
materials scientist at Los Alamos National Lab and a member of The
American Ceramic Society (ACerS).

The ceramics advantage already has been demonstrated through a
creative application on numerous aircraft, including the Air
Force's C-141.  Previously unarmored, the C-141s were vulnerable to
small-arms fire from ground snipers.  A new, modular, lightweight
ceramic/metal ("cermet") composite armor was developed that can be
transferred from one aircraft to another, with a total installation
time of about two hours.

"The portability feature ensured that any plane could be armored
quickly and easily without having to armor all of the planes, a
project that would have been far too expensive and required too
much time," said Frank Gac, leader of the Los Alamos National
Laboratory's Ceramic Science and Technology Group and a member of
The American Ceramic Society (ACerS).

This new portable armor was developed by a team of workers from Los
Alamos National Lab, Foster-Miller Co. and Lanxide Armor Products,
Inc., an ACerS corporate member.  The armor consists of several
mats of 4 in. square tiles manufactured by Lanxide from a silicon
carbide/aluminum nitride ceramic composite.  Kevlar, a woven
polymer fabric manufactured by DuPont, is adhered to the back of
the cermet armor.  Foster-Miller then integrates the resulting mats
into a kit that is delivered to the Air Force.  The armor is
attached to the plane's interior using a heavy-duty hook-and-loop
fastening material.

Skaggs explained that the cermet and Kevlar combination acts as a
"catcher's mitt" for bullets fired at the plane.  "When a bullet
hits the cermet tile, the bullet essentially disintegrates, without
damaging the entire tile," Skaggs said.  "The energy from the
bullet is absorbed through the tile while the Kevlar catches the
bullet fragments, preventing injury to the occupants or further
damage to the plane or its cargo."

Ceramic-based armor also is used in Apache, Cobra and Blackhawk
helicopters.  Manufactured by ACerS corporate member Ceradyne Inc.,
(Costa Mesa, CA) and Cercom (Vista, CA), the armor is incorporated
into the seats, floors and wall panels of cockpits to protect the
pilots.

One of the more difficult challenges the peacekeeping force is
expected to encounter is the large number of camouflaged mines
placed throughout the Bosnian countryside by the warring factions
during the last several years of conflict.  Trucks, personnel
carriers and tanks use ceramic armor to provide a previously
unavailable degree of protection and safety.

The LAV-25, for instance, has used modular ceramic armor since the
Gulf War.  Designed to enhance protection against fragments from
152 mm artillery projectiles encountered during the war, the armor
now protects troops from exploding land mines in Bosnia.
Manufactured by Lanxide and by Coors Ceramics Co., a Golden, CO-
based ACerS corporate member, the LAV-25 armor can be applied in
single or multiple layers and can be repaired in as little as 20
minutes from the on-board battle damage repair kit.

Troops in the field also are protected by ceramics.  To increase
their protection from larger rounds, troops slip a ceramic plate
into special pockets in their bullet-proof vests, often made of
Kevlar. Manufactured by Ceradyne, Coors and others, the half-inch
thick ceramic plates protect troops from armor-piercing bullets by
adding about 20 lbs. to the vests' weight.

Contact:  Wayne Hill of the American Ceramic Society (Tel: 614/224-
4600); or Robert Skaggs of the Los Alamos National Lab (Tel:
505/455-2392); or Lt. Linda Pepin, Air Mobility Command Public
Affairs, of Scott Air Force Base (Tel: 618/256-5003).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Laminated Matrix
Adds Toughness

Researchers at Georgia Institute of Technology have developed a new
type of material which they believe to be tougher and stronger than
conventional fiber-reinforced composites by applying alternating
thin layers of matrix materials to traditional reinforcement
structures.

These "laminated matrix" composites could replace metals in
aircraft structural components, heat engines, heat exchangers,
particulate filters and other applications requiring high-
temperature, high-strength materials.  By producing composites with
improved properties, the process may allow replacement of costly
reinforcing fibers with less expensive platelets or particles,
driving down the cost of composite materials.

"This idea offers the chance of improving materials properties--
particularly toughness--and lowering costs," said W. Jack Lackey,
a research scientist at the Georgia Tech Research Institute (GTRI).
"This gives us a wide range of possible new material systems we can
use."

Two conventional techniques exist for making mechanically tough
composites.  The first uses fiber reinforcement within matrix
materials such as ceramics or metals, while the other relies on
building up multiple bonded layers of different materials such as
copper and aluminum.

"We have combined those two approaches," explained Lackey.  "We
make a fibrous preform by stacking up layers of cloth, then
infiltrate a matrix into the preform one layer at a time.  We
infiltrate for a few moments with one material until we get a layer
of it around each fiber, then we infiltrate for a few moments with
another material, then we switch back to the first.  We keep
iterating until we have put down as many as 50 layers."

Sponsored by the U.S. Air Force Office of Scientific Research, the
work initially focused on infiltrating a carbon fiber preform with
alternate layers of carbon and silicon carbide matrix.  However,
the new process should also be applicable to silicon carbide or
aluminum oxide fibers, as well as to metallic, polymeric or ceramic
matrix materials.

Lackey notes that the matrix materials--which bind the
reinforcement fibers together and fill in the space between them--
must be carefully chosen to be chemically compatible and closely
matched in their thermal expansion properties.

"We need to consider how these materials will work together," he
said.  "Carbon and silicon carbide are a natural choice.  We knew
those materials were easy to infiltrate into a preform, and we also
knew that they were compatible chemically.  We want to be able to
study what kinds of materials do work well in this type of
composite."

The Georgia Tech research team, which also includes Sundar
Vaidyaraman and Shelli Godfrey, used forced-flow thermal-gradient
chemical vapor infiltration to apply layers ranging in thickness
from 0.02-0.5 microns.  The layers were formed by alternating the
precursor gases flowing into the chemical vapor infiltration
reactor.

Beyond improving the properties of fiber-reinforced composites, the
laminated matrix process could also allow the use of alternate
reinforcing materials that could lower the cost of making
composites.   That could open new applications for composite
materials.

Lackey believes the improved strength and toughness of the
laminated layers may allow the expensive reinforcing fibers--which
cost at least $300/lb.--to be replaced by particles or platelets
costing between $2-$30/lb.  Lackey's team has made composite
samples using silicon carbide grit instead of fibers.

"We have shown that we can make these laminated composites with
inexpensive particulates, replacing a costly reinforcing material
with an inexpensive one," he said.  "But we must demonstrate that
these materials have appropriate properties.  This is highly
speculative, but if it works, there would be a very significant
payoff."

If long-term testing shows that materials made with the laminated
process can provide the necessary properties at a lower cost, that
would allow composites to compete with metals in additional large-
scale applications.  If economically feasible in applications such
as jet engines, for instance, the lighter weight of the laminated
matrix composite components could allow significant performance
improvements in the aircraft using them.

"People are struggling to improve the mechanical properties of
ceramics and ceramic-matrix composites to the point that they can
replace metals," Lackey explained.  "If you can replace metals with
ceramics, you can operate at higher temperatures and get better
efficiency in a heat engine."

In addition to obtaining experimental verification of the new
materials' properties, Lackey must determine the optimal
combination of materials, appropriate thickness of matrix layers
and ideal reinforcing structures.  Finally, the process will have
to be scaled up from laboratory samples to full-sized components.

Georgia Tech has applied for a patent on the process. Georgia
researchers presented their work at the American Ceramic Society's
20th Annual Meeting on Composites and Advanced Materials in Cocoa
Beach, FL, January 7-11, 1996. This effort is sponsored by the Air
Force Office of Scientific Research, Air Force Materiel Command,
USAF, under grant No. F49620-92-J-0148.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Composite Shaped
for Furnaces

A new shaped ceramic composite material produced at 3M (St. Paul,
MN 55144-1000; Tel: 612/733-1110) is intended for use in
applications requiring good heat resistance and mechanical
properties, such as gas fired radiant burner tubes, gas burner
nozzle liners, heat exchangers, thermowells, core busters or flame
dispersers and other gas fired furnace components.  Robert G. Smith
reports that the composite includes ceramic oxide fibers, a coating
of a carbonaceous matrix which includes boron nitride particles,
and a silicon carbide coating.

Radiant burner tubes are used in high temperature, corrosive
environments such as are found in industrial heat treating furnaces
and aluminum melting furnaces.  The three most common types of
commercially available radiant burner tubes are metal alloy, e.g.,
nickel-based superalloy, tubes; ceramic, e.g., silicon carbide,
monolith tubes; and ceramic composite, e.g., ceramic fibers and
ceramic cloth in a ceramic matrix, tubes.  The upper use
temperature of such tubes is typically 900-1260(C.

Although monolithic silicon carbide radiant burner tubes with an
upper use temperature limit of about 1260(C are available, they are
generally brittle and prone to fail.  This is a common problem of
conventional shaped ceramic monoliths.  While it is possible to
select a conventional ceramic composite from which to prepare a
radiant burner tube which meets most of the requirements for use in
high temperature, chemically corrosive environments, it is only
possible by taking great care in the selection of materials and by
making some compromises in properties.

The carbon matrix or coating uses amorphous carbon is amorphous,
and has a thickness of up to one micrometer on an individual fiber.
The 3M product includes 20-50% by weight ceramic oxide fibers, 0.2-
20.0% by weight carbonaceous matrix, 0.2-15.0% by weight boron
nitride, and 50-75% by weight silicon carbide.  U.S. Patent
5,476,684 was assigned for this invention.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Building Insulation
That Takes the Heat

With a goal of becoming the largest "full line" supplier of high-
temperature insulation products, the Carborundum Co. (Fibers Div.,
P.O. Box 808, Niagara Falls, NY 14302; Tel: 716/278-2203, Fax:
716/278-2440) is readying a panel version of its Excelfrax product
line.  Other Excelfrax product forms, including Excelblok rigid-
board insulation, are in the development stage.

The developmental products, as well as the firm's commmercialized
flexible blanket form called the Excelflex Composite Systems, are
based on Excelfrax's core high-temperature insulation material.
This material blends ceramic (alumina and silica) powders and
fibers to produce a microporous structure.  The structure decreases
radiant heat flow, thereby making Excelfrax materials extremely
efficient insulation materials.  The core material can be
manufactured into a variety of product forms, including composite
systems, molded shapes, and rigid boards.

The firm's Excelflex Composite Systems are composed of a high-
temperature (1800(F) core material that has been placed between two
layers of a high-temperature textile.  The standard textile is a
1200(F S-Glass.  However, various high-temperature textiles can be
used in the composite to provide protection from 500(-2,300(F.  The
layers are compressed into a uniform thickness (ranging from 1/8-
inch to 1/2-inch) and density (both standard and lightweight).  The
layers are then quilted into a finished composite.  The Excelflex's
standard configuration is 36" x 36" pads that are lock-stitched
into one-inch squares.

Market manager of Carborundum's Fibers Div., Jim Olchawski (Tel:
716/278-2008, Fax: 716/278-2440), calls Excelflex's extremely good
thermal conductivity its main advantage.  Because of this excellent
thermal performance, Excelflex will provide the maximum amount of
insulation within the smallest amount of weight and space.  Stable
at high temperatures, Excelflex has low thermal diffusivity and
excellent material strength characteristics. Also, Excelflex's
flexibility and ease of fabrication are important considerations
for many applications.

Excelflex provides the best insulation (lowest thermal
conductivity) of all the insulating products currently provided by
Carborundum.  Olchawski recommends it as the material of choice
whenever high-temperature insulating materials are required and
space/weight savings are the primary consideration.  Excelflex
Composite Systems can reduce heat loss and reduce surface
temperatures in a variety of materials, including
aerospace/defense, industrial, and commercial markets.

Aerospace/defense applications for Excelflex include thermal
insulation/fire protection in aircraft engine struts, nacelles,
cowlings, and avionics.  Industrial applications can be found in
nuclear power plants, petrochemical facilities, and other
industrial areas (i.e. incinerators, heat-treatment furnaces,
insulation for kilns and furnaces, and other metal/glass processing
industries).  Commercial applications include commercial ovens,
night storage heaters, and many other appliance applications.

Olchawski explains that Excelfrax is a "natural," the direct result
of two principal factors: The company's technical capabilities,
developed over many years while working with Fiberfrax refractory
ceramic fibers in the same markets and the partnerships created
between the company's full-service applications engineering team
and Carborundum customers in developing critical design solutions
for any application.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Supply Contract
for SiC Whiskers

Hughes Aircraft Co. will demonstrate the advanced process to
produce low cost aluminum metal matrix composites (MMCs) that can
meet the requirements for high-performance military structural
components under a recently awarded $6.2 million U.S. Army
contract.

Of this, ART has been given an award worth $480,000 for further
optimization of a low cost manufacturing process for SiC whiskers
(reinforcements for the metal matrix composites) and for supplying
several hundred kilograms of whiskers to the program.

These selectively reinforced MMCs have potential applications such
as tracked vehicle tread shoes, powertrain parts, like pistons, and
missile structures.  Current technologies to produce MMCs with
lightweight, high-strength properties for these types of components
are very expensive for high volume automotive applications.

The contract, awarded by the U.S. Army Tank Automotive and
Armaments Command (TACOM), is also sponsored by the North American
Technical Industrial Base Organization (NA.HEADLINEBO), which is
composed of U.S. tri-service and Canadian military representation.

Key partners on the Hughes team are the Advanced Materials
Development Center of General Motors' Powertrain Group and Advanced
Refractory Technologies (ART).  GM brings to the program the state-
of-the-art squeeze casting process, created as part of their
development and production of automotive parts.  ART, as part of a
GM-sponsored initiative, has been developing a process for making
the silicon carbide whiskers which are used as the reinforcement
material in this casting process.

Contact:  Mary T. Spohn, Advanced Refractory Technologies, Inc.,
699 Hertel Ave., Buffalo, NY 14207; Tel: 716/875-4091, Fax:
716/975-0106.


Recent Patents:

Whisker Preforms
Patent Number: 5,464,583
Issue Date: 1995 11 07
Assignee:  Lockheed Idaho Technologies Co.
Inventor(s): Lessing, Paul A.
State/Country: ID

A process for manufacturing Si3N4/SiAlON whiskers by mixing silicon
carbide powder with aluminum nitride powder, adding impurities such
as calcium oxide or potassium chloride to control whisker
characteristics, forming the mixture in a boron nitrogen mold of
desired shape and isostatically pressing the formed mixture in a
nitrogen environment to produce whiskers comprised substantially of
SiAlON at the nucleating end of the whisker and Si3N4 at the other
end of the whisker. In one embodiment, reinforced composites are
formed by impregnating the Si3N4/SiAlON whisker preform with a
matrix material such as resin binders, liquid metals,
intermetallics or ceramic materials.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

3M Cleans Up
Coal Fired Plants

3M has introduced a high performance ceramic composite filter,
which features high temperature capability, resistance to thermal
shock, lightweight and resistance to catastrophic failure.

The Type 203 Ceramic Composite Filter is a rigid, candle-type
filter consisting of Nextel ceramic fibers which reinforce a
silicon carbide matrix.  The ceramic fibers toughen the composite
construction and result in a filter with excellent resistance to
thermal shock and catastrophic failure.  The filter is used to
remove particulate from high temperature gas streams up to 1850F
(1010C).  The collected particulate is removed by reverse pulse
jet cleaning.

The high temperature capability of this filter can eliminate the
need to cool the gas stream prior to filtration, which may increase
process efficiency and eliminate the cost and complexity of gas
dilution, air scrubbers, or heat exchangers.

The light weight (2 lbs.) of this filter reduces the strength
requirements of the tube sheet, and the excellent thermal shock
resistance provides protection during upset conditions. The 3M
Ceramic Composite Filter is designed for advanced coal-fired power
generation systems, such as pressurized fluidized bed  combustion
(PFBC), and integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC).

Contact:  Bob Carlton, 3M Ceramic Fiber Products, 3M Center, St.
Paul, MN 55144-1000; Tel: 612/733-1110.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Ceramic, Metal Bond
for Hot Gas Filters

Intumescent materials for joining ceramics to metals at high
temperatures in hot gas filtration systems have been formulated by
scientists at CeraMem Corp. (12 Clematis Ave., Waltham, MA 02154-
7035; Tel: 617/899-0467).  Other potential applications for the
materials include heat exchangers, high temperature vehicle
emission control systems, and heat protection and control systems
for new jet engines.

The cost effective sealing of ceramic components such as
particulate filters to high temperature metal alloys in advanced
coal-based power systems operating at temperatures of up to 1000C
is extremely difficult, reports Robert J. Higgins.  The problem
stems from the large disparity in thermal expansion coefficients of
these two types of materials.

This requirement to seal large gaps between ceramic and metallic
components, coupled with the need to maintain appropriate stress
levels on the ceramic components at all temperatures, places
extreme demands on the properties of the material used to seal the
ceramic-metal gap.  Similar systems operating at lower temperatures
utilize vermiculite-based intumescent mats for this purpose, but
such materials have limited lifetimes when used at temperatures in
excess of 500C and degrade at temperatures above 800C.

CeraMem scientists are investigating the use of multilayer,
biceramic composites that can reversibly expand and contract
between room temperature and 1000C.  These composites will include
various combinations of high temperature oxides fabricated by the
surface modification treatment of thin, tape cast ceramic sheets.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Heat Treatment for
PTCR Barium Titanate

Semiconducting barium titanate (BaTiO3) is of interest for a
variety of applications.  However, it is difficult to manufacture
due to the necessity of preferential distribution of dopants in the
titanate grains, and the sensitivity of the positive temperature
coefficient of resistance (PTCR) performance to the heat treatment
schedule used to sinter the microstructure of these electronic
ceramics.  Prof. Vasantha Amarakoon at Alfred University (New York
State College of Ceramics, Alfred, NY 14802; Tel: 607/871-2497)
reports in the Journal of the American Ceramic Society the effects
of heat treatment on PTCR behavior.

The PTCR behavior occurs as a result of either doping BaTiO3 with
an aliovalent ion or heating in a low oxygen atmosphere which
reduces Ti4+ to Ti3+.  Electronic conduction occurs up to the Curie
temperature (about 120(C) where the resistance increases by several
orders of magnitude.  The necessity of achieving uniform
distribution of liquid phase additives (excess barium, tin) is
dealt with by using a gel-coating process of the grains.  The PTCR
effect is seen to develop when the material is cooled to the
annealing temperature, as the grain boundaries rapidly oxidize when
the liquid phase there solidifies.  Oxygen diffusion continues
during annealing and cooling, which increases the PTCR response.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Optical Waveguides of
Alumina Thin Films

Alumina waveguides formed by reactive rf magnetron sputtering were
studied by researchers at Massachusetts Institute of Technology and
Hanscom Air Force Base (Lionel O. Bouthillette, Optoelectric
Components Branch, Hanscom AFB, Bedford, MA 01731-2909) as a
candidate material for optical waveguides.  Use of sputtering to
form alumina films enables it to be deposited in the amorphous
state, removing the necessity of achieving a crystallographic match
with the substrate.  The researchers described in the Journal of
the American Ceramic Society amorphous alumina films deposited at
temperatures up to 800(C and varying oxygen flow rates in the
deposition chamber.

The refractive index of the amorphous alumina films averaged 1.65
over a transmission range of 200 nm to 7 microns with reproducible
losses of 1dB/cm at a 632.8 nm wavelength.  A refractive index of
greater than 1.4 is desirable for compatibility with silicon
technology and less than 1.8 for coupling with fibers.  The
chemical inertness, adherence, hardness, and wear resistance, and
mechanical durability of alumina films additionally makes these
materials suitable for waveguide applications.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Actuator Technology
Wins Patent Protection

Research Corp. Technologies (RCT) in Tucson, AZ, has received U.S.
Patent 5,471,721 for a process to transform standard piezoelectric
wafers into unique domed structures that demonstrate an
unprecedented increase in displacement and load capacity over
conventional piezoelectrics.

In 1993, RCT granted an exclusive license to Aura Systems Inc.
(NASDAQ: AURA) in El Segundo, CA to make, use and sell ceramic
actuators using the process. RCT commercialized the technology on
behalf of Clemson University and the inventor, Dr. Gene Haertling.

Dr. Haertling's RAINBOW (reduced and internally biased oxide
wafers) support moderate loads while achieving large displacements
with modest applied voltages.  RAINBOWs are rugged, reliable, cost-
effective, and easy to make and use.

Structurally similar to standard piezoelectric unimorphs, the
unique structures can support over 100 psi or displacements of 50
mils, depending on load, size and composition.  Moreover, this
performance can be augmented by stacking multiple RAINBOWs.

RAINBOWs have a broad range of potential applications including
speakers, microphones, pumps, actuators, sensors, relays, switches,
transducers, hydrophones, vibrators, accelerometers, positioners,
and pyroelectric detectors.  Aura Ceramics, Inc., a subsidiary of
Aura Systems, supplies component RAINBOWs to OEMs.

"RAINBOWs offer more than an order of magnitude increase in
displacement over existing piezo approaches," said Jim Sloane,
president of Aura Ceramics.  "It's an enabling technology that will
open up numerous applications to the simplifying solutions of
active ceramics."

Contact:  Andrew Melcher, Aura Ceramics Inc., New Hope, MN; Tel:
612/535-9660, Fax: 612/535-9655.


Recent Patents

Microelectronics Package
Patent Number: 5,465,008
Issue Date: 1995 11 07
Assignee:  Stratedge Corp.
Inventor(s): Goetz, Martin; Babiarz, Joseph; Wein, Deborah S.;
Anderson, Paul M.; Lindner, Alan W.
State/Country: CA

A ceramic microelectronic package suitable for high-frequency
microelectronic devices includes a base which is at least partially
conductive, attached either by seal glass or by solder to a ceramic
RF substrate with a cavity formed at its center and a pattern of
conductive paths for providing interconnection from the inside to
the outside of the package. The base may be metal or ceramic with
a metal layer deposited thereon. A ceramic seal ring with a second
cavity corresponding to that of the RF substrate, but slightly
larger, is attached to the RF substrate by seal glass which is
patterned to generally match the dimensions of the seal ring. A
ceramic lid is attached to the top of the seal ring by a non-
conductive adhesive, such as a polymer adhesive or low temperature
seal glass, to seal the package once the microelectronic device has
been mounted inside.


Co-Fired Substrate
Patent Number: 5,468,694
Issue Date: 1995 11 21
Assignee:  Yamamura Glass Co. Ltd., Kyocera Corp.
Inventor(s): Taguchi, Tomoyuki; Kuribayashi, Hideyuki; Tanaka, Jun;
Konaga, Tomomi; Morigami, Yoshihiro
State/Country: Japan

A novel crystallizable glass composition for producing a novel low
temperature co-fired glass-ceramic substrate having patterns of a
low electrical-resistance conductor such as Ag, Ag-Pd, Au, and/or
Cu is obtained. Being subjected to a firing process, the novel
crystallizable glass can precipitate mullite as main crystalline
phase, and at least one subordinate crystalline phase among
forsterite, spinel, sapphirine, and similar crystalline phases. And
also, the novel crystallizable glass powder composition with an
inorganic filler as external additive having a minimum of 1.4 m2/g.
of mean specific surface area can precipitate both mullite phase
and cordierite phase. The mixing weight ratio of the filler to the
crystallizable glass powder is from 0.1/99.9 to 20/80. The
crystallizable glass composition comprises following oxide
components expressed in terms of percent by weight on the oxide
basis; 45-58% of Al2O3, 20-35% of SiO2, 5-15% of B2O3, 5-20% of
MgO, and 0-4% of alkali metal oxide. The substrates produced from
the above compositions have high flexural strength, low dielectric
constant, low loss factor, and controllable thermal expansion
coefficient of ranging from approximately 30 to 70X10-7/C. As for
the substrate containing both mullite phase and cordierite phase,
as the substrate has a low thermal expansion coefficient, it can be
combined with AlN to produce a composite structure package.







<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

HTS Filters for
Cellular Market

Illinois Superconductor Corp. (ISC, Mt. Prospect, IL) has been
installing and testing receivers that will substantially reduce
dropped calls and annoying static common in car phones.  The high-
temperature superconducting (HTS) filters, to be used in cellular
base stations, are designed to operate in the 825-850 MHz frequency
range.

The work has been partially supported by a 3-year, $3.5 million
project funded by the National Institute of Standards and
Technology's Advanced Technology Program.  Other partners in the
project include AT&T Bell Labs and Northwestern University.

To make these filters, ISC is using HTS thick-film material
developed by a team, now at the University of Birmingham
(Birmingham, England), that was funded in part by Ballistic Missile
Defense Organization (BMDO).  While the radio frequency (RF)
properties of HTS thick-film materials are not as good as competing
HTS thin films, they are much easier to make.  For example, thick
films can coat 3-D objects (thin films cannot), enabling the
fabrication of RF components designed to maximize performance.  In
addition, thick-film materials can be sprayed, dip-coated, or
brushed onto desired substrates. In contrast, thin films must be
made in clean-room facilities using a sophisticated laser process.


Contact:  Jim Hodge, Illinois Superconductor Corp., 1840 Oak Ave.,
Evanston, IL 60201; Tel: 708/391-9400.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Hg-Based Materials
Challenge Researchers

A paper presented by Paul Chu, et al., (The Texas Center for
Superconductivity and Dept. of Physics, University of Houston,
Houston, TX 77204; Tel: 713/743-8212) at the fall meeting of the
Materials Research Society focused on research underway on mercury-
based high-temperature superconductors, the homologue series,
HgBa2Can-1CunO2n+2+d [Hg-12(n-1)n or HBCCO] with n = 1, 2, ...7.

They were first found by a Swiss team in Zurich to be
superconducting at temperatures up to 134 K.  Later, the Houston
group raised the superconducting temperatures of these compounds to
a record-high temperature of 164 K by squeezing the sample, making
it possible for the first time to achieve the superconducting state
by using household air-conditioning technology.

These materials exhibit an impressive current carrying capacity of
up to one million amperes per square centimeter at 100 K, observed
by the IBM group at Yorktown Heights after making the compound into
the thin film form.  The figures translate to a theoretical limit
of about 10 million amperes per square centimeter at the liquid
nitrogen temperature of 77 K.

Chu said that because of the simple and yet subtle crystal
structure of the compounds, specifically the linear Hg-O
coordination that allows a large cation-doping range, scientists
are given the opportunity to peer into the effects of atomic
arrangement and doping on the occurrence of superconductivity at
high temperatures.

Some of the experimental results on these compounds have
demonstrated the limits of and the modifications needed in some of
the prevailing models of high-temperature superconductivity.  A
superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) was made from
this compound and operated at the unprecedentedly high temperature
of 114K by the IBM group.

However, he added that the mercury-based compounds are rather
unstable.  Usually, they are not easy to make in pure form, and
they decompose easily at the high temperatures required to shape
them into practical forms, such as wires for power transmission and
generators.   This is to say that Hg is lost at temperatures above
350(C.

Recently, progress has been made in this respect.  By doping the
compounds, the synthesis of the materials has been simplified and
the materials so prepared become more stable.  Preliminary success
has been achieved in wire-making.  Small single crystals of the
compounds have been obtained with high enough quality for
scientific study.  However, more material improvements are needed
before these new compounds can become a material of practice.  Dr.
Chu was not available to elaborate on these topics at press time.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Current Limiter
Prototype Tested

American Superconductor Corp. has successfully demonstrated a 2.4
kV high temperature superconducting (HTS) current limiter prototype
in partnership with Lockheed Martin Corp. (NYSE:LMT), Southern
California Edison (SCE) and Los Alamos National Lab (LANL).  The
project was funded by the Dept. of Energy, under their
Superconductivity Partnership Initiative program.  The
demonstration took place at SCE's Center Substation in Downey, CA.

The current limiter incorporates the world's largest HTS coil,
which was manufactured and delivered earlier this year by American
Superconductor.  Current limiters are devices that instantaneously
limit the flow of electrical current, and mitigate the effects of
short circuits, lightning or power fluctuations.  The devices
essentially act as giant surge protectors, which protects expensive
utility transmission and distribution equipment.  American
Superconductor expects to commercialize HTS current limiters in the
1998-1999 time frame.

"This demonstration is significant in that it shows that HTS wire
and coil technology is advancing rapidly to meet the needs of the
electric power industry," said Dr. Dean Peterson, Center Leader of
the Superconductivity Technology Center at Los Alamos National
Laboratory.  He added, "Development of high performance, low cost
current limiters will yield improved reliability, efficiency and
cost improvements for the electric utility industry.

Greg Yurek, president and CEO of American Superconductor,
commented:  "The successful demonstration of the prototype
utilizing our leading edge HTS coil represents another significant
technical milestone for American Superconductor and validates our
expected time line for commercialization of this product line.  Our
commercialization efforts in the area of current limiters will
continue with a number of global partners to meet the existing and
growing demand for HTS devices that overcome the limitations of
conventional copper-based technology."

Contact:  Denise Mikulis, American Superconductor Corp., 2
Technology Dr., Westborough, MA 01581; Tel: 508/836-4200; Fax:
508/836-4248.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Model for Complex
Vortex Behavior

One of the main obstacles in the development of practical high-Tc
superconducting materials is the dissipation caused by the motion
of vortices.  By using the speed and memory of parallel computers,
researchers at Argonne National Lab have numerically simulated,
using extremely fine temporal and spatial resolution, a model for
complex vortex behavior.

Resulting numerical simulations or vortex dynamics in a
superconducting sample show that, in the presence of a strong
magnetic field, the vortex lattice maintains a superstructure where
regions of varying vortex density are separated by stationary fault
lines.  Furthermore, the vortex lattice may have misoriented grains
that gradually "heal" when subjected to a weak current.  The
researchers also find that the orientation of the vortex lattice
depends on the strength of the transport current.

Argonne welcomes collaborations with industry to explore ways in
which computational models can be used for predicting the
performance characteristics of HTS superconducting wires and tapes.


Contact: Argonne National Lab, 9700 South Cass Ave., Argonne, IL
60439; Tel: 708/627-2596.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

DOE Presents Materials
Science Awards

The Dept. of Energy (DOE) recently presented nine national awards
in materials science to 10 winners in the U.S.  Open to the 14
national laboratories, the awards were given in three categories as
follows: metallurgy and ceramics, solid-state physics, and
materials chemistry. The following are the awardees in high-
performance ceramics and their areas of research.

Sandia National Labs and University of California at Los Angeles
won the Sustained Outstanding Research Award with "Fundamentals of
Sol-Gel Thin Film Deposition." In an ongoing project since 1988, a
team of nine scientists explored the fundamental physical and
chemical phenomena in sol-gel thin-film deposition by dip-coating
and used these phenomena to control such film properties as
refractive index, volume fraction porosity, and pore size.

Eleven researchers at Ames Lab won the Outstanding Scientific
Accomplishment Award for "Investigation of Single-Crystal RNi2B2C
Magnetic superconductors," The team has been investigating the
electronic and magnetic properties of the superconductors. The
experiments have revealed phenomena associated with the
simultaneous interplay of strong electron-photon interactions and
magnetic couplings.

A Pacific National Lab team with eight researchers won the Award
for Signification Implication for DOE-Related Technologies on
"Aqueous Deposition of Ceramics on Plastics and Complex Shapes."
The team developed a methodology to deposit ceramic films from
supersaturated aqueous solutions onto a wide range of substrate
materials. The technique provides conformal coatings on complex
shapes and can be used to deposit patterned coatings.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Alcoa to Shutter
Packaging Plant

Alcoa Electronic Packaging, Inc. (AEP), a manufacturer of ceramic
microprocessors will be shut down as of March 3, 1996 due to not
being included in Intel's supplier list. Of the four major
microprocessor suppliers in the world, three are Japanese
companies, Kyocera, NTK and Sumitomo. Of these, Kyocera has 75% of
the total world market.

AEP has been a qualified supplier to Kyocera and has been doing
business worth about $100 million per year. Although Intel has not
given the reason for switching to plastic packagings, it is
expected to accomplish that over the next two years. Kyocera, NTK
and Sumitomo will continue to supply ceramic microprocessors to
Intel.

AEP has not finalized its plan after the shut down. It is expected
to keep limited operation with a small team.

Contact: Alcoa Electronic Packaging Inc., 16750 via Del Campo Ct.,
San Diego, CA 92127; Tel: 619/451-7100.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

ART Teams with
European Firm

Advanced Refractory Technologies, Inc. (ART, 699 Hertel Ave.,
Buffalo, NY 14207; Tel: 716/875-4091, Fax: 716/875-0106) and N. V.
Bekaert S. A. have signed an agreement to develop and market ART's
DYLYN thin film coating technology in Europe.  The agreement will
result in commercialization of the technology in Europe via
customer-specific application development.

Under terms of the agreement, Bekaert acquires from ART the
worldwide exclusive right to design, manufacture, and sell DYLYN
deposition equipment to companies licensed by ART to use the
technology.  The equipment will be constructed by Sinvaco (Deinze,
Belgium) which is majority owned by Bekaert.

DYLYN is a family of diamond-like coatings consisting of two
interpenetrating networks, one based on carbon and the other based
on silicon.  The coatings offer low friction, high adherence, and
corrosion resistance.  According to ART's Mary Spohn, the materials
can also be tailored via the addition of metals and ceramics to
provide desired properties such as electrical conductivity or
resistivity.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

ATMI Acquires
Thin Film Maker

Advanced Technology Materials, Inc. announced the acquisition of
Epitronics, Inc. (Phoenix, AZ).  Epitronics specializes in the
manufacture of semiconductor thin films for the wireless and
optoelectronics markets.  ATMI will integrate Epitronics into its
Diamond Electronics Div., which is dedicated to the
commercialization of advanced semiconductor technology based on
diamond and related materials.

Duncan Brown, ATMI VP of Diamond Electronics said, "Epitronics'
products and manufacturing capability will complement ATMI's
silicon carbide and gallium nitride development efforts.  It also
provides enhanced distribution capability to our growing portfolio
of wafer and thin film products."

Dr. Robert Adams, general manager of Epitronics said, "The
opportunity to join forces with ATMI allows us to meet all of our
strategic objectives.  ATMI's customer and market focus, its strong
capitalization and growth record, and the unique technology and
products of the Diamond Electronics Div. nicely complement
Epitronics' capabilities and interests."

Contact:  Dean Hamilton, ATMI, 7 Commerce Dr., Danbury, CT 06810-
4169; Tel: 203/794-1100, Fax: 203/792-8040.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

A.P. Green Acquires
Refractories Unit

A.P. Green Industries, Inc., a ceramic and refractory manufacturer,
has acquired a 51% interest in its high performance refractories
business, Lanxide ThermoComposites, Inc. (L.HEADLINE).  In
consideration for the L.HEADLINE interest, A.P. Green is providing
funding to support the rapidly expanding L.HEADLINE business.

Concurrently with A.P. Green's acquisition, L.HEADLINE acquired
Chiam Technologies Inc. (Chiam) in exchange for a 20% common stock
interest in L.HEADLINE.  Chiam is a company specializing in the
export of refractory products from the People's Republic of China.

L.HEADLINE is concentrating on commercializing high performance
refractory products for the continuous casting segment of the steel
industry.  L.HEADLINE's unique products are derived using the DIMOX
directed metal oxidation process licensed from Lanxide Corp.

Contact:  A.P. Green Industries, Inc., Green Blvd., Mexico, MO
65265; Tel: 314/473-3626, Fax: 314/473-3222, or Michael J. Hollins,
Lanxide Corp., 1300 Marrows Rd., P.O. Box 6077, Newark, DE 19714-
6077; Tel: 302/456-6213, Fax: 302/454-1712.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Brake Production
Facility Starts Up

Lanxide Corp., Nihon Cement Co., Ltd., Kanematsu Corp. and Lanxide
K.K. have announced the commissioning of a new automotive
manufacturing line for production of ceramic-reinforced aluminum
brake rotors and drums.  The new production line, located at
Lanxide Corp.'s facilities in Newark, DE, is a result of a
cooperative development program among the four companies.

The manufacturing line will be used to produce newly introduced
lightweight ceramic-reinforced aluminum brake rotors and brake
drums for the automotive industry.  The new rotors and drums are
less than half the weight of their traditional cast iron
counterparts, and respond to the widespread industry need for
weight reduction to meet ever tightening government emissions and
fuel economy standards. Initial capacity of the production line
will be approximately 15,000 rotors and drums per year, expected to
increase to 60,000 units per year within a year.

The world's first production automobile to utilize LANXIDE ceramic-
reinforced aluminum brake rotors, the new Lotus Elise sports car,
was introduced at the Frankfurt Auto Show last year. The Elise uses
four silicon carbide ceramic-reinforced aluminum brake rotors
manufactured by Waupaca Foundry, Inc., under license from Lanxide
Corp.

According to Marc S. Newkirk, president and CEO of Lanxide Corp.,
the ceramic-reinforced aluminum parts made by the Lanxide's PRIMEX
Pressureless Metal Infiltration Process will have an increasing
impact on the design and performance of automotive equipment.  The
capacity to provide the rigidity of iron and steel at less than
half the weight directly enables improved fuel economy and reduced
emissions in cars, trucks and buses, addressing a critical,
industry-wide need.

Contact:  Dr. Christopher R. Kennedy, VP technology, Lanxide Corp.,
1300 Marrows Rd., P.O. Box 6077, Newark, DE 19714-6077; Tel:
302/456-6200, Fax: 302/454-1712; or Yuzo Yamaguchi, executive VP,
Lanxide K.K., 8th Floor, Shiba-koen Building, 2-2-22, Shiba-koen,
Minato-ku, Tokyo 105, Japan; Tel: 011/81/3-3432-4351; Fax:
011/81/3-3432-3045.


High Tech Ceramics News Stock Watch
(as of January 10, 1996)

                                       This      Last          Change
Company                   Symbol       Month     Month            (%)

Alcoa                     AA           50.50       58.25      -13.3
ACX Technologies          ACX          16.50      16.5        0.0
Amer. Superconductor      AMSC         14.50     11.00        +31.8
Advanced Tech. Mtl.       ATMI         10.00      10.12       -1.2
Aviall                    AVL          8.62       8.50        +1.4
Avx                       AVX          22.50     27.50        -18.2
CTS Corp.                 CTS          37.00      36.50       +1.4
Ceradyne                  CRDN         6.37       5.63        +13.1
Corning                   GLW          30.12      31.5        -4.4
Edo Corp.                 EDO          4.62      5.00         -7.6
Ferro Corp.               FOE          23.87     23.00        +3.8
Hitachi                   HIT          101.75     101.37      -0.4
Intermagnetics General    IMG          20.00     25.75        -22.3
Illinois Superconductor   ISCO         18.00     18.00        0.0
Kemet Electronics         KMET         22.12     28.18        -21.5
Kyocera                   KYO          142.00     160.50      -11.5
Morton International      MII          35.25      35.87         -2.8
3M                        MMM          65.37      66.00       -1.0
Praxair                   PX           31.87     29.00        +9.9
Superconductor Tech.      SCON         4.75      4.37          +8.7
TDK Corp.                 TDK           52.12     52.00       +0.2
Textron                   TXT          70.62      76.12       -7.2
Vishay Technologies       VSH          26.62      33.12       -19.6

Source: BCC




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Tensile Properties
of CMCs Tested

A joint Korean and Japanese research effort studied the tensile
properties of ceramic matrix composites. Researchers Dong-Woo Shin
and Keun Ho Auh (Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea) and Hidehiko
Tanaka (National Institute for Research in Inorganic Materials,
Tsukuba-shi, Ibaraki, Japan) characterized the mechanical
properties of various 2D ceramic matrix fiber composites by tension
testing, using the gripping and alignment techniques. The woven
fabric composites used for the test had the basic combinations of
Al2O3, fabric/Al2O3, SiC fabric/SiC, and SiC monofilament uniweave
fabric/SiC.

Tension testing was performed with strain gauge and acoustic
emission instrumentation to identify the first matrix-cracking
stress and assure a valid alignment. The peak tensile stresses of
these laminate composites were about one-third of the flexural
strengths. The SiC monofilament uniweave fabric (14 vol%)/SiC
composites showed a relatively high peak stress of 370 MPa in
tension testing.

The full paper is available in the Journal of the American Ceramic
Society [78 (11), 1995].




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Behavior of SiC
Fibers in a Matrix

This work was done by Hyunho Shin at School of Materials Science
and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA
30332. The full paper is published in the Journal of American
Ceramic Society [78 (11), 1995].

A Nicalon SiC fiber-reinforced Si-Al-Ca-O-N composite was
fabricated by a slurry infiltration process followed by hot
pressing at 1600C.  A carbon-rich interfacial layer (~100 nm) as
well as a crystalline silicon-rich layer (~15 nm) were observed
between the fiber and matrix. Based on this interfacial
phenomenology, the following behavior of SiC fibers in the matrix
was proposed:  fine SiC grains (diameter of ~1.7 nm in as-received
fibers) decomposed at fiber surfaces (SiC  C + Si), followed by
silicon migration into the glassy phase of the matrix.  The glassy
phase was interpreted to play a key role as a silicon consumer in
fostering the formation of the carbon-rich layer.  The presence of
silicon implied that the oxygen activity in the matrix was low
enough to avoid SiC oxidation.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

BIBLIOGRAPHIES

Sintering SiC

The bibliography contains citations concerning the sintering
processes used to form silicon carbide powders and products.
Processing techniques including high pressure combustion, reaction
sintering, pressureless sintering, liquid phase sintering, and
microwave sintering are covered.  The use of sintering aids, or
additives, and the resulting effects on properties such as thermal
conductivity and electrical resistivity are examined.

Contains a minimum of 144 citations and includes a subject term
index and title list from Ceramic Abstracts Database. Available
from N.HEADLINES, Ref. No. PB95-860995/ABS, Price Code: PC N01/MF/
N01. Tel: 703/487-4650, Fax: 703/321-8547.

Sol-Gel Processes

The bibliography contains citations concerning design and
development of sol-gel processes and sol-gel derived materials.
Sol-gel derived materials include protective and transparent films,
ceramic coatings, nanocomposites and microcomposites, porous and
dense composites, fiber reinforced composites, oxides, and ductile
ceramics.  Topics include preparation of high temperature
superconducting oxides and films, glass-ceramic composites and
ceramic matrix composites for high temperature applications, sol-
gel processes for advanced ceramics, coatings on semiconductors,
infrared optical coatings, and coatings on carbon/carbon
composites.

Contains 250 citations and includes a subject term index and title
list from the Aerospace Database. Available from N.HEADLINES, Ref.
No. PB95-859989/ABS, Price Code: PC N01/MF/ N01. Tel: 703/487-4650,
Fax: 703/321-8547.


PLZT Ceramics

The bibliography contains citations concerning the development and
use of lanthanum-doped lead zirconate titanate (PLZT) ceramics in
optical modulation and image storage.  Topics include technology
reviews, fabrication techniques, equipment development, ion
implantation effects on photo-sensitivity, and electro-optical
properties.  Applications of PLZT ceramics in optical switching
systems, display devices, and lenses for eye protection are
discussed.

Contains 250 citations and includes a subject term index and title
list from INSPEC Database. Available from N.HEADLINES, Ref. No.
PB95-861274/ABS, Price Code: PC N01/MF/ N01. Tel: 703/487-4650,
Fax: 703/321-8547.


Processing of Sialon

The bibliography contains citations concerning the processing of
Sialon (named for its constituents Si--Al--O--N).  Citations
include discussions about the preparation, formation, and sintering
of sialon ceramics.  Specific methods of producing Sialon materials
mentioned are combustion synthesis and gas-pressure sintering.

Contains a minimum of 179 citations and includes a subject term
index and title list from Ceramic Abstracts Database. Available
from N.HEADLINES, Ref. No. PB95-859880/ABS, Price Code: PC N01/MF/
N01. Tel: 703/487-4650, Fax: 703/321-8547.


Glass Ceramics

The bibliography contains citations concerning the design,
development, evaluation, and applications of glass ceramics.
Citations discuss fabrication and testing of glass ceramic
materials for high strength, high thermal expansion, and high
voltage applications.  Applications in lasers, solar concentrators,
metal seals and metal bondings, pyrotechnic devices, insulators for
vacuum tubes, nuclear waste treatment, capacitance thermometers,
millimeter wave devices, biomaterials, and automobile thermal
reactors are examined.

Contains a minimum of 183 citations and includes a subject term
index and title list N.HEADLINES Bibliographic Database. Available
from N.HEADLINES, Ref. No. PB95-860029/ABS, Price Code: PC N01/MF/
N01. Tel: 703/487-4650, Fax: 703/321-8547.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

BOOKS AND REPORTS

Chemistry of
Advanced Materials

Edited by C.N.R. Rao, the 416 page Chemistry of Advanced Materials
has been organized according to various materials and processing
technologies as follows: sol-gel route for materials syntheses,
combustion, oxide synthesis, the pyrosol process, ferroelectric
tungsten bronze oxide, rapidly solidified magnetic materials,
superconducting materials, nitride ceramics, shape memory effect in
nickel-titanium, nanomaterials, extended molecular electronic
materials, functionalized polymeric materials for electronics and
optics, molecular electronics, diamond thin films, catalysts and
adsorbents, composite thermistors and amorphous materials.

These are written mostly by university professors and researchers
from various laboratories around the world. Most of the articles
concentrate on the chemistry of formation of these materials along
with detailed theoretical aspects.

The book provides an up-to-date survey of some of the important
aspects of modern materials. It will be a useful reference for
materials scientists, polymer chemists and inorganic chemists.

Published in 1993 by Blackwell Scientific Publications, it is being
distributed in the U.S. by CRC Press Inc. Price: $129.95. Available
from: CRC Press, 2000 Corporate Blvd. NW, Boca Raton, FL 33431;
Tel: 407/994-0555.


Keeping Up on
Superconductors

High Temperature Superconducting Materials Science and Engineering
was edited by Donglu Shi of University of Cincinnati and written by
researchers from universities, national and industry labs. The book
has been organized into 10 chapters as follows: High Tc in Layered
Cuprates, Properties of High Tc Superconductors, Crystal Structures
and Phase Equilibria, Vortex State in type II Superconductors,
Structural Defects, Transport Critical Currents, Thin Films, Bulk
Processing and Characterization, Processing Bi-Based High Tc
Superconducting Tapes, Wires and Thick Films for Conductor
Applications, and High Tc Superconductor Applications.

The focus of the book is on the basic concepts and recent
developments in the field. Most of the theoretical issues are
addressed in a straightforward manner so that technical
nonspecialists and university students can benefit from the
information. Many physical concepts in superconductivity are
explained in light of current theories.

The book is written for a large readership including university
students and researchers from diverse backgrounds such as physics,
materials science, engineering and chemistry. Both undergraduate
and graduate students will find the book a valuable reference not
only on superconductivity, but also on materials-related topics,
including structure and phase diagrams of complex systems, novel
ceramic and composite processing methods, thin film fabrication,
and new materials-characterization techniques. In particular, this
book gives a detailed introduction to experimental methods at low
temperatures and high magnetic fields. Therefore, the book can
serve as a comprehensive introduction to researchers in
electromagnetic ceramics in general, and can also be used as a
graduate level text in superconductivity.

Published 1995, 480 pages, price: $120, available from: Elesevier
Science Ltd., The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Oxford OX5 1GB,
England; Tel: 44/1865/843000, Fax: 44/1865/843010




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
HIGH TECH CERAMICS NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

CALENDAR

February 4-8, 1996, The 1996 TMS Annual Meeting & Exhibition,
Anahein, CA. Contact: TMS, 420 Commonwealth Dr., Warrendale, PA
15086; Tel: 412/776-9000.

February 8-9, 1996, Southeast University/Industry Technology
Transfer Conference, Orlando Airport Marriott Hotel, Orlando, FL.
Contact: Technology Transfer Conferences, Inc., 325 Plus Park
Blvd., No. 108, Nashville, TN 37217; Tel: 615/366-0679, Fax:
615/366-0695.

February 13-14, 1996, Advanced Turbine Systems Materials Workshop,
Charleston, SC. Contact: Tel: 410/290-0370.

February 26-28, 1996, Soft Magnetic Materials 96, San Francisco,
CA. Contact: Gorham/Intertech Consulting, 411 U.S. Route One,
Portland, ME 04105; Tel: 207/781-9800, Fax: 207/781-2150.

March 12-15, 1996, 10th Anniversary HTS Workshop on Physics,
Materials, and Applications, Houston, TX. Contact: S.W. Butler,
Texas Center for Superconductivity at the University of Houston,
Houston, TX 77204-5932; Tel: 713/743-8210, Fax: 713/743-8201.

March 15-16, 1996, International Workshop on Fine Ceramics '96,
Nagoya, Japan. Contact: Japan Fine Ceramics Center, 2-4-1 Mutsuno,
Atsuta, Nagoya 456, Japan; Tel: 81/52-871-3500, Fax: 81/52-871-
3599.

March 25-26, 1996, Western University/Industry Technology Transfer
Conference, Holiday Inn Crown Plaza, Las Vegas, NV. Contact:
Technology Transfer Conferences, Inc., 325 Plus Park Blvd., No.
108, Nashville, TN 37217; Tel: 615/366-0679, Fax: 615/366-0695.

April 1-3, 1996, 5th International Symposium on Trends and New
Applications in Thin Films: Hard Coatings, Centre de Rencontres
d'Echanges et de Formation (CREF), Colmar, France. Contact: Socit
Franaise du Vide, 19 Rue du Renard - 75004, Paris, France; Tel:
33/1/4278 15 82, Fax: 33/1/42 78 63 20.

April 8-12, 1996, MRS Spring Meeting, San Francisco, CA. Symposia
includes: nitrides and other wide bandgap semiconductors, amorphous
silicon and display materials, ceramics, superconductors, rapid
thermal processing and photovoltaics. Contact: MRS Meeting Dept.,
9800 McKnight Rd., Pittsburgh, PA 15237; Tel: 412/367-3003, Fax:
412/367-4373

April 14-17, 1996  American Ceramic Society 1996 Annual Meeting and
Exposition, Indiana Convention Center & RCA Dome, Indianapolis, IN.
Contact: The American Ceramic Society, P.O. Box 6136, Westerville,
OH 43086-6136; Tel: 614/794-5880, Fax: 614/794-5882.

May 20-21, 1996, Northeast University/Industry Technology Transfer
Conference, Radisson Hotel - Airport, Philadelphia, PA. Contact:
Technology Transfer Conferences, Inc., 325 Plus Park Blvd., No.
108, Nashville, TN 37217; Tel: 615/366-0679, Fax: 615/366-0695.

May 20-22, 1996, International Conference on Hot Isostatic
Pressing, Andover, MA. Contact: ASM International, Materials Park,
OH 44073-0002; Tel: 216/338-5151, Fax: 216/338-4634.

May 31-June 4, 1996, Beijing Ceramics '96 - International Ceramics
Technology and Equipment Exhibition, China World Trade Center,
Beijing, China.

June 19-22, 1996, 10th International Symposium on Non-Oxide
Glasses, Radisson Hotel, Corning, NY. Contact: Alexis Clare, NY
State College of Ceramics at Alfred University, 2 Pine St., Binns-
Merrill, Room 215, Alfred, NY 14802; Tel: 607/871-2368, Fax:
607/871-2392.

July 18-19, 1996, Midwest University/Industry Technology Transfer
Conference, Westin Hotel, O'Hare Airport, Chicago, IL. Contact:
Technology Transfer Conferences, Inc., 325 Plus Park Blvd., No.
108, Nashville, TN 37217; Tel: 615/366-0679, Fax: 615/366-0695.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-32</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B019-97</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ml16.html 205.156.212.5 19970122034709 text/html 79293
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:44:40 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:47 GMT
Content-length: 79106
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ml16.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>PLASTICS AND POLYMERS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>New Resin&nbsp;Grades Debut</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(402 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Standard Tests&nbsp;on the Way</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(134 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>Polyimide Tubes&nbsp;Finding Medical Uses</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(175 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>Porosity of Nylon&nbsp;Films Measured</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(277 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>ProCyte Moves into&nbsp;Moist Dressings</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(416 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>Now Bioabsorbable&nbsp;Elastomers Are Here</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(282 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>COATINGS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>Dry Coating Improves&nbsp;Implant Properties</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(216 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>On-Line Plasma&nbsp;Sampling Developed</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(313 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>BIOLOGICALS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>Lab-Grown Cartilage&nbsp;Ok'd for Compensation</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(313 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>Engineered Heart&nbsp;Valves Promising</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(249 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>DELIVERY SYSTEMS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>Microsphere Drug&nbsp;Device That Works</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(326 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>Oscillator Changes&nbsp;pH to Release Drug</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(142 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>Probes Deliver&nbsp;Drugs to Eyes</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(185 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>Pulmonary-Flow Sensing&nbsp;Technology Patented</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(210 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><LI>Channel Blocker&nbsp;Dosage Automated</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(364 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>Patch Alternative to&nbsp;Hormone Replacement</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(218 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>DIAGNOSTICS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><LI>Test Measures&nbsp;Bone-Collagen Loss</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(364 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><LI>Heart Attacks&nbsp;Diagnosed at Bedside</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(417 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><A HREF = "#19"><LI>Simultaneous Assay for&nbsp;Chlamydia, Gonorrhea</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(376 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><A HREF = "#20"><LI>Hepatitis Serotyping&nbsp;Test Launched</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(274 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><A HREF = "#21"><LI>Bladder Cancer&nbsp;Test Available</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(291 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FILTERS AND MEMBRANES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#22"><A HREF = "#22"><LI>Adhesion Control&nbsp;OK'd for Europe</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(220 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><A HREF = "#23"><LI>Pall Changes&nbsp;IV Concept</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(156 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><A HREF = "#24"><LI>Toray Creates&nbsp;Antithrombotic</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(375 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INDUSTRY NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#25"><A HREF = "#25"><LI>Medtronic Expands&nbsp;Neurological Business</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(217 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><A HREF = "#26"><LI>Johnson & Johnson&nbsp;and Cordis Merge</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(193 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><A HREF = "#27"><LI>ICN Acquires Medical&nbsp;Diagnostic Firm</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(159 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><A HREF = "#28"><LI>Rapid Change in&nbsp;Device Market</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(258 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>LEGISLATIVE ISSUES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#29"><A HREF = "#29"><LI>Medical Device Reuse&nbsp;Still Unresolved</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(276 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>LASERS & OPTICS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#30"><A HREF = "#30"><LI>Artificial Nose May&nbsp;Have Medical Applications</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(428 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><A HREF = "#31"><LI>Imaging Systems&nbsp;Go to Japan</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(249 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><A HREF = "#32"><LI>Energy Pumped&nbsp;into MRI Diagnosis</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(667 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MEDICAL DEVICES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#33"><A HREF = "#33"><LI>Syringe Prevents&nbsp;Self-Puncture</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(174 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#34"><A HREF = "#34"><LI>Rotatable Heart&nbsp;Valve Unveiled</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(286 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#35"><A HREF = "#35"><LI>Heart Pumps May&nbsp;Replace Transplants</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(349 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#36"><LI>CALENDAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(134 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

New Resin
Grades Debut

Special acrylics, high-clarity ABS, post-autoclave toughened
polyolefins and gamma-radiation resistant PVC are examples of
recent production introductions.

ICI Acrylics Inc.'s (10091 Manchester Road, St. Louis, MO 63122;
Tel: 314/966-3111) Polymer Division has introduced a new grade of
Perspex for medical fluid diagnostic applications. The DP-356 UVT
product is a highly specialized acrylic polymer for disposable
medical devices where maximum degree of optical clarity is needed,
including blood cuvettes and products for blood and fluid analysis.
Tests show a luminous transmittance of 92%, a tensile strength of
10,000 psi, and injection-molding flow of 13 g/10 min.

Lustran ABS 266 Mediclear, from Bayer Corp. (100 Bayer Road,
Pittsburgh, PA 15205; Tel: 412/777-2000) offers clarity and
toughness with easy processing and resists deterioration caused by
chemicals commonly used in medical devices.  The high-clarity
material follows the trend toward increased use of medical devices
at home, which involves self-administration and monitoring of
performance by patients themselves.

Lustran ABS 266, containing methyl methacrylate, meets FDA USP
class VI requirements; after sterilization by gamma radiation,
samples of the new grade show negligible deterioration.  The
material, providing (for a 1/8-inch specimen) an Izod impact
strength of 3.25 ft-lbs/inch per ASTM D-256, has been qualified by
Burron OEM Division of Braun Medical Inc., a manufacturer of
components and assemblies, including valves, transfer and filter
devices, fluid-administration systems, balloon catheters, and trays
and kits.

A polyolefin resin recently introduced by Montell Polyolefins (2801
Centerville Road, Wilmington, DE 19850; Tel: 302/996-6000), KS-
029P, which is manufactured by the company's Catalloy multistage
gas-phase polymerization/special catalyst process, is suitable for
blown-film applications requiring toughness after autoclaving or
exposure to gamma radiation.  Other applications for polypropylene
resins in the medical industry reported by Montell include
syringes, labware, biohazard bags, laminated thermal blankets,
medical bags, surgical drapes and gowns, and other disposables that
utilize the material's sterilizability, contact clarity, moisture
barrier, chemical resistance, strength, and heat resistance.

New gamma radiation-resistant flexible PVC compounds from Teknor
Apex Co's Plastics Division (505 Central Ave., Pawtucket, RI 02801;
Tel: 401/725-8000) offer improved color stability for medical
applications.  The APEX 90-A471R-NT PVC products, formulated to
withstand up to 10 megarads of gamma radiation with minimum color
shifting, more effectively maintain their light blue tint. The
gamma radiation is generally used for one-time preuse sterilization
of disposable medical devices.  Applications for the new products
include infusion kits, drip chambers, kidney-dialysis kits, and
intravenous solution systems.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Standard Tests
on the Way

The Sterilization Packaging Manufacturers Council, working with the
Flexible Packaging Association (1090 Vermont Ave. N.W., Washington
D.C. 20005; Tel: 202/842-3880) is trying to clarify existing test
methods and create new versions to keep pace with the demands being
placed on flexible sterilized medical packaging.

The current test method on seal integrity does not differentiate
between energy required to destroy or open the seal. Test methods
are also being created to focus on differences between laboratory
and production tests.  The role pressure plays in seal quality is
also an issue receiving attention.

Several of the completed test methods are based on ASTM standards,
which include seal strength, inflation testing (burst and creep),
and peel strength. The Council is also working on test methods for
visual seal inspection, porosity, and coat weight determination.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Polyimide Tubes
Finding Medical Uses

Micro-Biomedical Tubing Inc. (410A Old Mill Road, Carterville, GA
30120; Tel: 770/606-0003), a manufacturer of miniature catheter
tubing and electrical sleeving, has introduced a line of polyimide
tubing composites that offer a wide range of construction and
composition options for medical and electronic applications.

The LubriFlex, LubriBraid, and LubriCoil products offer inside
diameters of 0.0050 to 0.0925 inches and can be custom manufactured
to meet specific requirements. LubriFlex can be made with and
without Teflon layers in a variety of compositions; LubriBraid is
reinforced with a wire or fiber braid in the tubing wall; and
LubriCoil is reinforced with a wire or fiber coil.  The wire or
fiber braids and coils offer various degrees of stiffness, shock
absorption, longitudinal elongation, and resistance to burst
pressure.

All three tubing systems can be produced with Teflon on the inside
or outside walls or sandwiched between layers.  Fillers can be
added for improved performance or resistance to wear and abrasion.
According to the company, the products offer increased lubricity,
softness, and flexibility over conventional tubing.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Porosity of Nylon
Films Measured

Nylon 610 films show promise for use in drug encapsulation.  Ken
Phares, M. Cho, Keith Johnson, and James Swarbrick of the
Pharmaceutical Dept. at the University of North Carolina (Chapel
Hill, NC 27599-7360; Tel: 919/962-2211) have investigated drug
transport through artificial membrane films composed of Nylon 610.

Nylon 610 is a hydrophilic polymer.  The researchers synthesized
the polymer using an interfacial polycondensation reaction.
Hexamethylenediamine, which readily partitions into a good solvent,
and sebacoyl chloride were used.  The sebacoyl chloride was a
solvent blend of chloroform and trichlorotrifluoroethane in varying
ratios (1:1, 1:4, 4:1).  Phares and coworkers observed that the use
of hexamethylenediamine allows the formation of a high molecular
weight polymer before precipitation.

The films resulting from these synthesis variables were
characterized on the basis of porosity, thickness, molecular
weight, and crystallinity.  Transport of potassium chloride,
hydrocortisone, and m-creosol were measured for the different
films.  Chloroform concentration was found to be the most important
factor in the resulting molecular weight of the film.  With an
increase in molecular weight, increases were observed in film
thickness, porosity, and hydrocortisone permeability.  As the
molecular weight decreased, permeability to m-creosol increased.

Phares and colleagues published "Drug Transport Across Nylon 610
Films:  Influence of Synthesis Variables" in Pharmaceutical
Research [12(2), 248-256, 1995].  According to Phares, their
subsequent work with Nylon 610 microspheres will be published in
1996 in the International Journal of Pharmaceutical Advances. Since
the publication of the article, Ken Phares and James Swarbrick have
left UNC to work with Applied Analytical Industries (1206 N. 23rd
St., Wilmington, DE 28405; Tel: 910/251-6383). Phares continues his
research on drug transport, but focusing on concerns other than
Nylon 610.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

ProCyte Moves into
Moist Dressings

ProCyte Corp. (12040 115th Ave., Kirkland, WA 98034; Tel: 206/820-
4548) acquired from Hymedix International (2235 Route 130, Dayton,
NJ 08810; Tel: 908/274-2288) worldwide rights outside of Asia to
five wound-care products that have received market clearance from
the FDA, broadening the company's planned entry into the moist-
wound dressing market.

The products include proprietary transparent thin-film wound
dressings, aquagel sheet dressings, exudate absorbers, and wound
moisturizers, all based on a multi-block copolymer structures that
are especially well-suited for wound-care applications, including
chronic and acute wounds, burns, and surgical wounds, according to
ProCyte.

The company said that the newly licensed products complement its
internationally-developed Iamin gel wound dressing, for which FDA
clearance to market is pending under the 510(k) pre-market
notification guidelines. ProCyte said it expects the first of its
wound-care products to be available to long-term care, hospital,
and home health-care professionals by mid-1996, following equipment
scale-up and design and validation of improved manufacturing
processes at its Redmond, WA, commercial manufacturing plant.

The U.S. market for moist-wound dressings, which include the
polymer-based products ProCyte acquired, is expected to reach $500
million by 1999.  Industry sources say market growth for moist-
wound dressings and all other wound-care products and systems is
being driven by an increasing incidence of wounds associated with
advanced age, during which surgeries and chronic wounds tend to
occur more frequently.

Centerpiece for ProCyte's newly-acquired products is a versatile
polymer technology, called HYPAN, manufactured by a patented method
to provide a uniquely variable number of structural aquagels,
useful in construction of synthetic moist-wound dressings and
related products. ProCyte also has the worldwide rights outside of
Asia for all future wound-care applications of HYPAN technology for
synthetic moist-wound dressings and related products.

As part of its agreement with Hymedix, ProCyte also gained
exclusive worldwide rights for drug-delivery applications of the
HYPAN technology for wound care.  ProCyte plans to continue its
research and development efforts in wound treatment and healing and
to study drug-delivery aspects of technology for enhanced delivery
of antibiotics, anti-infectives, and other compounds to wounds.

HYPAN polymers are synthetic materials that ProCyte believes can be
manufactured in a cost-effective manner. The products are believed
to provide maximum performance at low concentrations, to have
excellent biocompatibility profiles, and to be both stable and
sterilizable.  The structural flexibility of these aquagels is
expected to make them ideally suited to broad-based applications in
wound management and treatment, particularly since they address the
breadth of chronic and acute wounds.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Now Bioabsorbable
Elastomers Are Here

Elastomers have been extensively used in medical devices,
especially thermoplastic copolyesters (COPEs) and thermoplastic
polyurethanes (TPUs). The copolyester elastomers are polymers with
"hard" and "soft" segments. While commercial viability of
elastomeric polymers for medical applications has been established,
a need exists for certain properties that have not yet been met.

For numerous applications, especially for those requiring a
surgical device to be implanted in bodily tissue, the polymer from
which the device is prepared must be bioabsorbable.  Ethicon Inc.
(U.S. Highway 22, Somerville, NJ 08876; Tel: 908/218-0707) has
developed bioabsorbable elastomers made up of random copolymers as
reported in U.S. Patent 5,468,253.

These copolymers consist of:
    epsilon-caprolactone, trimethylene carbonate, an ether lactone
or a mixture of these; and
    the balance being substantially glycolide, para-dioxanone, or
a mixture of these.

The random copolymers surprisingly exhibit elastomeric properties,
and the copolymers are bioabsorbable.  Combination of physical and
biological properties of these elastomeric copolymers are
particularly well-suited for numerous medical and surgical
applications.

Complete bioabsorption should take place within 12 months, although
preferably bioabsorption will be complete within nine months and
most preferably within six months.  In this manner, the elastomer
can be fabricated into medical and surgical devices that are useful
for a vast array of applications requiring complete absorption
within the relatively short time periods set forth.

Biological properties of the bioabsorbable elastomer used to form
the device or part thereof, as measured by its absorption rate and
its breaking strength retention in vivo, can be varied to suit
needs of particular application for which fabricated medical device
or component is intended.  This can be conveniently accomplished by
varying ratio of components of the elastomeric copolymer chosen.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Dry Coating Improves
Implant Properties

Medical device manufacturers prefer using polymeric materials for
making implants, such as cannulae, needles, catheters, percutaneous
connectors, and the like. Polymeric implants have, however, brought
about several complications, especially thrombophlebitis and
sepsis.  Some workers in the field have investigated the use and
beneficial effect of an in-line filter in reducing infusion-
associated infection, in particular phlebitis.  However, others
have focused on the material of the cannula itself.

It has been shown that steel needles produce fewer infusion-
associated complications that do plastic cannulae.  The issue is
how to advantageously use the desirable bulk property of polymeric
implants -- flexibility, avoiding infiltration without adversely
affecting the patient by exposing him or her to increased risk of
infusion-associated phlebitis, and infection.

Spire Corp. (1 Patriots Park, Bedford, MA 01739; Tel: 617/275-7470)
recently won a patent (U.S. No. 5,468,562) for imparting a thin
metallic film to outside surfaces of polymeric implants. Apparatus
includes a vacuum chamber, an evaporator and an ion source mounted
in operative association within the chamber.

The patent claims improved biocompatibility between implant and
body.  Metal films include chromium and titanium with thicknesses
of 0.5 microns.  Claims are also made for use of other metals for
biomedical devices (implants) such as silver, zirconium, tantalum,
aluminum, nickel, molybdenum, platinum, gold, and stainless steel.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

On-Line Plasma
Sampling Developed

Often a need exists to sample and analyze the plasma constituent of
blood without affecting other constituents.  For example, end-stage
renal disease ("ESRD") patients undergoing maintenance hemodialysis
treatments at home presently send blood samples to laboratories for
analysis.

The blood sample is analyzed for general chemistry profiles (e.g.
electrolyte, plasma hemoglobin, total protein, albumin, and
immunoglobin concentrations).  Sending out blood samples is tedious
and involves a significant loss of the ESRD patient's blood cells.
Since ESRD patients are typically anemic, a further loss of red
blood cells compounds their anemic condition.

Presently, ESRD patients either ignore the problem of further
blood-cell loss altogether or endure a complicated procedure
whereby  blood cells withdrawn with a sample are salvaged.

Since for a large proportion of diagnostic procedures a plasma
sample is all that is necessary, a need exists for an inexpensive
means for collecting a plasma sample without contributing to
further blood loss of an ESRD patient.

University of Utah (Salt Lake City, UT 84112; Tel: 801/581-7200)
researchers have developed an extracorporeal plasm filter
comprising a housing, an inlet, an outlet, and a sampling port and
containing at least a hollow semi-permeable filter fiber through
which blood plasma, but not whole blood, may pass.

U.S. Patent 5,464,535 has been granted to Udipi Shettigar for this
filter, which is constructed so that a heterogenous fluid, such as
blood, entering the inlet passes into the first open end of the
hollow filter fiber and through the fiber.  A portion of the fluid
(e.g. a filtrate or diffusate) permeates the semi-permeable portion
of fiber to collect within the housing.  The collected portion may
then be sampled from the sampling port.

The filter will usually be structured with a plurality of hollow
fibers comprising a filter fiber bundle.  These fibers are attached
one to another near their respective ends, e.g. by gluing.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Lab-Grown Cartilage
Ok'd for Compensation

The Florida State Agency for Health Care Administration has
approved Carticel surgery, an innovative technique utilizing lab-
grown cartilage cells, for Workers Compensation benefits, according
to Dr. Douglas Stringham, the first orthopedic surgeon in Florida
and one of only 15 surgeons in the country to have performed the
specialized surgery.

"This procedure is supported in the medical literature by basic
scientific research, and we've concluded that it is not
experimental and that there are likely to be significant positive
benefits of this procedure to recovery and well-being of the
injured worker," said Suzanne Suarez, senior health policy analyst
for the agency.

"This decision sets a precedent for all of Florida," said
Stringham. "We invested a considerable amount of time and energy
investigating, evaluating, and establishing the procedure as a
recommended and appropriate treatment for a defined group of
patients suffering cartilage injury."

Bill Aliski, vice president of patient and product services at
Genzyme Tissue Repair (1 Kendall Square, Cambridge, MA 01239; Tel:
617/252-7500) the lab where the cartilage cells are grown,
responded, "We are very pleased with the decision of the Workers
Compensation Division.  The board has recognized the value of the
Carticel procedure and confirms the medical opinion of the surgeon.
While this is a first in Florida, other favorable coverage
decisions for Carticel are expected in the future."

The technique, pioneered in Sweden by Dr.Lars Peterson, involves
removing a very small piece of healthy cartilage, growing the
cartilage cells in tissue cultures for several weeks, and then
reinjecting them back into the damaged area.  In time, the
transplanted cells heal the defect with cartilage that is
essentially indistinguishable from the original normal cartilage.

Left untreated, significant cartilage defects progressively
enlarge, leading to career-ending injuries for athletes and loss-
of-job disabilities for workers.  Eventually, untreated defects may
develop into painful arthritis that often requires joint
replacement.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Engineered Heart
Valves Promising

Advanced Tissue Sciences Inc. (10933 N. Torrey Pines, La Jolla, CA
92037; Tel: 619/450-5730) announced preclinical data on tissue-
engineered heart valves at a recent session of the American Heart
Association.

Current therapy for valvular heart disease includes replacement of
heart valves with porcine xenografts, cryopreserved cadaver, or
mechanical valves.  Advanced Tissue Sciences is utilizing its core
technology to develop tissue-engineered heart valves with improved
function and durability in order to overcome disadvantages of
current therapy.

Dr. Shin'oka, a fellow in the department of cardiovascular surgery
at Boston's Children's Hospital (300 Longwood Ave., Boston, MA
02115; Tel: 617/735-6000) and a collaborator with Advanced Tissue
Sciences, presented data that demonstrated feasibility of utilizing
tissue engineering to create heart-valve replacement products.

Dr. Skin'oka reported that tissue-engineered valve leaflets were
made by seeding a synthetic biodegradable fiber matrix with
fibroblasts and endothelial cells.  Leaflets were then implanted in
large animals, which were followed for up to six weeks.  Total
protein and collagen analysis of tissue-engineered heart-valve
leaflets showed development of an extracellular matrix and
histologies of the constructs resembled native tissue.  Angiography
and echocardiography demonstrated no stenosis and a minimal
valvular regurgitation.

Dr. Zeltinger presented studies that characterized deposition of
human-specific extracellular matrix proteins in porcine heart
valves colonized with human neonatal fibroblasts and grown under
dynamic flow conditions.  Long-term growth studies indicated
excellent migration and viability throughout the newly deposited
matrix, demonstrating the feasibility of utilizing tissue-
engineering techniques to create heart valves.







<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Microsphere Drug
Device That Works

Currently systemic antibiotic therapy by intravenous or
intramuscular injection is the clinically accepted standard for
prevention and treatment of infected surgical and traumatic wounds.
Systemic administration of antibiotics is recognized as an
inherently inefficient method for delivering drugs because only a
small fraction of total dose actually reaches target area and most
of the drug is excreted unused.

Recently, microencapsulated antibiotics have been developed based
on lactic and/or glycolic acid-based biodegradable polymers. These
microcapsules are either injected or layered on to the wound.
Uneven drug distribution is often the result.  The injection route
is also only suitable for the area that the needle can traverse.

Jean Setterstrom, Elliot Jacob, and Walter Franz received U.S.
Patent 5,470,311 for apparatus and methods for dispensing
medicinals encapsulated in a biodegradable polymer in surgical and
other wounds. In this procedure, a microcapsule drug applicator
allows the caregiver to implant or spread measured and uniform
quantities of microencapsulated medicinals in or on surgical or
traumatic wounds to prevent or treat infections.

Specific examples where microencapsulated antibiotics may prove
useful include soft-tissue wounds, following debridement and
reduction or fixation of open fractures, onto osteomyelitic bone
after surgical debridement, after surgical insertion of prostheses
such as hip/knee replacements (arthroplasty), and following
vascular surgery or grafting.

Local implantation of microencapsulated antibiotics can provide a
significantly higher local concentration of medication at the wound
site then can be obtained using traditional systemic therapy and
offers the possibility of producing significantly reduced side
effects.

In addition to antibiotics, other drugs and biological agents may
be encapsulated and administered in a similar fashion.  Such
medicinals include  steroids, narcotic antagonists,  local
anesthetics, growth factors,  anti-cancer agents, and  non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.

The microsphere application comprises two basic units: A drug
container or vial that contains microspheres, and a unit that
generates the nebulizing gas stream required to spray or propel
microspheres contained in vial (ital.???) onto the area to be
treated.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Oscillator Changes
pH to Release Drug

Scientists at the Ciba-Geigy Corp. (444 Saw Mill River Road,
Ardsley, NY 10502; Tel: 914/479-5000, Fax: 914/478-1201) are
developing a novel approach to drug delivery that uses a pH
oscillator.  Only the uncharged form of a drug can cross over
lipophilic membranes.  This device changes the pH of a solution to
charge or uncharge a drug.  In this way, the release of a drug can
be controlled.  An advantage of this system is that it does not
require external power sources or electronic controllers. For the
study, the scientists used a mixed Landoldt pH oscillator to study
diffusion of nicotine or benzoic acid across a membrane.

Steven A. Giannos, S.M. Dinh, and B. Berner of the Ciba-Geigy Corp.
published "Temporally Controlled Drug Delivery Systems:  Coupling
of pH Oscillators with Membrane Diffusion" in the Journal of
Pharmaceutical Sciences [84(5), 539-543, 1995].




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Probes Deliver
Drugs to Eyes

Drugs are unable to perfuse well from the blood into the eye, and
doctors must give patients very large amounts of systemic
medications in order to treat eye diseases.  With certain drugs,
such high concentrations in the body increase the risk of toxic
effects.  Scientists are trying to develop polymer devices that can
deliver drugs directly into the eye.  In this study, polycarbonate
and polyamide membranes were investigated for suitability.

Three classes of drugs were studied for their ability to perfuse
from the microdialysis membranes:  antibiotics, corticosteroids,
and cytostatic agents.  In addition, substances of varying
molecular weights were studied.  Earlier studies had shown that
some lipophilic drugs stick to polycarbonate polymer devices, but
this study did not reveal any differences between the two polymers.
All the study substances dialyzed through the implanted
microdialysis membranes.  The shape of the probe was found to
affect its dialyzing action.

J. Waga and B. Ehinger of the Department of Ophthalmology at the
University of Lund (Sweden) published "Passage of Drugs Through
Different Intraocular Microdialysis Membranes" in Graefes Archive
for Clinical and Experimental Ophthalmology [233(1), 31-7, 1995].




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Pulmonary-Flow Sensing
Technology Patented

Aradigm Corp. (26219 Eden Landing Road, Hayward, CA 94445; Tel:
510/783-0100) was awarded U.S. Patent 5,469,750 covering flow-
sensing technology used in its pulmonary drug-delivery systems to
ensure reproducible delivery of aerosolized drugs.  The patent,
"Method and Apparatus for Sensing Flow in Two Directions and
Automatic Calibration Thereof," further strengthens Aradigm's
patent portfolio, which protects methods and systems for efficient
and consistent delivery of a broad range of drugs.

Aradigm's microprocessor-controlled devices are capable of making
precise quantitative measurements of a patient's inspiratory flow
rate and volume in order to deliver consistent doses of aerosolized
medication to the lungs.  The system's flow sensors measure a
patient's inhalation characteristics and send digital signals to a
microprocessor, which selects the appropriate point to
automatically release an aerosolized drug dose for treatment of
respiratory disease or for systemic effect.

Aradigm is developing two aerosol drug-delivery platforms.  The
handheld, microprocessor-controlled devices are intended to deliver
reproducible doses of wide range of small and macromolecular drugs.

The SmartMist Asthma Management System was designed to deliver more
consistent doses of aerosol medications from standard metered-dose
inhaler canisters.  The AERx Pulmonary Drug Delivery System was
developed to deliver aerosols created from liquid drug
formulations, many of which currently are available only by
injection.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Channel Blocker
Dosage Automated

A prospective, randomized hypertension study will determine whether
a novel verapamil calcium channel blocker is as effective as the
"first-line standard of care" regimen (diuretic or beta blocker)
recommended by the Joint National Committee on Detection,
Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC V) in the
primary prevention of cardiovascular complications including heart
attacks, strokes, and death in 15,000 patients followed over a
four-to-six-year period.

Dr. Henry Black, chairman of the Department of Preventive Medicine
at Rush Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center (1653 W. Congress
Pkwy., Chicago, IL 60612; Tel: 312/942-5000) and the trial's
principal investigator, announced the beginning of the study with
representatives from G.A. Searle Inc. (5200 Old Orchard Road,
Skokie, IL 60077; Tel:708/470-6728).

Cover-HS, the calcium channel blocker to be used in the Searle-
sponsored trial, incorporates a novel, controlled-onset, extended-
release COER-24 delivery system and is currently under review by
the FDA for treatment of hypertension and angina.

Taken at bedtime, Covera-HS is designed to lower blood pressure by
releasing active drugs in concert with the body's natural circadian
rhythms.  Since blood pressure commonly follows a circadian
pattern, dropping at night and rising in early morning, Covera-HS'
COER-24 delivery system was developed to deliver peak
concentrations of the drug when blood pressure tends to be highest
-- in the hours just before and after awakening.

"We know that as blood pressure rises, risk of suffering myocardial
infarction is generally highest within the six-hour period after
waking," Black explained.  "This large-scale trial will determine
whether treatment with Covera-HS, which delivers higher dosages of
calcium channel blocker at time of greatest risk, will be
equivalent to standard of care in decreasing risk of fatal and non-
fatal heart attack and stroke in patients with mild to moderate
hypertension," he said.

"This study could provide substantial new information on how we
should manage hypertension and perhaps change our way of thinking
with respect to which antihypertensives should be used and when,"
he said.

In addition to primary endpoint, the trial will look for treatment
differences in other endpoints associated with hypertension, such
as death from any cause and the development of congestive heart
failure requiring hospitalization.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Patch Alternative to
Hormone Replacement

SmithKline Beecham (1 Franklin Plaza, Philadelphia, PA 19101; Tel:
215/751-4000) and Theratech Inc. (417 Wakara Way, Salt Lake City,
UT 84108; Tel: 801/583-6023) announced that Androderm (Testerone
Transdermal System) is now available nationwide.  Adroderm is a
treatment for men suffering from hypogonadism, a condition in which
the body produces insufficient levels of testosterone.  The
product, available only by a doctor's prescription, was cleared for
marketing by the FDA.

Only about five percent of the estimated four to five million
American men of all ages with hypogonadism currently receive
testosterone-replacement therapy (TRT). "The currently available
choices given hypogonadal men in need of testosterone-replacement
therapy have been less than ideal," said Daniel Tasse, vice
president and director, endocrine and oncology products, SmithKline
Beecham. "Androderm will fill a distinct need in the area of
hormone-replacement therapy for men."

Overall, treatment with Androderm resulted in normalization of
morning testosterone levels in 92% of the 94 patients who completed
the trials.  In a key eight-week study of 29 patients who were
withdrawn from their previous testosterone-replacement therapy,
Androderm produced improvements in erectile function, libido and
mood, and decreases in complaints of fatigue.

Hypogonadism may be caused by conditions of the testes (such as
testicular injury, infection, or Klinefelter's syndrome, a
chromosomal abnormality), or disorders of the pituitary and
hypothalamus.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Test Measures
Bone-Collagen Loss

Metra Biosystems Inc. (265 N. Whisman Road, Mountain View, CA
94093; Tel: 415/903-9100) received FDA market clearance for its two
Pyrilinks urine-based assays that provide a quantitative measure of
excretion of pyridinium crosslinks as a indicator of type I
collagen resorption, especially bone collagen.  This provides
measurement of bone-collagen breakdown, which, when elevated, leads
to bone loss.

Bone is made up of a complex collagen matrix that is constantly
built up by cells called osteoblasts and broken down by cells
called osteoclasts.  In this process of bone turnover, osteoclasts
release pyridinium crosslinks (Pyd and Dpd) into urine that can be
quantitatively measured by Pyrilinks assays.

Alkphase-B, another Metra test previously cleared by the FDA,
measures alkaline phosphatase, a by-product of osteoblasts present
in blood.  When the rate of bone breakdown (loss) exceeds rate of
formation, total bone mass decreases.

Currently there are no commercially available products to rebuild
bone once it is lost.  For this reason, in diseases like
osteoporosis, it is exceedingly important to identify individuals
at risk and to act early and definitively.  Bone loss can be
controlled through use of a number of therapies including hormone
replacement, bisphosphonates, and calcitonin.

Pyrilinks values reflect level of bone-collagen loss as impacted by
such factors as low estrogen production, low calcium intake, low
physical activity, or diseases known to affect bone metabolism such
as osteoporosis, Paget's disease, hyperparathyroidism,
hyperthyroidism, and bone metastases.  As with all diagnostic
tests, Pyrilinks results should be interpreted in conjunction with
clinical findings and other diagnostic results. As the FDA has
stated, markers like Pyrilinks are needed if anti-resorptive
therapies -- such as those used to fight osteoporosis -- are to
increase in use and be used successfully," said George W. Dunbar,
president and CEO of Metra Biosystems.

Metra Biosystems has developed a panel of six biochemical bone
markers to help physicians more precisely assess a patient's bone
turnover.  Bone metabolism normally stays in careful balance,
maintaining healthy, strong bones.  Prolagen-C and NovoCalcin
assess bone and collagen formation.  Pyrilinks-D (currently under
review by the FDA), NovoCalcin, and Prolagen-C are available for
research use in the U.S. Metra's panel is available for clinical
use abroad.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Heart Attacks
Diagnosed at Bedside

Boehringer Mannheim Diagnostics (9115 Hague Road, Indianapolis, IN
46250; Tel: 317/576-3914) received marketing clearance from the FDA
for a new rapid bedside assay that helps physicians diagnose
myocardial infarction.  The easy-to-use assay is based on the
company's proprietary marker--cardiac troponin T. It is located
inside cardiac muscle and is released into blood only when cells
are damaged.  In the U.S., Boehringer Mannheim has marketed an
ELISA version of the assay on its ES 300 immunoassay system since
June 1994.

The Cardiac T Rapid Assay is a self-contained, disposable unit
approximately four inches long, less than an inch wide, and only a
quarter of an inch thick.  Drops of blood are placed in a well on
the device and are quickly drawn into a sandwich assay impregnated
with two distinct types of monoclonal antibodies that link to
cardiac troponin T in the sample, resulting in a visible color
change.  A red control line appears to verify that the test is
working properly, and if the sample contains cardiac troponin T, a
second red line appears to alert the physician, nurse, or
laboratory specialist.

Meanwhile, researchers from Brigham and Women's Hospital reported
that elevated levels of Cardiac Specific Troponin-I predict an
increased mortality risk and may play a role in identifying
patients appropriate for early invasive treatment.  The study is
the largest to investigate the role of Cardiac Specific Troponin-I
in predicting mortality risk.

Investigators examined multiple blood specimens from 1,470 patients
with unstable angina who were enrolled in the National Institute of
Health's Thrombolytic and Myocardial Infarction Study (TIMI-IIIB).
Cardiac Specific Troponin-I was measured to identify those patients
appropriate for early invasive therapy, such as early
catheterization and revascularization.

Results indicated that Cardiac Specific Troponin-I levels greater
than 0.4 ng/ml predicted a significantly increased mortality by 42
days.  Conversely, Cardiac Specific Troponin-I levels less than 0.4
ng/ml were predictive of a low risk of mortality.  The study found
that for every ng/ml elevation of cardiac troponin-I, a patient's
mortality risk increased 10%. Patients with an elevated cardiac
troponin-I level experienced a significantly improved survival rate
when they underwent an early invasive versus a conservative
strategy.

"For the first time, a blood test is available that identifies
patients with unstable angina who are an increased risk of
mortality," said Dr. Elliot Antman, lead investigator of the study,
director of Coronary Care, and associate professor of medicine at
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School (25
Shattuck Ave., Boston, MA 02115; Tel: 617/495-1000).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Simultaneous Assay for
Chlamydia, Gonorrhea

Gen-Probe Inc. (9880 Campus Point Drive, San Diego, CA 92121-1589;
Tel: 619/546-8000) now markets PACE 2C, a new version of the PACE
2 assay for simultaneous diagnosis of the two most common sexually
transmitted diseases in the U.S.  PACE 2 and PACE 2C detect the
presence of ribosomal RNA for Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria
gonorrhoeae, the organisms responsible for chlamydia and gonorrhea
infections.

According to Craig S. Hill, manager of scientific affairs at Gen-
Probe, infection with both diseases simultaneously is "quite
common"; as many as 50% of patients who have gonorrhea infections
are also infected with chlamydia.  The PACE 2 and PACE 2C assays
offer the advantage of diagnosing both infections as part of the
same procedure. Traditional laboratory tests for gonorrhea require
a bacterial culture, while chlamydia detection relies on cell
culture.  Both methods have limitations not experienced with the
PACE 2 and PACE 2C assays.  Immunoassays have also been used to
detect these sexually transmitted diseases, but they cannot detect
the presence of both infections in a single sample or assay.

First introduced in 1990, the PACE 2 assay relies on DNA probes
that are labeled with acridinium ester, which can detect the
ribosomal RNA of the disease organisms.  One sample from the
patient is all that is needed to test for both organisms.  If the
disease organism is present, the DNA probes hybridize to the target
ribosomal RNA, and the results can be obtained within 2.5 hours by
measuring the signal (measured in relative light units).

According to Hill, the PACE 2 assay is "the most widely used
nonculture [chlamydia and gonorrhea] assay in the U.S."  The PACE
2C assay can detect the disease organisms from a single sample, as
well as in a single test tube.  If a positive signal results from
this assay, a second assay can determine which of the organisms is
present.

In one investigation, sensitivity of the PACE 2C assay was 96.3%,
while specificity was 98.8%.  Sensitivity and specificity of the
PACE 2 assay for chlamydia are 93% and 99%, respectively.  The
sensitivity and specificity of the PACE 2 assay for gonorrhea are
95% and 99%, respectively.  By comparison, the sensitivity of
culture methods may be as low as 88.9%.






<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Hepatitis Serotyping
Test Launched

International Murex Technologies (3075 Northwoods Circle, Norcross,
GA 30071; Tel: 770/662-0660) has commercialized its second-
generation assay for serological genotyping of Hepatitis C (HCV).

The Murex HCV Serotyping (1-6) assay is a simple, enzyme
immunoassay that identifies whether a patient is infected with HCV
types 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6.  This second-generation test is the only
commercial assay to cover HCV types 1-6, according to the company.
The test will initially be marketed to clinicians and research,
clinical, and private laboratories outside the United States.  The
product has already been registered for in vitro diagnostic use in
France.

Murex launched its first-generation serotyping test identifying
types 1, 2, and 3 in November 1994.  Prior to that introduction,
HCV typing was restricted to certain laboratories where genotyping
could be performed by complex, laborious procedures involving DNA
amplification technology.  This seriously limited investigations
into the disease.  In contrast, the Murex HCV Serotyping (1-6) test
is suitable for use in any laboratory as no specialist skills or
facilities are required.

The launch of Murex HCV Serotyping (1-6) test will now allow
meaningful research into significance of different HCV types and
will greatly assist in development of appropriate patient-
management strategies. HCV type is a key factor in determining
patient response to antiviral therapy; it is critical to determine
HCV type so that the patient may receive the most appropriate
therapy.

The Murex HCV Serotyping (1-6) test utilizes synthetic peptides
representing variable antigenic regions from NS4 of HCV types 1
through 6.  Differential response of patient antibodies to these
regions of NS4 enables the test to identify HCV types in infected
patients.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Bladder Cancer
Test Available

Maritech Inc. (330 Nevada St., Newton, MA 02160; Tel: 617/928-0820)
received conditional approval from FDA's Immunology Devices Panel
of the Medical Devices Advisory Committee for its "Maritech NMP22
Test Kit."

The Panel voted that the FDA should approve the product for use in
identifying patients at risk of recurrence, with the condition that
the company provide data on an additional number of certain
subjects.  Another Panel hearing will not be necessary, but the
company must provide these data in order to obtain approval to
market from the FDA.

Maritech is presently studying the FDA's request for additional
data in order to provide it as promptly as possible.  NMP22 is the
first Nuclear Matrix Protein-based diagnostic product to be
reviewed by the FDA for sale in the U.S.

Now being sold in Europe, the "Matritech NMP22 Test Kit" is twice
as sensitive as urine cytology and is a painless, low-cost, highly
accurate tool for management of transitional cell carcinoma of the
urinary tract (TCC/UT), which accounts for more than 90% of bladder
cancer.

The Maritech NMP22 Test Kit's enabling technology is based on a
fundamental breakthrough in cell biology discovered at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), where researchers
found that nuclear matrix proteins (NMPs) in cancer cells differ
from those in normal cells.  MIT obtained patents covering the use
of NMPs to detect cancer and licensed their discovery worldwide,
exclusively, to Matritech.

While Lamm anticipates that other urologists will embrace a more
accurate and painless alternative to current testing options, they
also noted that Matritech's urine assay will offer patients
significant savings.  For example, invasive cystoscopy often costs
about $300.  Matritech estimates the NMP22 Test Kit will sell for
between $40 and $50 per test.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Adhesion Control
OK'd for Europe

Gliatech's (23420 Commerce Park Blvd., Cleveland, OH 44122; Tel:
216/831-3200) Adcon-L Surgical Adhesion Control Gel has received
European Union (EU) regulatory approval for commercial distribution
within the EU member countries.  Adcon-L has satisfied critical
clinical and regulatory requirements of the European Medical
Devices Directive for safety, quality, and performance and has been
awarded European CE Certification.  This certification is the
designation of regulatory and market approval, which is universally
accepted by all 15 EU member countries.

Safety and effectiveness of Adcon-L was established based on
clinical data obtained from a European multicenter pivotal trial of
Adcon-L involving 254 patients at nine academic medical centers in
Europe.  Results of this study demonstrated that Adcon-L
signifiq9ntly reduced incidence of peridural fibrosis and related
clinical symptoms following lumbar discectomy surgery, according to
Gliatech.

Gliatech is currently marketing two Adcon products, Adcon-L and
Adcon-T/N, in France and The Netherlands, based on previous
national laws, prior to implementation of the present European
Union CE Certification process.  With Adcon-L certification
completed, Adlcon-T/N, which inhibits post-surgical adhesions
around tendons and nerves, will be the next focus for CE
Certification.  The Company is also conducting pivotal clinical
studies in the United States for both Adcon-L and Adcon-T/N.
Gliatech is also developing additional Adcon products to inhibit
surgical adhesions associated with abdominal, pelvic/gynecological,
and cardiac surgeries.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Pall Changes
IV Concept

A new concept in intravenous (IV) fluid filtration has been
developed by Pall Biomedical Products Co. (25 Harbor Park Drive,
Port Washington, NY 11050; Tel: 516/484-3600, Fax: 516/484-3637, E-
mail: custsvc@pall.com).  The Pall DUO96 Set Save Extended-Life
Disposable Filter incorporates a new dual-chamber design that is
for use with intermittent medications in oncology and intensive
care.  The smaller chamber (0.5cc) is ideal for fluid-restricted
patients such as neonates.

In addition to its clinical benefits, the DUO96 filter provides
cost savings.  When the Pall IV filter is used, the interval for
routine IV set change can be extended up to 96 hours, resulting in
a reduction in set use and costs.  Nursing time associated with
intravenous administration (set changes, restarts, and problem
resolution) is also reduced.

The DUO96 filter contains a Posidyne 0.2 micron Nylon 66 membrane,
a hydrophilic filter medium that is easily wetted and easily
primed.  Position-insensitive hydrophobic membranes automatically
vent air.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Toray Creates
Antithrombotic

Researchers at Toray Industries (2-1, Nihonbashi-Muromachi 2-chome,
Chuo-ku, Tokyo 130 Japan) have synthesized a hydrophilic material
and a formed a semipermeable membrane from that material (U.S.
Patent 5,480,953).

When membranes are used for medical care and brought into contact
with blood or body fluid, their components such as platelets,
leucocytes, erythrocytes, and fibroblasts inevitably adhere. There
are fears that these adhered components generate a thrombus on a
surface of a membrane coming into contact with blood and that the
components affect a complement. As a result, formation of a
thrombus or reduction of an immunity function is presumed to be
caused.

Various attempts to solve these difficulties have been made. In
synthesizing a hydrophilic copolymer containing a polyalkylene
oxide chain, copolymerized with an acrylic or methacrylic ester,
the content of polyalkylene oxide in the copolymer can be too high,
and there is a problem that the synthesized copolymer becomes a gel
in spite of the kind of the acrylic or methacrylic ester used. The
gel can hardly be dissolved in a solvent. In such a case, it cannot
be used as a coating material and cannot be formed as a fiber or a
membrane.

Even if the content of polyalkylene oxide is low, a satisfactory
anti-fouling property and antithrombotic property have not been
demonstrated. In research to improve the gel structure, a polymer
that can be easily dissolved in a solvent with a high water content
and a high affinity with acrylic ester or methacrylic ester was
synthesized by copolymerizing an acrylic ester or methacrylic
ester, polyalkylene oxide, and another copolymerizable component.

The material developed is characterized as a copolymer composed of
a monomer with a polyalkylene oxide unit and a polymerizable
carbon-carbon double bond in its molecule, a methacrylic ester
monomer or an acrylic ester monomer, and a monomer with a
polymerizable carbon-carbon double bond other than the first two
monomers. The content of the monomer is not less than 5% by weight
and not more than 90% by weight.

The hydrophilic material can be dissolved in a solvent and has
excellent antithrombotic and anti-fouling properties and provides
an antithrombotic semipermeable membrane. These materials can be
appropriately used in the medical field and as water-absorbent and
anti-fouling materials.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Medtronic Expands
Neurological Business

Medtronics (7000 Central Ave., Minneapolis, MN 55432; Tel: 612/574-
4000) signed an agreement to acquire Micro Interventional Systems
(680 Maud Ave., Sunnyvale, CA 94086; Tel: 408/481-4900). MIS is a
rapidly emerging provider of products for minimally invasive
treatment of stroke and for treating diseases in other parts of the
body accessible through small blood vessels.

MIS offers broad lines of catheters and guidewires used by
neuroradiologists and interventional radiologists to perform
procedures in blood vessels of the brain and elsewhere to treat
blockages and malformations of vessels, fistulas, clots, tumors,
and hemorrhages.  Use of these devices can often replace
destructive neurosurgery or address medical needs for which no
previous therapy was available.

William W. George, Medtronic president and CEO, noted that the MIS
acquisition would come shortly after acquisition of Medtronic PS
Medical, a world leader in neurosurgical implants, announced late
in 1995. "Acquisition of these innovative organizations, whose
product lines address critical  medical needs, represents
significant strategic expansion of Medtronic Neurological Business,
which now includes neurostimulation, site-specific drug delivery,
neurosurgical implants, and products for stroke therapy," George
said.

MIS participates in a worldwide inverventional neuroradiology
market of $100 million, expected to grow to more than $500 million
by the year 2000 as physicians and reimbursers emphasize catheter-
based therapies over open surgeries.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Johnson & Johnson
and Cordis Merge

Johnson & Johnson (1 Johnson & Johnson Plaza, New Brunswick, NJ
08933; Tel: 908/524-3535) and Cordis Corp. (14201 N.W. 60th Ave.,
Miami, FL 33457; Tel: 305/824-2821) have agreed to merge, creating
one of the leading worldwide vascular disease-management companies,
enhancing value for both companies' shareholders.  The merged
company will conduct its business under the name Cordis, a Johnson
& Johnson Co., and will continue to be headquartered in Miami, FL.

Johnson & Johnson also said it has received a request for
additional information from the FTC relating to whether combining
the neuroscience products business of Cordis with a unit of Johnson
& Johnson would raise concerns under the federal antitrust laws.

Cordis' neuroscience products business has worldwide sales of $17
million, a small proportion of its total sales of more than $400
million. Johnson & Johnson has already provided documents to the
commission in response to this request and said that it believes it
will be in compliance with that request shortly.  Johnson & Johnson
has also been in discussions with commission staff and is
optimistic that it will soon have an agreement that will fully
satisfy all antitrust concerns.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

ICN Acquires Medical
Diagnostic Firm

ICN Pharamaceuticals (3300 Hyland Ave., Costa Mesa, CA 92626; Tel:
714/545-0100) announced an agreement to acquire 40% of SeaLite
Sciences Inc. (187 Ben Burton Circle, Bogart, GA 30622;
Tel:706/546-4960) a privately held company that develops high-
technology diagnostic tests and research products used to detect
hormone abnormalities and other diseases.

The agreement, which also calls for ICN to produce and distribute
SeaLite's products, is part of ICN's plan for global expansion
through new acquisitions and licensing agreements. "This investment
provides ICN with cutting-edge technology that will complement our
existing medical diagnostics product line and help us expand into
other world markets," said Milan Panic, chairman and CEO of ICN.

Incorporated in 1991, SeaLite specializes in development of in
vitro diagnostic products that test body fluids to determine
changes in hormone levels.  Its highly sensitive technology is
based on genetically engineered luminescent proteins, for which it
has a worldwide exclusive proprietary position through existing and
pending patents.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Rapid Change in
Device Market

Daphne Allen, assistant editor of Medical Device & Diagnostic
Industry, has analyzed the growth in the number of registered
medical device manufacturers in the U.S.  Data were obtained from
the FDA's Division of Small Manufacturers Assistance, which is a
part of the Center for Devices and Radiological Health.

During the period between August 1994 and August 1995, the FDA
recorded an increase of 1,737 registered medical device companies.
Overall, however, the total number of medical device establishments
has declined by 2%.  In addition to companies who leave the device
industry, the decline may be attributed to mergers, acquisitions,
consolidation of sites, and business failures.

The study indicated that six states provide the homes of nearly 47%
of the registered manufacturers.  California led the pack with
1,920 companies; New York, Illinois, Massachusetts, Florida, and
Texas are also important locations for manufacturers.  The analysis
was published in Volume 17, No. 10


Medical Materials Update Stock Watch
(At Close, Jan. 2, 1996)

                                         Current    Last
Company                        Symbol    Price      Month     Change

Abbott Laboratories            ABT       41.75      39.375    +2.375
American Home Products         AHP       96.5       91.75     +4.75
C.R. Bard Inc.                 BCR       31.0       28.75     +2.25
Bausch & Lomb Inc.             BOL       39.5       37.0      +2.5
Baxter International Inc.      BAX       41.625     42.125    -0.5
Becton, Dickinson & Co.        BDX       75.75      69.125    +6.625
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.       BMY       85.625     80.75     +4.875
Guidant Corp.                  GDT       43.625     38.25     +5.375
Johnson & Johnson              JNJ       84.25      85.875    -1.625
Mallinckrodt Group Inc.        MKG       36.5       34.375    +2.125
Medtronic Inc.                 MDT       52.0       52.5      -0.5
3M                             MMM       67.75      65.25     -2.5

Source:  BCC Inc.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Medical Device Reuse
Still Unresolved

A reusable medical device, as opposed to medical disposables, is
intended for repeated use on either the same or different patients
-- with obviously requisite decontamination and other necessary
reprocessing between uses. Examples of reusable devices include
endoscopes and surgical instruments, which often do not have
directions and labeling for proper reuse.

Furthermore, although disposable devices such as dialyzers and
catheters are intended for single use, they are often reprocessed
without labeling or directions for safe reuse by manufacturers.

Therefore, there are two issues involved in the reuse of medical
devices: reusables and disposables.

According to some medical trade associations, the FDA has not been
able to establish a consistent reuse policy even though the agency
takes the position that device reuse is a potential safety problem.
Medical device industry associations also state that the FDA has
shifted responsibility for safe reuse to medical device
manufacturers rather than health-care providers.  Only recently has
the FDA provided guidance on how to label products for reuse.

A key ingredient of the FDA's policy on reuse labeling requires any
510(k) notice to contain a certificate of validation. Although the
responsibility for medical device reuse is still not clear, the FDA
appears to be getting tougher with service organizations that
assist hospitals in reprocessing.  But the agency still is not
willing to directly regulate health-care facilities.

The general consensus is that the FDA will continue to apply
pressure to manufacturers to justify and validate reuse of their
devices despite their single-use labeling. A critical question
remains as to whether the FDA's position will be upheld in
litigation or lead to voluntary compliance by industry.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Artificial Nose May
Have Medical Applications

By mimicking the impressive ability of the human nose to pick a
single odor out of a million, Tufts University (419 Boston Ave.,
Medford, MA 02155; Tel: 617/627-3250) researchers David Walt and
John Kauer have invented a fiber optic and computer "nose" that can
identify many substances by their smells.

One of many potential uses for an artificial nose includes
"detecting the signature odor of a human being, which can be used
not just for identification but also for diagnostic purposes.  We
may be able to test breath and sweat odors to detect diseases that
alter metabolism," said Kauer, professor of neuroscience and
anatomy and cellular biology at Tufts School of Medicine. "Smell is
the most sensitive, most flexible way to do chemical testing," said
Walt, professor and chairman of chemistry at Tufts.

Cells inside the nose house millions of receptors that send
messages to the olfactory bulb, a pea-sized structure between the
eyes.  The olfactory bulb pares these messages down to a few
thousand, which it relays to the brain.

A chemical sensor works in the following manner.  A hair-thin glass
fiber is tipped with chemical A, a combination of a polymer and a
dye, which is known to react with chemical B.  The fiber is exposed
to the substance to be tested.  A light beam travels down the
fiber, hits chemical A (if it's there), and bounces back.  A
computer analyzes the light for changes in color and intensity that
would occur if chemical A encountered chemical B.  Like litmus
paper that turns a brighter red in presence of increasing amounts
of acid, behavior of light tells chemists how much of chemical B,
if any, is present.

While Walt's optical sensors have proved useful for various
medical, environmental, and chemical testing processes, "you need
100 sensors to detect 100 substances," he said. However, "if you
built a system based on olfactory principles, then one sensing
system would detect many different odors," Kauer said.  "There
would be an array of sensors where each one is cross-reactive --
each one responds to some degree to some compounds and to some
degree to others -- to create patterns across the array."

Using Walt's knowledge of sensors and Kauer's knowledge of
neurological networks, they created a device -- for which they
received a patent -- that can tell the difference between alcohols
that differ by one carbon atom and can identify five-carbon esters
that smell like bananas.  In other words, their invention is, in
some cases, almost as good as a well-trained human nose.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Imaging Systems
Go to Japan

Polaroid Corp. (153 Needham St., Newton, MA 02164; Tel: 617/386-
3112) announced that its Japan subsidiary, Nippon Polaroid K.K.,
has signed an agreement with Konica Corp. that enables Konica to
market, under its brand name, Polaroid's Helios digital laser
imagers and dry-process film to the medical radiology industry in
Japan.

Terms of the non-exclusive agreement call for Polaroid to supply
Konica with an unspecified number of its patented laser imagers and
dry-film products, which are produced in the U.S. and marketed
worldwide by the Polaroid Medical Imaging Systems division (PMIS).

Konica will develop an image networking system that will provide
imagers with interfaces to a variety of medical imaging acquisition
devices.  Konica will be responsible for all sales, service and
technical support of products bearing its brand and sold in Japan.

Laser imaging systems are commonly used by radiologists to record
images generated by such digital diagnostic devices as computed
tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), applications
where Konica has a leading share of the market in Japan.  Konica's
new dry-process product line will include two models that produce,
respectively, 8x10-inch and 14x17-inch films.

Polaroid's revolutionary digital laser imaging and dry-process film
technology combines powerful lasers and a patented digital
rendering technique to generate consistently precise images onto a
unique carbon-based film in seconds.  Because the system is fully
digital, it enables hospitals and clinics to eliminate silver-based
film and wet-chemical processing, as well as costs and hazards
related to use of chemicals.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Energy Pumped
into MRI Diagnosis

Researchers are using high-power diode lasers from Opto Power Corp.
(3321 E. Global Loop, Tucson, AZ 85706; Tel: 520/746-1234, Fax:
520/294-3300, E-mail: opc_info@ix.netcom.com) in a new, gas-based
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) procedure that may detect
emphysema, asthma, pulmonary embolisms, and other lung diseases
that have been difficult or impossible to diagnose with
conventional proton MRI.  Employing this experimental "laser-
polarized" gas MRI method, physicists at Princeton University and
scientists with Duke University's Center for In Vivo Microscopy
acquired the first high-resolution images of a human lung, reports
OPC's Merrill Apter.

Since they are filled with air and not water, a human lung is
difficult to image effectively using proton MRI because it lacks
the necessary hydrogen atoms to produce a resolute picture.  While
x-rays of the lungs can show some accumulation of fluid and scar
tissue, their exposures are too short to reveal porous lung tissue.

Other diagnostic procedures for imaging the lungs, such as
ventilation scans with radioactive isotopes, expose the patient to
significant levels of radiation and often fail to produce
sufficiently high-resolution images.  The noble gases used in the
laser-polarized gas MRI technique--usually helium (He) or xenon
(Xe)--are inert and nonradioactive and therefore are harmless
inhalants, posing no health risk to the patient.

Tuned to 795 nm, the diode laser stimulates an atomic transition in
the alkali metal rubidium (Rb), which is driven into a vapor in a
small oven heated to about 180C.  The Rb vapor becomes polarized
in the process and subsequently transfers some of the polarization
to the nuclei of 3He or 129Xe during gas-phase collisions in a 50-
100 cc sealed cell.  After sufficient polarization is generated in
the noble gas, it can be cooled to room temperature (condensing the
rubidium vapor) and inhaled into the lungs for imaging.

Physicist Hunter Middleton of Princeton University (223 Jadwin
Hall, Princeton, NJ 08544; Tel: 609/258-2843, Fax: 609/258-1124, E-
mail: midleton@princeton.edu) describes how the research team
relies on intense light from OPC's high-power diode lasers to
produce the required volumes of polarized gas.  "The highly
polarized state of the noble gas allows images taken with the new
MRI technique to be generated in seconds, compared to the minutes
often required for conventional MRIs," says Middleton.  When the
project began they were using five sets of large titanium:sapphire
laser systems pumped by argon ion lasers to achieve the required
levels of polarization, but those lasers were found to be too
expensive and inefficient.

Turning to diode lasers, they were able to dramatically lower their
operating costs. The compact 20 W open-heatsink diode laser
initially employed in the new MRI technique was priced at about
$4,000 and used less than 80 W of electrical input power.  By
comparison, the argon ion and titanium:sapphire lasers together
were priced in the neighborhood of $500,000 and used about 250 kW
of electricity to produce the same output power. "The
titanium:sapphire setup was so big it required a separate room,"
explains Middleton.  "The diode laser array, on the other hand, is
so small and efficient that it allows us to move the laser-
polarized gas MRI station easily from the laboratory to a hospital
environment equipped with only a standard 110 v wall outlet."

The 20 W array was more than adequate for imaging the lungs of a
guinea pig, but couldn't produce enough polarized gas necessary for
human tests.  For the first test of a human lung, a 120 W array
produced nearly 1 liter of polarized gas in four hours.  "Though
the spectral distribution, or emission bandwidth, of the diode
laser array (about 2.5 nm) is much broader than that of
titanium:sapphire lasers and exceeds the absorption line of the
rubidium as well, it's nevertheless extremely efficient in this
application," says Middleton.  "We believe that imaging the
function of the lungs and other organs and tissues filled with air
spaces using laser-polarized gas has vast potential and may evolve
into a nice complement to conventional proton MRI."







<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Syringe Prevents
Self-Puncture

Medisys Technologies Inc. (9624 Brookline Ave., Baton Rouge, LA
70809; Tel: 504/926-0420) has received a patent for a safety
syringe designed to prevent accidental "dirty needle stick" or
inadvertent self puncture.

According to the company, Softip is the only existing needle and
syringe that automatically encloses the needle in a protective
micro-thin sheath before the hypodermic is withdrawn from the
patient's body thereby eliminating exposure to a potentially
contaminated sharp needle point.

Edward Sutherland, the company's chief executive officer, stated,
"Needle sales in the United States are in excess of $1 billion
annually, and industry analysts project demand for safety needles
will grow dramatically as healthcare workers, hospitals, and home-
use patients demand products that offer safety from accidental
exposure to infectious diseases such as AIDS and Hepatitis."

The company is currently in discussions with a number of
manufacturers of needles and syringes.  The product is expected to
sell commercially for pennies more than the needles and syringes
currently available, as compared to the high cost of existing
safety needles.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Rotatable Heart
Valve Unveiled

St. Jude Medical (1 Lillehi Plaza, St. Paul, MN 55117; Tel:
612/483-2000) received FDA approval of its new rotatable heart
valve, the Mechanical Heart Valve SJM Masters Series valve.  The
FDA approved all aortic and mitral versions of the product.  Given
this approval, the SJM Masters Series valve will soon be available
to all U.S. customers.  The product has been available in Europe
since March 1995, with positive market reaction.

The SJM Masters Series valve is a system of enhancements of the St.
Jude Medical Mechanical Heart Valve, the industry's most preferred
heart valve, with more than 600,000 implants worldwide.  The SJM
Master Series valve was developed in consultation with more than
200 physicians and surgeons.

The product can be rotated for optimum valve-leaflet position after
it is sutured in place, providing additional flexibility for those
surgeons who desire rotatability.  It is also MRI compatible and
radiopaque for improved post-implant diagnostic capability features
requested by some surgeons.

Initial European implants of the SJM Masters Series valve occurred
in March, and the aortic version of the valve was awarded the CE
Mark in September.  To date, there have been more than 1,500
implants of the SJM Masters Series valves in Europe and Canada.
The company submitted a premarket approval (PMA) supplement to the
FDA for U.S. market approval in May 1995.  This FDA approval is the
culmination of a year-long rollout of this product by the company's
heart-valve division.

Commenting on FDA approval of the SJM Masters Series valve, Terry
L. Shepherd, president of the St. Jude Medical Division, said, "The
SJM Masters Series represents the continued enhancement of a
revolutionary design introduced in 1977, the St. Jude Medical
Mechanical Heart Valve."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Heart Pumps May
Replace Transplants

Continued improvement in left ventricular assist devices (LVAD)
have enabled doctors at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center (New
York, NY 10032; Tel: 212/305-5587) to discharge patients awaiting
heart transplantation.

LVADs are devices that assist pumping function of the heart.  The
earliest models developed more than 20 years ago were quite
cumbersome, keeping patients tethered to large external pumps and
their pneumatic power systems.  Recent technology advances have
yielded a portable, battery-powered version, its power source worn
on a belt or shoulder holster.

The LVAD used at Columbia-Presbyterian is the vented electric
Thermo Cardiosystems HeartMate.  About four inches in diameter,
less than two inches thick, and weighing about one and a half
pounds, the pump is implanted in the abdomen.  It is attached to
the heart and receives and pumps blood into the circulation,
leaving the natural heart in place to perform other important
functions.

A cable from the pump extends out of the body and is connected to
a battery pack.  With proper care, this connection can be
maintained for long periods without infection. After discharge,
patients and their caregivers must provide simple maintenance for
the LVAD, including changing the battery pack every six to eight
hours, changing dressings daily around the cable exit, and keeping
it dry.

A major advance of these new LVADs is a textured internal surface
that reduces likelihood of blood clots that can lead to strokes, a
serious problem in earlier devices.  No anti-coagulation medication
other than aspirin is needed. No deaths, serious device
malfunctions, or infections have occurred among discharged
patients.  All have been able to maintain their LVADS safely.

Currently, LVADs are FDA-approved only as a "bridge to transplant";
i.e. they are implanted in people who are awaiting a donor heart
but who suddenly decompensate and cannot survive without extra
pumping help. Until recently, LVAD patients had to remain in the
hospital, waiting an average of three months for transplantation.
However, advances enabled Columbia-Presbyterian physicians to
discharge seven patients to await transplantation more comfortably
-- and far less expensively than in an intensive care unit -- at
home.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "36"></A>Copyright
MEDICAL MATERIALS UPDATE via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

CALENDAR

February 1-2, 1996, HIMA Sterilization Workshop, Costa Mesa, CA.
Contact: Health Industry Manufacturers Association, Washington
D.C.; Tel: 202/434-7238.

February 6-7, 1996, Implementation of Quality Systems for the
Medical Device Industry, Anaheim, CA. Contact: Excel Partnership
Inc., Sandy Hook, CT; Tel: 203/426-3281.

February 6-8, 1996, 18th Annual Piper Jaffray Conference, Medical
Device Division, New York, NY. Contact: Barbara Rooney, Piper
Jaffray Inc., Minneapolis, MN; Tel: 612/342-6271.

February 6-8, 1996, Medical Design & Manufacturing West '96,
Anaheim, CA. Contact: Trade Show Div., Canon Communications Inc.,
Santa Monica, CA; Tel: 310/392-5509.

February 8-9, 1996, Design Control for the Medical Device Industry,
Anaheim, CA. Contact:  Excel Partnership Inc., Sandy Hook, CT; Tel:
203/426-3281.

February 10-15, 1996, Medical Imaging '96, Newport Beach, CA.
Contact: The International Society for Optical Engineering,
Bellingham, WA; Tel: 360/676-3290.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-33</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B019-153</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ml17.html 205.156.212.5 19970122034739 text/html 70230
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:45:34 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:46 GMT
Content-length: 70043
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ml17.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>ION-EXCHANGE RESINS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>Eichrom's Diphonix&nbsp;Shows Specificity</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(729 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>System Reuses 95% of&nbsp;Copper Rinse Water</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(408 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>Metal Recovered&nbsp;from Residues</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(243 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>Method Purifies&nbsp;Crude Proteins</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(152 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ADVANCED FILTRATION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>Zero Emissions Close&nbsp;with Nomex Delta</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(447 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>Osmonics Holding&nbsp;More of the Dirt</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(406 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INDUSTRY NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>Akzo Nobel Sells&nbsp;50%  JV Interest</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(210 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>ECC Merges North&nbsp;American Units</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(305 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>Close-Out Sales&nbsp;Affect Revenues</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(453 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CLATHRATES/CHELATES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>Partial Resolution of&nbsp;Enflurane with TOT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(500 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>Activator Prepared&nbsp;from Snake Venom</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(172 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ACTIVATED CARBON</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>Suction-Type Filter&nbsp;Neutralizes PVC Gases</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(154 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>VARA's Says Its&nbsp;Record's Proven</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(307 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>Selective Coated&nbsp;Powders for PSA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(284 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MICROPOROUS SUPPORTS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><LI>Nonwovens Add&nbsp;Mechanical Strength</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(379 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>Oxygen Selection on&nbsp;Carbon Substrate</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(245 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INSULATION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><LI>Material Combines&nbsp;Ceramic and Fibers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(472 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ZEOLITES/MOLECULAR SIEVES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><LI>Molecular Diffusion&nbsp;in a Single Crystal</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(343 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><A HREF = "#19"><LI>Solid/Solid Reaction&nbsp;Prepares Redox V</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(194 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><A HREF = "#20"><LI>Adsorption Isotherms&nbsp;Determined, Modeled</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(449 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>SORBENTS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#21"><A HREF = "#21"><LI>Solid-Phase Extraction&nbsp;Isolates and Purifies</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(773 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><A HREF = "#22"><LI>Reduction of Food&nbsp;Radiostrontium</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(360 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INORGANIC MEMBRANES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#23"><A HREF = "#23"><LI>Better Flow Rates&nbsp;in Extraction Disks</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(290 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><A HREF = "#24"><LI>Thin-Film Zeolite&nbsp;Readied for Market</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(202 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><A HREF = "#25"><LI>RO Separation with&nbsp;Clay Investigated</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(263 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>CALENDAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(198 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Eichrom's Diphonix
Shows Specificity

The Diphonix ion-exchange resin produced by Eichrom Industries Inc.
(8205 S. Cass Ave., Suite 107, Darien, IL 60561; Tel: 708/963-0320,
Fax: 708/963-0381) has metal-ion specificity that enables it to
remove radionuclides and metals selectively from aqueous solutions.
This high-performance, gel-type cation resin displays exceptional
ionic selectivity, tremendous capacity, and a rapid rate of
complexation.  The selectivity, capacity, and exchange kinetics of
the Eichrom resin allows performance enhancements in an array of
applications where selective separation is important.

In contrast to other commercially available ion-exchange resins,
Eichrom's Diphonix resin is polyfunctional, with two distinct
functional groups.  Each of these groups contributes to the resin's
performance.  The Diphonix resin is constructed of a
polystyrene/divinylbenzene matrix in a spherical bead form (in a
tightly controlled size range).

Chemically bonded to the polymer matrix are diphosphonic and
sulfonic acid groups.  The primary exchange group is geminally
substituted diphosphonic acid (with a content of 1.2-1.6 mmol of
phosphorus per dry gram of resin).  These unique ligands form
extremely stable complexes with a number of metal ions and are
responsible the Diphonix resin's metal ion specificity.
Incorporated into the matrix at the time of polymerization, the
diphosphonic acid functional group is physically stable over a wide
range of thermal and chemical conditions.

Resin activity is exceptional in acidic solutions where the
Diphonix resin's contains complexed metals under conditions that
for most ion exchangers would effect the resin regeneration.  The
diphosphonic acid ligand retains metals effectively at pH values of
2 and under, conditions that many resins would see as regenerating.
The resin can remove trace metals from acid solutions used in the
semiconductor industry for product washing and etching, allowing
the reuse of the solutions.

The secondary exchange sites in the Diphonix resin are comprised of
sulfonic acid groups.  Contained with the polymer matrix, these
ligands make the resin very hydrophobic.  As a result, they enhance
metal ion accessibility into the polymer network and significantly
improve the ion-exchange kinetics of the Diphonix resins.

The Diphonix ion-exchange resin is ideally suited for
ultrapurification, metallurgical processing applications, treatment
of radioactive effluents, industrial wastewater treatment, and
environmental remediation.  In these applications, the resin
preferentially interacts with metal ions in liquid solutions,
providing a cost-effective way of removing metals from process or
waste solutions.  Metal selectivity is maintained even in the
presence of a high concentration of competing cations, such as
sodium, calcium, and magnesium.  The Diphonix resin reduces the
metal concentrations to the level required, while rejecting
unregulated ions (i.e., the competing cations).  Metals can be
extracted via ion exchange instead of by alkaline precipitation.

By utilizing a bed of Diphonix resin, a sidestream arrangement,
contaminant residuals in process streams can be controlled.
Diphonix resin shows exceptional selectivity for a number of
radionuclide species.  In nuclear power plants, contaminated
radwaste can be treated at a reduced cost compared to conventional
ion-exchange resins.  The Diphonix resin's capacity is not spent on
non-regulated species.  Additionally, in soil or water remediation,
the resin's high reactivity achieves removal to the lowest possible
concentration.

The resin's preference for metal ions makes the effective capacity
for metals higher than non-selective cation resins.  On a total
exchange basis, the capacity compares with non-selective resins of
similar crosslink percentage.  Capacity values for all resin forms
(determined by bead size and percent crosslinkage) are available
from Eichrom.  The firm offers the Diphonix resin in a variety of
bead sizes and crosslinkage percentages that suit a number of
laboratory and process applications.

The Diphonix resin is the result of breakthrough technologies
developed by Argonne National Laboratory and the University of
Tennessee, where Spiro D. Alexandratos determined that
bifunctionality and intra-ligand cooperation played important roles
in ensuring metal ion selectivity when phosphorus acid ligands were
covalently bonded to polystyrene beads.

Building upon this technological base, Eichrom has developed a
significant array of new products that stem from three innovative
core technologies:  Selective ion-exchange resins, extraction
chromatographic resins, and specific extractants.  Sectors in which
Eichrom is involved include the following:

Increased productivity, waste minimization, and cost reduction for
environmental laboratories;

Extraction chromatographic resins for the selective separation of
radium, cesium, and tritium;

Enhanced analysis and removal capabilities for actinides,
strontium, and technetium;

Separation of ultrapure isotopes for radiopharmaceutical
applications; and

Advanced separations products for industrial and environmental
applications, including ultrapure reagents, hydrometallurgy, and
radioactive wastes.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

System Reuses 95% of
Copper Rinse Water

A water-recycling system from the Engineered Systems Division of
Kinetico Inc. (10845 Kinsman Road, Newbury, OH 44065; Tel: 800/633-
5530) will enable West Coast Circuits (Watsonville, CA) to recycle
more than 95% of the copper rinse waters used in its printed
circuit fabrication process.  The unique design of the 20- to 30-
gpm system will produce high-purity deionized water that will
improve product quality and reduce water and sewer costs.

Ion-exchange technology is used to recover heavy metals and
minimize waste at West Coast Circuits facility, thereby reducing
its cost of hauling the wastewater discharge off-site.  The
Kinetico water-recycling system features countercurrent process to
regenerate the ion-exchange resins used.  The process regenerates
the resin columns with acid for the metal cations and caustic for
the anions injected from the opposite flow direction. This process
design uses up to 50% fewer chemicals, produces less waste
regenerant, and utilizes resin capacity more effectively.

The Kinetico division has also sold a Waste Minimization System to
Motorola Semiconductors Hong Kong Ltd. (Taipo, Hong Kong), an
international semiconductor manufacturer.  The system, which
combines ion-exchange technology with electrowinning, will provide
Motorola with high-purity water recycling, metal recovery, and
waste minimization.

The two-part Kinetico system consists of a rinse-water recycling
system and a metal scavenging system.  The 60 gpm rinse-water
recycling system will recycle rinse water from four Technic Plater
lines.  It will also treat the dragout rinses after process steps
in the manufacturing of semiconductors.  This design will improve
environmental performance, reduce water and sewer bills, and lower
operating costs.

The 12 gpm metal-scavenging system selectively removes metals to
lower discharge limits; therefore, minimal water treatment is
needed before discharge.  The system is integrated with a 25-
square-foot electrolytic metal recovery system and waste-acid
recovery system to recover copper and tin/lead in metallic form
from the dragout and flowing rinses.  This minimizes wastewater
flows to the existing treatment system and reduces the amount of
sludge produced, thereby lowering the waste-effluent quality.

For more information on Kinetico systems and the firm's line of
deionization, ion-exchange, electrowinning, and membrane systems
for process and wastewater treatment, contact Teresa Saloka.
Standard and custom systems are available for water recycling,
metal recovery, and waste minimization.  These systems are ideal
for applications in the metal finishing, electronics, printed
circuit board, semiconductor, groundwater remediation, and a
variety of other industries.  Kinetico is an authorized OEM for
Rohm & Haas pollution-control resins and Koch Membrane Systems.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Metal Recovered
from Residues

A two-phase process from Cabot Corp. (157 Concord Road, Billerica,
MA 01821-7101; Tel: 508/663-3455) recovers metal and acid values
from a metallic fluorides-containing source material.  Invented by
Robert A. Hard and protected by U.S. Patent 5,437,848, the process
digests the source material in sulfuric acid.  This digestion forms
a slurry that separates into two phases:

A fluoride-containing solid phase; and

A metal-containing first-liquid phase.

Hard writes that subjecting the solid phase to pyrohydrolysis
allows the recovery of sulfuric and hydrofluoric acids.

The liquid phase is then processed, via solvent extraction or ion
exchange, to recover the metal values.  A water-immiscible organic
extractant, such as methylisobutyl ketone, extracts the tantalum
values, and water strips it from the first organic phase.  The
process includes the additional steps of heating the separated
solid phase from ambient to elevated temperatures, in the presence
of water vapor, to evolve sulfuric acid and render the gangue
chemically inert.

When the source material contains uranium, the digestion step
reduces the amount of gangue present in the radioactive source. The
process can include the additional steps of removing uranium from
the liquid phase, by either an ion-exchange resin or by solvent
extraction.  This removal process also uses a water-immiscible
organic extractant to yield a uranium-depleted aqueous phase that
can be treated with an aqueous solution of calcium oxide.  Sulfuric
acid and the organic extractant for extracting uranium can be
recycled if desired.







<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Method Purifies
Crude Proteins

David Naveh and John C. Tang of Schering Nederland B.V. (Van
Houten, Industriepark 1, NL-1381 MZ Weesp, The Netherlands; Tel:
0031-2940-62424, Fax: 0031-2940-18336) have invented an ion-
exchange chromatography technique that purifies proteins.  The
crude protein mixture contains one or more undesirable proteins of
unknown isoelectric points.  Naveh and Tang use either computer
simulation or isoelectric focusing gels to determine the
isoelectric points of proteins in the crude protein mixture.

The pH for the ion-exchange chromatography is adjusted to a point
between the ranges of isoelectric points of the protein fractions
to be separated.  Separation occurs when contact is made between
the ion-exchange resin and the crude protein mixture.  Since the
proteins in the first and second fractions are oppositely charged,
only one of the fractions binds to the ion-exchange resin.  U.S.
Patent 5,451,662, which protects the technique, also discloses
details on the purification of GM-CSF using a cation-exchange
resin.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Zero Emissions Close
with Nomex Delta

The hot-gas filtration industry has been seeking technology with
higher filtration efficiency and greater air-pollution control. One
goal of the industry is dry-particulate filtration media with
efficiencies that approach zero emissions.

That goal moved closer to the realm of possibility with the
introduction of Nomex Delta Micro by E.I. Du Pont de Nemours and
Co. (1007 Market St., Wilmington, DE 19898; Tel: 302/774-1000). The
product combines high separation efficiency with low differential
pressure.  This combination results in significantly improved
surface filtration and reduced operating costs.

Based on the Du Pont's well-known Nomex fiber technology, Nomex
Delta Micro filters are composed of high-temperature-resistant
meta-aramid fibers.  The fibers measure only 0.78 dtex and have a
69% greater surface area than the 2.2 dtex aramid fibers used in
conventional aramid fibers.  These attributes enable users to
produce microporous needlefelts with more density and excellent
surface-filtration properties.

Most importantly, especially in filter cleaning and recovering
valuable production elements, the dense micropore filter surface
retains a greater proportion of dust particles than conventional
filters.  The microporous fleece structure of Nomex Delta Micro
filters causes the initial dust-cake phase to build up more
effectively.  Additionally, the structure prevents the dust-
particle penetration common to felts with larger, more open pores.

Launched worldwide, Nomex Delta Micro filters meet the new German
VDI Guideline 3926 that evaluates cleanable filter media.  Long-
term filtration behavior tests confirm that the dust-leakage values
of the new filters are significantly better than with standard
Nomex fibers or with other meta-aramid filter felts. The tests also
reveal that emission reductions with the Nomex Delta Micro filters
are comparable to (equivalent with) higher-priced laminated
filters.

Laboratory tests show that the new technology has a lower pressure-
drop value than standard filter felts.  DuPont reports that the
higher air-to-cloth capability of needlefelts composed of Nomex
Delta Micro filters allows more flue gas per square meter of felt
surface to be treated.  Therefore, the firm states that users need
to clean the filters less frequently. Another added benefit is that
the filters could make smaller, less expensive ventilation systems
feasible.  The lightweight capability of the ultrafine fibers could
potentially lead to reduced operating costs, without any loss any
filtration efficiency.

Du Pont  notes that the chemical resistance of filter felts
composed of the new fibers equals or excels that of standard (2.2
dtex) Nomex filter felts.  Both the standard and the new Nomex
filters perform well mechanically and demonstrate dimensional
stability at operating temperatures up to 200oC.  They provide an
extensive safety margin for temperature surges.

Information on Nomex Delta Micro may be obtained from Fleet Smith
(Tel: 302/999-3419), Nomex marketing manager for Du Pont.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Osmonics Holding
More of the Dirt

Increased dirt-holding capacity (DHC) or contaminant loading of
filters has been a continuous goal of filter manufacturers and a
continuous desire of filter users.  This is because increased DHC
results in more economical filtration.  However, it is difficult to
achieve higher DHC without compromising the efficiency of the
filter.

Most filter manufacturers have devised increasing DHC by improving
the filter media.  The amount any filter medium can hold is
directly proportional to the void volume or open area in the media.
Over the years, millions of dollars have been spent on developing
media that will hold more contaminant.  It is a difficult task
because in any given medium, if you increase the void volume, you
decrease contaminant-removal efficiency.

To increase DNC without compromising removal efficiency,
manufacturers have altered the structure of the media.  Despite
using finer fibers, greater loft, more entanglement, and multiple
layers, or by forming asymmetric pores and creating greater pore
density, filter media manufacturers have been able to achieve only
modest increases in DNC.

Spiraltek rolled-cartridge filters from Osmonics (5951 Clearwater
Drive, Minnetonka, MN  55343;  Tel: 612/933-2277,  Fax: 612/933-
0141) represent a new concept in filtration.  The filter was
developed using a knowledge of crossflow technology.  In crossflow
filtration, the media is continuously cleaned by the process fluid
that flows across the media surface.  The fluid flow is
mechanically restricted downstream, such that a portion of the flow
passes through the media, while the remainder passes beyond the
restriction. The portion that did not go through the media contains
a concentrated level of contaminant.

Spiraltek filters employ the basics of crossflow filtration, but
the downstream restriction is entirely closed.  The result is a
fluid flow that continuously cleans the media surface without a
secondary stream containing concentrated contaminant.  As
contaminant is pushed towards the sealed end of the filter, the
contaminant packs against itself in a non-porous section of the
filter.  Restriction to flow increases very slowly, and the filter
operates steadily for a longer period of time.  The end result is
less dependence on the void volume of the media for increased DNC
and a quantum increase in DNC based on the filter construction.

The new filters have been successfully applied in the field, and
subjected to unbiased, head-to-head comparison testing.  Test
results show that Spiraltek filters hold three to six times more
contaminant per square foot of filter media when compared to other
pleated filters.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Akzo Nobel Sells
50%  JV Interest

Akzo Nobel nv (Zeperweg 76, Arnhem, Gelderland 6800 SB,
Netherlands; Tel: 085-66-4433) has transferred its 50% share in the
companies Glucona VoF (the Netherlands) and Glucona America to its
joint venture (JV) partner, AVEBE.  The Glucona plants (in Ter
Apelkanaal, the Netherlands and in Janesville, WI), which comprised
Akzo's chelating-agents-as-mineral-supplements business, are part
of the transfer.

AVEBE now fully owns Glucona, the worldwide leading manufacturer of
gluconates.  These chelating agents are produced from potato starch
by a fermentation process.  Applications for gluconates include
sequestering agents and micronutrients as a mineral source.  The
world's largest producer of potato starch and derivatives, AVEBE
markets tapioca, corn, and wheat starches.  The firm operates
production plants in the Netherlands, France, Germany, Sweden, and
Thailand.  AVEBE markets its products through a worldwide sales and
distribution network.

Akzo Nobel remains one of the world's leading suppliers of chelates
for industrial applications, such as water treatment. The firm also
is an industry leader in selected areas of chemicals, coatings,
healthcare products, and fibers.  More than 70,000 people in more
than 50 countries make up the Akzo Nobel work force.

For more information on the transfer, contact Nick Sommers at Akzo
Nobel Inc. (300 S. Riverside Plaza, Chicago, IL 60606; Tel:
312/906-7612, Fax: 312/906-7811).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

ECC Merges North
American Units

As part of its strategy to become the leading supplier of
technology-based, value-added minerals and chemicals to the
industries it serves, English China Clays (1015 Arlington Business
Park, Theale, Reading RG7 4SA, England; Tel: 01734-304010, Fax:
01734-309500) has merged its North American paper business units.
The merged units will operate as ECC International Inc. AmPac Paper
Group.

The merger enables ECC, the world's leading supplier of pigments to
the paper industry, "through a single organization, to deliver
improved levels of service and products," says Andrew Teare, ECC's
executive director.  Teare notes that the merger furthers a
transition begun in the early 1990s from ECC's "being a minerals
and construction business into a specialty minerals and chemicals
company.  A major step in the strategy was the acquisition in 1993
of the specialty chemical company Calgon Corp."

Teare adds that "within Europe, it is expected that as Calgon
expands it services to the paper industry, a similar combined
minerals and specialty chemicals structure will also be an
effective means of serving the paper industry."

For more information on the merger, contact Harriet Bowen (Tel:
404/303-4396) at ECCI AmPac or Perry Colosimo (Tel: 412/494-8485)
at Calgon Corp.

Microporous Materials Stock Watch
(At Close, Jan. 2, 1996)

                                    Current         Last
Company                   Symbol    Price           Month     Change

Advanced Polymer Systems  APOS      5.250           5.500     -0.250
AlliedSignal              ALD       49.250          47.750    +1.500
Calgon Carbon             CCC       12.000          12.875    -0.875
Dow Chemical Co.          DOW       71.125          71.375    -0.250
DuPont                    DD        72.000          67.625    +4.375
ECC International         ECC       10.500          10.125    +0.375
Engelhard Corp.           EC        22.875          23.375    -0.500
Foster Wheeler Corp.      FWC       42.000          41.250    +0.750
Millipore Corp.           MIL       41.125          36.875    +4.250
Pall Corp.                PLL       26.625          27.125    -0.500
Praxair                   PX        33.250          28.750    +4.500
Rohm & Haas               ROH       64.625          61.250    +3.375
U.S. Filter               USF       26.625          22.500    +4.125
Westvaco                  W         28.125          27.500    +0.625

Source:  BCC Inc.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Close-Out Sales
Affect Revenues

Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer of Advanced Polymer
Systems Inc. John J. Meakam Jr. (3696 Haven Ave., Redwood City, CA
94063; Tel: 415/366-2626, Fax: 415/365-6490) cites large close-out
sales of an older version of its Take-Off product as a reason for
its 1995 third-quarter revenues ($3,057,000) being slightly lower
than its 1994 third-quarter revenues ($3,398,000). During the third
quarter of 1994, APS replaced its Take-Off make-up remover with an
updated version that incorporated its Microsponge systems.  Close-
out sales of the older version moved rapidly and created a slight
jump in 1994 third-quarter sales.

Meakam attributes the decrease in revenues to low sales of
unlicensed suncare products, which do not include Advanced
Polymer's delivery-system technology.  Licensing revenues for the
third quarter were down, primarily due to variations in the timing
of payments from Ortho Pharmaceuticals.  However, licensing
revenues were up for the first nine months of 1995 ($12,939,000)
compared to the same period in 1994 ($12,870,000).

Even though APS has experienced overall revenue decreases in the
1995 third quarter, Meakam adds that "it is important to note that
revenues from products that incorporate our delivery-systems
technology were up 36% for the quarter.  This growth was due to
increased sales of established products and the introduction of new
products.  Most notably, third-quarter 1995 sales of the Exact line
of acne products were up 94% compared with the same period in 1994,
due partly to the introduction of our four new Exact line
extensions."

Operating expenses for the quarter were down 7% overall to last
year.  Reduced spending for now-completed clinical studies of two
ethical pharmaceutical products decreased R&D expenses by $725,000.
At the same time, selling, marketing, advertising, and promotion
expenses for the quarter increased by $469,000 due to the
introduction of the Exact line extensions.

To gain operating cash without diluting its stock, APS completed
two financing arrangements, during the third quarter of 1995. The
firm switched from current to long-term debt and raised extra cash.
Certain assets and the operating cash flows of a subsidiary secure
these loans.

With its strong delivery system platforms and expanding technology
applications, Meacham feels that APS is in a position to focus on
opportunities that offer the greatest potential for increasing
shareholder value (its stocks decreased to $0.12 in the third
quarter 1995 from $0.17 in the same period of 1994).

The firm's objective is to use its technology base to form new
strategic alliances and licensing agreements that offer the
potential to increase its commercial opportunities significantly,
both in the near term and the long term.  Recent discussions with
prospective partners has increased APS' appreciation for the
breadth of its technologies and the potential that lies ahead.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Partial Resolution of
Enflurane with TOT

The preparative resolution (asymmetric synthesis) of current
inhalation anesthetics (i.e. enflurane, halothane, and isoflurane)
via inclusion complexes presents a challenge to researchers.  The
challenge lies in the how to produce inclusion complexes of the
anesthetics that consist of small, apolar molecules These molecules
lack the functional groups normally used for inclusion complexation
or for attachment of a chiral auxiliary. Producing chiral-inclusion
compounds with inhalation anesthetics could offer pharmaceutical
companies a means of obtaining large amounts of enantiomerically
pure (highly enriched) products.

Toward this end, a multinational research effort between Israeli
and German chemists, with funding coming from an Israeli-U.S.
foundation grant and from German industries, has been working on
cage-type clathrate-inclusion complexes.  The chemists believe that
enclathration may serve as a means of obtaining sufficient
quantities of pure enantiomers, especially of the two kinds needed
to conduct chiroptical and biological studies.  The availability of
such enantiomers could allow researchers to determine whether they
undergo a different metabolism, another problem that plagues
anesthesiology.

Israeli chemists involved in the effort include Jallal M. Gnaim
(The Institutes for Applied Research, Ben-Gurion University of the
Negev, P.O. Box 653, Beer-Sheva 84105, Israel) and Bernard S. Green
(Dept. of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, The School of Pharmacy, The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, P.O. Box 12065, Jerusalem 91120,
Israel).  The two Germans, Volker Schurig and Heiko Grosenik, are
chemists at the Institut fr Organishe Chemie, Universitt
Tbingen, Auf der Morgenselle 18, D 7400, Tbingen 1, Germany).

The team's efforts have resulted in cage-type clathrate-inclusion
complexes of tri-o-thymotide (TOT) that yield partial preparative
resolution of enflurane.  The partial preparative resolution occurs
after a single crystallization step of TOT from solutions of
enflurane in 2,24-trimethylpentane.  Gas chromatography (a column
coated with polymeric chiral-phase Chirasil-Dex) reveals that the
single crystals contain 38% ee of enflurane.  Further
crystallization of TOT-enflurane clathrate crystals enhances the ee
level.  The chemists have found that, in some cases, the first
enantiomer eluted predominates, while, in other cases, the
enantiomer eluted last predominates.

To prepare the clathrates, the chemists obtained a solvent-free TOT
by synthesizing and crystallizing a TOT-ethanol complex, which was
warmed to 130oC at 0.2 mm/g for 24 hours and recrystallized.  They
dissolved 0.2 g of the TOT in 1.0 ml of boiling enflurane and added
9.0 ml of 2,2,4-trimethylpentane (TMP).  Addition of the TMP
facilitated cage-type clathrate nucleation and lowered the
solution's density, in order to prevent the growing crystal from
floating on top of the solution.  The team then filtered and slow
cooled the complex, prior to filtering and washing the resultant
crystals with 1 ml of cold methanol.  This latter step yielded 0.08
g of large, colorless cubic crystals with a TOT:enflurane ratio of
2:1, with no TMP present.

In Tetrahedron: Asymmetry [6(7), 1499-1502, 1995], the research
team describes the TOT molecules as homochiral in each crystal;
therefore, enclathration produces an enantiomerically enriched
enflurane.  Measurement of the TOT optical rotation occurs prior to
full racemization and once again if the concentration is sufficient
to warrant it.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Activator Prepared
from Snake Venom

A method from Pentapharm AG (Buros: Engelgasse 109, Ch-4002, Basel,
Switzerland; Tel: 061-312-9680, Fax: 061-311-2049) prepares a
phospholipid-dependent prothrombin activator from the venom of
snakes belonging to the Elapidae family.  The venom is adsorbed on
a water-insoluble barium, magnesium, calcium or aluminum salt.  The
activator is eluted from the venom with an aqueous solution of
alkali-, ammonium-, or organic amine salts to form insoluble salts,
complexes or chelates with alkaline earth or aluminum ions.  The
eluted salts are removed, and the activator is recovered.

Developed by Douglas A. Triplett and Kurt Stocker and protected by
U.S. Patent 5,453,370, the activator increases plasma clotting
activity in the presence of phospholipids and calcium ions. In the
presence of Lupus Anticoagulant, the activator exhibits reduced
activity.  The activator facilitates clotting in a normal clotting
time in the presence of platelet-poor plasma. The plasma has normal
or decreased levels of factor V, VII, VIII, IX, or X and a major
band with a molecular weight of 40,000 to 60,000 daltons on an SDS
gel.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Suction-Type Filter
Neutralizes PVC Gases

Kenro Motoda of Motoda Electronics Co. Ltd. (17-11, Kamitakaido 1-
chome, Suginami-ku, Tokyo 168, Japan; Tel: 03-3303-8491, Fax: 03-
3329-5519) has discovered a means of removing chlorine from the
gases generated in the treatment of hydrogen and polyvinyl chloride
wastes.  The method utilizes a suction-type solution filter
container to neutralize and dissolve the chlorine gas. The filter
contains activated carbon or other materials with excellent
adsorbability to post treat residues of the wastes.

U.S. Patent 5,449,398 describes how the hydrogen and polyvinyl
chloride wastes are put in the sealed container and heated at 400oC
or less, without oxygen or with air-blocked condition. Heating
extracts the chlorine and hydrogen chloride gases from the wastes.
The extracted gases are then put into the suction-type solution
filter container.  The container also contains liquid filtration
agents through which the gases pass.  The chlorine is removed and
reduced in volume from the wastes in the sealed container.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

VARA's Says Its
Record's Proven

For over 20 years, VARA International (1201 195th Place, Vero
Beach, FL 32960; Tel: 407/567-1320, Fax: 407/567-4108), a division
of Calgon Carbon Corp., has created, tested, and installed the most
technically advanced and successful pollution-abatement systems.
Based on proven carbon adsorption and distillation technology,
these systems meet the unique requirements of clients in many
different countries.

The VARA solvent-recovery system enables users to recycle and reuse
up to 99+% of their solvents.  The system consists of an activated
carbon-adsorption unit with a minimum of two adsorber vessels and,
if required, a liquid air-stripping or distillation unit.  Solvent-
laden air passes through the adsorber vessel where its solvent
vapors are adsorbed by specially selected activated carbons.  The
amount and depth of activated carbon in the adsorber vessel is
determined by the users' system requirements.

The sequencing of adsorption and regeneration cycles is alternated
to ensure that each carbon adsorber is on-line for an equivalent
period.  The result is a continuous and automatic processing of
solvent-laden air.

During the regeneration cycle of the VARA solvent recovery system,
low-pressure steam strips the solvent vapors from the carbon.
After the steam/solvent mixture is condensed and cooled, it passes
through a decanter where the solvents and water separate by
relative solubilities and specific gravities into a water phase and
a solvent phase.  Generally, water-insoluble solvents can be reused
directly.

If required, water-soluble solvents and complex solvent blends are
further separated, dehydrated and/or purified through liquid
distillation.  VARA offers complete extractive and azeotropic
multi-component distillation systems for the separation and
purification of solvent mixtures.  Depending upon customer and
process requirements, these systems can be designed for either
continuous or batch operations.

VARA's custom-designed units can handle solvent-laden air stream
flows from 500 to 1,000,000 cfm.  Packaged vertical or horizontal
solvent recovery units handle 1,000 to 20,000 cfm.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Selective Coated
Powders for PSA

Over the past 20 years, adsorptive gas separation, especially in
pressure-swing adsorption (PSA), has been the focus of considerable
research.  Many researchers believe that coated adsorbents would
expand the applicability of PSA to the separation of a wider range
of gas mixtures.  Based on the premise that coated absorbents
enhance selectivity, R. van der Vaart and his cohorts at the
University of Twente (Faculty of Chemical Technology, P.O. Box 217,
7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands) have taken a first step in the
development of coated adsorbents for PSA.

The scientists coated a dense cellulose acetate membrane on the
outer surface of a porous tablet of compressed activated-carbon
powder.  A powdered Norit Americas (RB1) activated carbon was
pressed to a diameter of 20 mm and a thickness of 1.2 mm, using
bentonite as a binder.  The tablet was pyrolyzed at 1073 K in a
nitrogen atmosphere, and it was then dipped on side with a 14%
cellulose acetate solution (from Eastman Kodak) in a DMF from
Merck.  The tablet's pores were blocked with a filler that
evaporated during the coating process.  The coated tablet was then
dried in a pure nitrogen atmosphere at room temperature.

Since permeability was found to be independent of pressure, the
investigators concluded that a defect-free membrane was prepared
and could be used in a limited test of their model.   They observed
uptake times that corresponded to cycle times of kinetic PSA
applications. Preliminary calculations indicated that the coated
adsorbents show promising viability in these applications. The
scientists are conducting an extensive experimental program to
substantiate their preliminary results.  The focus of that program
is highly permeable silicone rubber coatings rather than the low-
permeable cellulose acetate coatings.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Nonwovens Add
Mechanical Strength

Semipermeable membranes have no mechanical strength and need to be
supported during the filtration process.  Support can be provided
via perforated tubes or channelled plates (i.e. porous, non-
compressable support materials).  These types of support materials
come in the form of PVC or stainless steel tubes or plastic plates.
The high pressures (e.g. 1-140 bar) often necessitated by the
process mean that the distance between the holes or channels must
be relatively large to retain the mechanical strength of such
support materials. A porous, non-compressable supporting layer is
used between the semipermeable membrane and the supporting element
to provide a drainage layer.

Produced by Freudenberg Nonwovens L.P. (20 Industrial Ave.,
Chelmsford, MA 01824; Tel: 508/454-0461, Fax: 508/256-6214),
Viledon nonwovens add mechanical strength and provide custom-made
support and drainage layers for semipermeable membranes.  Viledon
Nonwovens meet the demands of industry by offering the following
advantages:

  high homogeneity and thus uniform porosity;
  smooth surfaces;
  no projecting fibers; and
  good processability during the demanding membrane-coating
process;

Used for reverse osmosis, microfiltration, and ultrafiltration,
Viledon nonwovens are usually coated directly with the membrane
solution.  When used in the various module systems, the nonwoven
provides direct support for the delicate membranes.  An equally
important factor is uniform distribution and drainage of the
permeate, for which the porous structure of the nonwoven is
advantageous.

Viledon nonwovens are successfully employed plate, spiral-wound,
and tubular configurations.  In the plate module, the permeate
passes through the membrane and is drained off in a drainage layer
or in drainage channels.  In the spiral-wound module, a nonwoven
sheet is laminated on one side with the membrane and sealed at the
edges to a second sheet, thereby forming a virtually continuous
"bag."

Especially for tubular modules, Viledon nonwovens meet high demands
with respect to rigidity and mechanical strength.  The nonwovens
are initially welded to form a tube and them laminated on the
inside with the membrane.  This tube is inserted into a perforated
metal or plastic pressure tube, which provides the support.

Marketing questions on Viledon nonwovens should be directed to
Shari Fowler-Hutchinson at Freudenberg's Chelmsford location.
Technical requests should be directed to Volker Haendler (Tel: 011-
49-6201-806319) at Carl Freudenberg Industrial Products (P.O. Box
1369, D-6940 Weinheim, Germany; Tel: 011-49-6201-706273, Fax: 011-
49-6201-706299).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Oxygen Selection on
Carbon Substrate

A method developed by Timothy Golden et al for Air Products and
Chemicals Inc. (7201 Hamilton Blvd., Allentown, PA 18195; Tel:
610/481-4911) makes an oxygen (O2)-selective adsorbent with a
porous substrate, such as carbon molecular sieve, activated carbon,
carbon black, coal, or petroleum coke.  The substrate is
impregnated with an acidic solution and then dried.  The oxygen
selective adsorbent, which is protected by U.S. Patent 5,447,557,
can be used in a pressure-swing adsorption process for the
separation of oxygen from nitrogen, for example, in air.

Another R&D effort at Air Products has resulted in U.S. Patent
5,451,385 for a process that controls exhaust emissions from
methane-fueled internal combustion engines.  Developed by James G.
Hansel et al, the process utilizes a crystalline zeolite to remove
nitrogen oxides and carbon monoxide from the exhaust emissions.
The zeolite catalyst causes the carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides,
and oxygen in the exhaust gas to react with methane.

The catalyst has a silicon-to-aluminum ratio of equal to or greater
than about 2.5.  It is prepared by ion exchange of a non-acid
sodium or ammonium form of crystalline zeolite with one or more
cations selected from cobalt, nickel, iron, chromium, and
manganese.  The zeolite is exchanged with from 0.1 to about 15 wt
% of the cation, based on the total weight of the exchanged
zeolite.  The metal-exchanged zeolite is impregnated with from 0.1
to 23 wt % alumina, based upon the total weight of the impregnated
metal-exchanged zeolite.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Material Combines
Ceramic and Fibers

With a goal of becoming the largest "full line" supplier of high-
temperature insulation products, the Carborundum Co. (Fibers Div.,
P.O. Box 808, Niagara Falls, NY 14302; Tel: 716/278-2203, Fax:
716/278-2440) is readying a panel version of its Excelfrax product
line.  Other Excelfrax product forms, including Excelblok rigid-
board insulation, are in the development stage.

The developmental products, as well as the firm's commmercialized
flexible blanket form called the Excelflex Composite Systems, are
based on Excelfrax's core high-temperature insulation material.
This material blends ceramic (alumina and silica) powders and
fibers to produce a microporous structure.  The structure decreases
radiant heat flow, thereby making Excelfrax materials extremely
efficient insulation materials.  The core material can be
manufactured into a variety of product forms, including composite
systems, molded shapes, and rigid boards.

The firm's Excelflex Composite Systems are composed of a high-
temperature (1800oF) core material that has been placed between two
layers of a high-temperature textile.  The standard textile is a
1200oF S-Glass.  However, various high-temperature textiles can be
used in the composite to provide protection from 500oF to 2,300oF.
The layers are compressed into a uniform thickness (ranging from
1/8-inch to 1/2-inch) and density (both standard and lightweight).
The layers are then quilted into a finished composite.  The
Excelflex's standard configuration is 36" x 36" pads that are lock-
stitched into one-inch squares.

Market manager of Carborundum's Fibers Division, Jim Olchawski
(Tel: 716/278-2008, Fax: 716/278-2440), calls Excelflex's extremely
good thermal conductivity its main advantage.  Because of this
excellent thermal performance, Excelflex will provide the maximum
amount of insulation within the smallest amount of weight and
space.  Stable at high temperatures, Excelflex has low thermal
diffusivity and excellent material strength characteristics. Also,
Excelflex's flexiblity and ease of fabrication are important
considerations for many applications.

Excelflex provides the best insulation (lowest thermal
conductivity) of all the insulating products currently provided by
Carborundum.  Olchawski recommends it as the material of choice
whenever high-temperature insulating materials are required and
space/weight savings are the primary consideration.  Excelflex
Composite Systems can reduce heat loss and reduce surface
temperatures in a variety of materials, including
aerospace/defense, industrial, and commercial markets.

Aerospace/defense applications for Excelflex include thermal
insulation/fire protection in aircraft engine struts, nacelles,
cowlings, and avionics.  Industrial applications can be found in
nuclear power plants, petrochemical facilities, and other
industrial areas (i.e. incinerators, heat-treatment furnaces,
insulation for kilns and furnaces, and other metal/glass processing
industries).  Commercial applications include commercial ovens,
night storage heaters, and many other appliance applications.

Olchawski explains that Excelfrax is a "natural," the direct result
of two principal factors: The company's technical capabilities,
developed over many years while working with Fiberfrax refractory
ceramic fibers in the same markets and the partnerships created
between the company's full-service applications engineering team
and Carborundum customers in developing critical design solutions
for any application.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Molecular Diffusion
in a Single Crystal

Both industry and the scientific community are paying attention to
zeolites as novel adsorbents and catalysts.  Significant attention
has been paid to the measurement of diffusivity in zeolites, but
there has been little attention paid to applications based on
differences in the rates of transport of molecules in zeolite
micropores.  However, microscopic methods that measure molecular
diffusion are beginning to surface.

One of these methods has been investigated by Orhan Tula, D.B.
Shah, and Shaozhuang Sun of Cleveland State University (Dept. of
Chemical Engineering, Cleveland, OH 44115).  Their method involves
modifying a single-crystal zeolite membrane.  The modification
consists of incorporating a high-sensitivity Mass Selective
Detector (MSD) into the membrane.  The MSD determines the
concentration of the diffusing species on the receiving side.  It
measures the small increase in concentration that occurs as a small
amount of substance diffuses through the crystal.

Tula et al report that the modification yields a more accurate
measurement.  Modifying the membrane with the MSD also enables the
research to use a setup that measures directional diffusivity, as
well as concurrent and countercurrent diffusion.  To test the
efficacy of its modification, the investigators measured the
intracrystalline diffusivities of normal alkanes through silicates.

The scientists results show a corresponding increase of the
diffusivities of the hydrocarbons as the carbon number rises, due
to critical diameters being almost the same.  However, the length
of the molecules affect diffusion.  Ethane with a length double
that of methane exhibits a significant decrease in diffusivity over
methane.  Therefore, the team asserts that with carbon numbers less
than six, the critical diameter is the major influence on the
diffusion process.  With numbers larger than six, the hydrocarbons
exhibit a more relative diffusion decrease.

Some difficulties need to be overcome before the full potential of
MSD modification can be realized. Problems with MSD calibration at
low concentration need to be solved.  The zeolite membranes need to
be made from larger crystals.  Researchers need a good embedding
method, one that can withstand high temperatures, in order to
measure diffusivities at elevated levels.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Solid/Solid Reaction
Prepares Redox V

E.M. El Malki and a host of researchers from the University of
Pierre and Marie Curie (Laboratoire de Reactivite de Surface,
Paris, France) have prepared redox molecular sieves by solid-solid
reactions, using a thermally pretreated vanadium (V)/beta-molecular
sieve mixture.  Measurement techniques indicate that thermal
pretreatment at intense temperatures (900oF) reduces only 6% of the
vanadium in the mixture.

Calcination causes the solid-solid reaction to disperse the
vanadium ions inside the zeolite channels.  Tests indicate that, in
dehydrated samples, superhyperfine interactions occur between the
unpaired electron of vanadyl cations and the aluminum nuclei. In
hydrated samples, though, evidence exists of intraporosity in
vanadium tetrahedral species, which are difficult to rehydrate. The
researchers surmise this evidence from the persistence of a band
260 nm at long hydration periods (about 8 days).

X-ray diffraction reveals the beta-molecular sieve to be unaltered
by the intraporosity vanadium species, even after pretreatment.  It
is cautioned that weakening of the zeolite framework could occur
since BET tests indicate a porosity decrease in the presence of the
vanadium species.  The researchers present their conclusions in the
Proceedings of the American Chemical Society, Division of Petroleum
Chemistry [40(1), 114-18, 1995].




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Adsorption Isotherms
Determined, Modeled

Much research has gone into aluminophosphate molecular sieves,
particularly in the area of their water-adsorption characteristics.
Citing a lack of literature on the single and/or multicomponent
adsorption of permanent gases (i.e. nitrogen, carbon monoxide, and
methane) at room temperature by these adsorbates, a trio of
University of Ottawa (Dept. of Chemical Engineering, 161 Louis-
Pasteur, P.O. Box 450, Stn. 4, Ottawa, Ontario K1N 6N5, Canada)
researchers headed by F.H. Tezel have conducted an investigation.

Their investigation has resulted in a determination of adsorption
isotherms for a number of the permanent gases.  The determination
comes from studying adsorption on three molecular sieves (AlPO4-11,
AlPO4-17, and AlPO4-18) at temperatures between 23oC and 40oC and
pressures up to 120 kPa.

A decrease in the slope of the AlPO4-11's isotherms as the
temperature rises indicates the lower adsorptive capacity of this
molecular sieve at high temperatures.  This adsorbate exhibits its
greatest capacity with methane and its lowest with nitrogen. Tezel
et al attribute this to the "equal access" offered by this medium-
pore molecular sieve to all gaseous adsorbates smaller than those
of its pore aperture (3.9 x 5.1 in pore dimensions).  Methane,
being the largest molecule (4.2 ), is easily trapped within the
3.9 x 5.1  of the AlPO4-11.  Nitrogen, being the smallest molecule
(3.0 x 4.1 ), easily leaves the adsorbed phase and is less easily
retained than the other gases.  The molecular sieve features
intermediate capacity values for carbon monoxide (3.7 x 4.2 ).

Tezel recognizes that AlPO4-11 adsorbs methane more readily than it
does nitrogen and carbon monoxide at 40oC.  He attributes this to
its larger molecular size and its energetic homogeneity and adds
that the nitrogen isotherm lies about the carbon monoxide isotherm.
He explains this latter condition as a result of neighboring
quadrupolar nitrogen molecules that repel each other to a lesser
extent than do neighboring polar carbon monoxide molecules.  The
smaller nitrogen molecules enter the molecular sieve pore openings
more easily than the larger carbon monoxide molecules.

For AlPO4-18, Tezel gives the following adsorptive capacity
decrease order at 40oC and 120 kPa: Carbon monoxide, methane, and
nitrogen.  He explains that the researchers noticed a slight S-
shape behavior for the carbon monoxide isotherm within the very low
pressure range.  The other isotherms of the other two gases exhibit
linear tendencies for the entire pressure range.

Based on their data, Tezel and his colleagues have been able to
model the adsorption isotherms, using Langmuir, Flory Huggins-
Vacancy Solution Theory, and Freundlich equations.  Tezel reports
that the team has  been able to predict binary adsorption
equilibria for the permanent gases and that stearic effects
regulate the adsorption mechanism in all three adsorbents.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Solid-Phase Extraction
Isolates and Purifies

Solid-phase extraction (SPE) is a powerful tool for chemical
isolation and purification.  From trace-level sample preparation to
industrial-scale chemical isolation, SPE plays an increasingly
important role in a broad range of applications, including
pharmaceutical, clinical, fine chemical, biomedical, food analyses,
organic synthesis, environmental, and many others.  SPE utilizes
the same analyte/sorbent interactions that are exploited in the
powerful separation technique of high-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC).

Varian Sample Preparation Products (24201 Frampton Ave., Harbor
City, CA 90710; Tel: 310/539-6490 or 800/421-2825, Fax: 310/539-
4270), formerly known as Analytichem International, pioneered
solid-phase extraction technology with the introduction of the Bond
Elut SPE extraction cartridge.  Normally, the cartridge is packed
in straight-walled syringe-barrel tubes of ultraclean medical-grade
polypropylene and polyethylene or stainless steel frits.  Packed
within each tube is a surface-modified bonded-silica sorbent.

The sorbent selectively retains specific classes of chemical
compounds within a given matrix.  As an example, the Bond Elut
strong cation exchanger (SCX) can be used to retain the cationic
drug, amphetamine, from urine.  The more specific the interaction
between the sorbent and the analyte, the cleaner the final extract.

Bonded silica sorbents are in many ways the ideal materials for
chromatographic isolation.  This attribute comes primarily from the
number of different functional groups that can be readily bonded to
the silica surface.  Bonded silicas are rigid supports that do not
shrink or swell and form a clean, non-leachable substrate upon
which the bonded functional groups are attached. They also are
stable in a wide range of aqueous and organic solvent conditions
and possess very large surface areas due to their porosity.

Solid-phase extraction works via three general extraction
mechanisms:  Non-polar, polar, and ion exchange.  Each sorbent
within a given extraction mechanism exhibits unique properties of
retention and selectivity that may be quite specific for a given
analyte.  So even in an extraction calls for a non-polar extraction
mechanism, it may be necessary to test several sorbents within a
given category to find the optimal balance between high recovery
and good clean-up.

Both C18 and C8 give acceptably high recoveries for non-polar
analytes from an aqueous matrix.  The slightly increased polarity
of C8 may allow many matrix contaminants to pass through the
cartridge unretained.  Otherwise, it would be retained on the more
non-polar C18 sorbent.  The end result would be a cleaner final
extract with the C8 sorbent.

Bond Elut cartridges come in a variety of sizes, ranging from 50 mg
to 10 g of sorbent.  Smaller cartridges are useful when a sample
size is very small or when the ability to elute the analyte in a
very small volume is needed for maximum concentration.  For sample
or rinse volumes greater than the volume of the standard Bond Elut
cartridge, Varian recommends its Bond Elut LRC configuration as an
alternative.

The flared shape of this cartridge allows users to pour up to 10 ml
in it, without having to use additional adapters or reservoirs.
The wide opening of the Bond Elut LRC also makes alignment and
sample introduction easy for automated sample-processing robots.
The cartridge's tubes have a sturdy, double-ridged lip that
provides a consistent seal for reliable performance when used with
these robotic work stations.

The Bondesil sorbents and sorbent-bed geometry of Bond Elut LRC
cartridges are the same as the standard straight-barreled Bond Elut
cartridges. This means that any method used on a standard cartridge
may be immediately transferred to a Bond Elut LRC with little or no
modification.

Maximum retention capacity for polar and non-polar sorbents is
approximately 5% of the sorbent mass (i.e. 5 mg for a 100 mg
sorbent bed).  However, this value must take into account
additional compounds present in the sample matrix that are also
retained by the sorbent.  Thus, for the compound users wish to
extract, the effective capacity may be much less.  Varian
recommends testing the cartridge capacity for each specific
application.

Larger sorbent amounts provide greater capacity (the amount of
compound that can be retained on the column).  Larger sorbent
masses also require more solvent to elute the compound from the
column.  Consequently, the analyte may be more dilute than if a
smaller sorbent bed was used.

Minimum elution volume for a cartridge is defined as two bed
volumes of elution solution.  Bed volume is 120 l per 100 mg of
sorbent.  In some cases, less than two bed volumes can be used.
Such extractions are often very sensitive to flow rates and other
variables and are not recommended because irreproducible results
may be generated.

Information on Varian's extensive sorbent cartridge line is
available from Nigel Simpson, their Product Manager.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Reduction of Food
Radiostrontium

Radiostrontium contaminates foods and, once digested, accumulates
in the skeleton, where it is difficult to withdraw.  Scientists are
seeking ways of preventing the consumption of radiostrontium in
foodstuffs via the use of various adsorbents (mainly zeolites and
mixed oxides of titanium, silica, or manganese). This isn't a large
problem in the U.S., but is in much of the former USSR.

Results obtained by A.M Puziy (Institute for Sorption and Problems
of Endoecology, Palladin prospect 32/34, 252142 Kiev, Ukraine), G.
Bengtsson [MATFORSK (Norwegian Food Research Institute), Osloveien
1, N-1430 s, Norway], and H.S. Hansen (Dept. of Animal Science,
Agricultural University of Norway, 1432 s, Norway), indicate that
the use of adsorptive materials may be regarded as promising for
reducing foodstuff radioactivity.  The results come after testing
of strontium binding by various sorbents in a number of different
water solutions.

The researchers have found that strontium adsorption from all
studied solutions depends upon pH, with a rise in pH resulting in
steady adsorption increases for the titanium-silicate and the
titanium-manganese sorbents, in particular.  Adsorption on zeolites
remains almost constant.  The existence of either weakly or
strongly acidic groups explain these phenomena. All of the
adsorbents exhibit high selectivities for tracer strontium in 0.1
M of sodium chloride above a pH level of 6. However, in an
artificial flood fluid (AFF), the zeolites (P and A4) exhibit
higher selectivities than the mixed oxides above a pH level of 3.

The research team have ascertained that the strontium binding in
AFF fits well to a model of non-ideal competitive adsorption of 1:1
stoichiometry.  The kinetics of AFF follow a biphasic manner with
a rapid initial phase for all adsorbents. The second slow phase
reveals a decrease for the zeolites and an increase for the mixed
oxides.

For reducing radiostrontium in liquid foodstuffs,  granular forms
(titanium-silicate bound to activated carbon or titanium-manganese)
for continuous flow through deep beds are recommended.  For batch
applications, they suggest powder forms of titanium-silicate or
zeolites.  They caution that the toxicity of these promising
strontium adsorbents warrants more detailed investigation,
especially in the area of the relatively high release of aluminum
and silicon in AFF.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Better Flow Rates
in Extraction Disks

The Empore Extraction Disks, a hybrid membrane technology from
Varian Preparation Products (24201 Frampton Ave., Harbor City, CA
90710; Tel: 310/539-6490, Fax: 310/539-4270), are designed to
provide high sample flow rates.  Better flow rates are valuable for
environmental liquid/solid extraction procedures that require
extraction of large sample volumes.  Formulated for maximum flow
through the membrane, the disks effectively adsorb organic analytes
form aqueous samples and avoid many of the drawbacks associated
with liquid/liquid extraction, such as emulsion formation, labor
intensiveness, delicate expensive glassware, and excessive solvent
usage.

Based on a combination of 3M's Teflon processing technology and
Varian SPP's sorbents, the Empore Disk cartridge consists of a
membrane that contains either embedded polymeric or silica-based
sorbent particles.  The particles are tightly bound in and
individually suspended in a web of inter-micro PTFE fibrils. This
leaves the surface of each particle free for maximum interaction
with the sample during separation.  The result is a very high
efficiency SPE device with superior purity and outstanding flow
characteristics.

Since the sorbent is held in place by the inert PTFE matrix, the
Empore disk is compatible with virtually all organic and inorganic
solvents.  The physical and chemical properties of the Empore
disks, with their silica-based Bondesil sorbents and a new expanded
range of HPLC-grade polymeric sorbents, present practically
unlimited possibilities for the separation scientists.

Empore disks are available in a number of bonded phases.  Disks are
available in three diameters: 25, 47, and 90 mm.  By increasing the
diameter of the disk used, the disk surface area available for
sample passage increases dramatically, resulting in better solvent
flow rates through the disk.

For more information on Empore Extraction disks, contact Nigel
Simpson, product manager, or customer service (Tel: 800/421-2825).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Thin-Film Zeolite
Readied for Market

Zeolite membranes can  separate nitrogen from natural gas deposits
and remove hydrogen from hydrocarbons, such as benzene or methane.
They have proven effective in removing noxious chemicals (i.e.
carbon tetrachloride) from pollution sources. Research, especially
on the academic level, is underway that could yield commercial
benefits.

Researchers at the University of Colorado at Boulder (Boulder, CO
80309-0009; Tel: 303/492-6100, Fax: 303/492-5894) have developed a
thin-film zeolite membrane.  The new membrane can withstand high
temperatures and harsh (chemical) environments.

The technology for the membrane involves growing ultrathin layers
of zeolite crystals on the interior walls of small ceramic and
stainless steel tubes. Formation of the membranes occurs with
placement of a zeolite-forming gel inside the small tubes.  After
each end is capped, the gel is heated to a temperature until
crystals form around microscopic octagonal pores.

The resultant zeolite crystals contain very small uniform-sized
pores about the size of a small molecule. This uniformity and small
pore size allows smaller gas and vapor molecules to pass through
the zeolite membrane and rejects larger molecules.  The researchers
are extending their technology through a project for designing
zeolite membranes for use in environmental sensing devices that
will detect minute quantities of pollutants.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

RO Separation with
Clay Investigated

Building upon the knowledge that pure clay membranes reject ionic
solutes and desiring to broaden the scope of membrane separation
technology beyond salt rejection, scientists from Japan and Canada
have investigated the solute separation characteristics of
montmorillonite membranes in reverse osmosis.  Investigators
include T. Matsuura (Dept. of Chemical Engineering), C. Detellier
(Dept. of Chemistry) of the Industrial Membrane Research Institute
(University of Ottawa, 161 Louis-Pasteur, P.O. Box 450, Ottawa, K1N
6N5, Ontario, Canada), and M. Ishiguro of the National Research
Institute of Agricultural Engineering (2-1-2 Kannondai, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki 305, Japan).

In the Journal of Membrane Science (107, 87-92, 1995), the
scientists draw the following conclusions from their experimental
data:

  A montmorillonite layer works well as a reverse-osmosis membrane
in rejecting electrolyte solutions;
  The montmorillonite membranes exhibit similar characteristics to
charged membranes;
  The montmorillonite membranes exhibit lower separation of non-
ionized organic solutes than polymeric membranes; and
  The separation of amino acids with the montmorillonite membrane
depends upon the net charge of the amino acid.

The scientists base these conclusions on experiments with Smectites
that come in two-dimensional arrays of silicon-oxygen tetrahedra
and aluminum or magnesium oxygen-hydroxyl octahedral. The clay (in
the form of a paste) is coated on (until all of the paste is
transferred into the cell) and sandwiched between two millipore
filters of 0.1 m pore diameter.  The filters are placed on a
porous stainless steel surface.  The scientists advise placing a
filter paper between the millipore filter and the porous stainless
steel.  Doing so minimizes potential damage when applying high
pressures of various non-ionized organic solutes.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
MICROPOROUS MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

CALENDAR

February 16-17, XIV IMS Conference: Membranes in Chemical and
Biochemical Industries, New Delhi, India.  Contact: A.M. Dave, Fax:
0091-3265-372966; or G.P. Agarwal, Fax: 0091-11-6862037.

March 9-13, 1996, 1996 AIChE Spring National Meeting, Houston, TX.
Contact: Dennis Griffin, American Institute of Chemical Engineers,
345 E. 47th St., New York, NY 10017-2395; Tel: 212/705-7373.

March 24-28, 1996,  211th ACS National Meeting, New Orleans, LA.
Contact: Ann Nelson, American Chemical Society, 1155 16th St. N.W.,
Washington D.C. 20036; Tel: 202/872-4396, Fax: 202/872-6128.

April 8-12, 1996,  1996 MRS Spring Meeting, San Francisco, CA.
Contact: Gail Oare or Mary Guil, Materials Research Society Meeting
Dept., 9800 McKnight Road, Pittsburgh, PA 15237; Tel: 412/367-3004,
Fax: 412/367-4343, E-mail: info@mrs.org.

May 18-22, 1996, Eighth Annual Meeting of the North American
Membrane Society, NAMS '96, Ottawa, Canada.  Contact: Nicole
Serrault, Tel: 613/991-2060, Fax: 613/993-7250, E-mail:
sarault@aspm.lan.nrc.ca.

June 10-12, 1996, Carbon Materials and the Environment, Charleston,
SC. Contact: Ljubisa R. Radovic, Penn State University, 217
Academic Projects Bldg., University Park, PA 16802; Tel: 814/863-
0594, Fax: 814/865-3075, E-mail: lrr3@psu.edu; or Fred S. Baker,
Charleston Research Center, Westvaco Corp., 5600 Virginia Ave.,
P.O. Box 2941105, North Charleston, SC 29411-2905; Tel: 803/745-
3942, Fax: 803/745-3742.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-34</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B019-200</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ml07.html 205.156.212.5 19970122034809 text/html 73794
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:46:04 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:48 GMT
Content-length: 73607
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ml07.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>COATINGS AND POLYMERS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>Photoluminescence&nbsp;in Thin Films</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(210 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Optronics Improves&nbsp;Reflectance, Durability</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(146 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>AT&T Develops&nbsp;Stable Facet Films</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(357 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FIBER OPTICS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>Poly-Optical Debutes&nbsp;Scintillating Product</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(102 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>Low Cost Video&nbsp;Link Is Ready</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(215 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>Lightest Route&nbsp;to Tube Links</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(171 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>LASERS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>Energy Pumped&nbsp;into MRI Diagnosis</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(672 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>DOE's Nonproliferation&nbsp;Program Uses Device</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(159 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>Fuji Photo Film Co.&nbsp;Improves Accuracy</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(353 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>OTHER WAVEGUIDES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>LiNbO3 Improves&nbsp;Disk Drives, Printers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(575 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>Achieving Stability&nbsp;Over Longer Times</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(514 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INDUSTRY NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>Interactive Holography&nbsp;Will Be Evaluated</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(229 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>Coherent, Uniphase in&nbsp;License Agreement</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(404 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>Briefly Noted:</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(137 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><LI>AT&T Wins&nbsp;German Contract</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(211 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>Growth Predicted&nbsp;to End of Decade</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(662 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>LENSES AND GLASSES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><LI>New Chinese&nbsp;Products Ready</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(106 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><LI>Diffuser/Condenser&nbsp;Improves Process</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(448 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CRYSTALS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#19"><A HREF = "#19"><LI>Possible Reduction&nbsp;of Passive Losses</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(236 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><A HREF = "#20"><LI>NIST Finds That&nbsp;Disorder Is Useful</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(152 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><A HREF = "#21"><LI>Low Temperature&nbsp;Growth Method</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(311 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>OPTOELECTRONICS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#22"><A HREF = "#22"><LI>Building a New Flat&nbsp;Panel Video Screen</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(350 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><A HREF = "#23"><LI>Reimaging Units&nbsp;Improve Focus</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(175 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><A HREF = "#24"><LI>Advances in&nbsp;Quantum Wire</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(508 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>SENSORS/DETECTORS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#25"><A HREF = "#25"><LI>Miniature NIR&nbsp;Spectrometer</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(438 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><A HREF = "#26"><LI>Chemical Monitor&nbsp;under Construction</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(209 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>STORAGE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#27"><A HREF = "#27"><LI>Reflectance Control&nbsp;Method Discovered</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(382 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><A HREF = "#28"><LI>Improved Near&nbsp;Infrared Absorbers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(213 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>TESTING/DESIGN</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#29"><A HREF = "#29"><LI>New FOTP&nbsp;Standards</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(152 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><A HREF = "#30"><LI>Partnership in&nbsp;Color Chemistry</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(177 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>BOOKS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(364 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>CALENDAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(193 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Photoluminescence
in Thin Films

Photoluminescence has been detected in thin films of partially
oxidized silicon (Si) nanoclusters by scientists at the Lawrence
Livermore National Lab (Livermore, CA 94550; Tel: 510/422-1100).
The scientists, reports Lloyd L. Chase, synthesized Si nanoclusters
with average diameters of only a few nanometers (nm) using thermal
vaporization of Si in an argon (Ar) gas background.  The first
monolayer of Si nanoclusters was deposited directly onto the basal
plane of highly oriented pyrolytic graphite, and the layer was
exposed to oxygen (O2) for five minutes.  Although, additional
monolayers were added until the film thickness reached about 250
nm, no photoluminescence was observed.

Post annealing the film in O2 produced a white photoluminescence,
which peaked at about 600 nm.  The photoluminescence increased in
intensity as a function of annealing time and temperature up to
850(C without any accompanying shift in wavelength.  The decay time
was less than five nanoseconds.

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy revealed extensive oxidation of
the film, and the photoluminescence excitation spectrum of the film
showed a strong resemblance to the optical absorption curve of bulk
Si, except for an increase in absorption at wavelengths longer than
375 nm.  The scientists attribute the photoluminescence to the
recombination of carriers in localized defect centers in the
silicon oxide layer.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Optronics Improves
Reflectance, Durability

Optronic Labs, Inc. (4470 35th St., Orlando, FL 32811; Tel:
407/422-3171 or 800/899-3171, Fax: 407/648-5412) has commercialized
its line of Optolon diffuse reflectance coatings.  William A.
Schneider, VP and director of sales and operations, says, "Unlike
other sprayable coatings, Optolon materials are extremely rugged
and washable."  The products are claimed to have a higher
reflectance and better mechanical properties than competitive
products.

Optolon products are available for a wide variety of custom and OEM
applications requiring highly reflective, diffuse, durable
coatings.  Uses include integrating spheres, diffuse reflectance
standards, diffuse reflectance targets, uniform radiance sources,
lamp cavities and reflectors, diffusers and high efficiency
coatings for lamp fixtures and baffles.

Two versions of Optolon coatings are manufactured.  Optolon 1
polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)-based coating is useable at 250-
2,500 nanometers (nm), and Optolon 2 is a barium sulfate-based
coating useable over the more limited 300-1,100 nm range.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

AT&T Develops
Stable Facet Films

Silicon oxide (SiOx) films suitable for use as nonhermetic laser
facet coatings have been produced by researchers at AT&T Corp. (600
Mountain Ave., Murray Hill, NJ 07974; Tel: 201/582-3000).  Naresh
Chand relates, in U.S. Patent 5,440,575, that the new films have
low levels of cracks, voids and particulate contamination and that
they are stable in ambient atmospheres.

The surfaces of nearly all semiconductor lasers must be protected
and/or modified.  Although dielectric films suitable for some
devices are widely used, e.g., silicon dioxide (SiO2) on silicon
(Si), there is a need for a dielectric that is mechanically and
chemically stable and free of pinholes, cracks, particulates and
voids.  It should also have good adhesion, be highly resistant to
moisture penetration and be adaptable for use as a semiconductor
laser facet coating regardless of emission wavelength.

A number of materials, including yttrium stabilized zirconia (YSZ),
have been proposed, but end up with shortcomings, including poor
reproducibility with respect to refractive index and/or mechanical
stress and contamination with particulates.  In addition,
conventional facet coatings are not normally stable in the ambient
atmosphere, causing changes in laser properties and premature laser
failure.

Because of the problems associated with conventional facet
coatings, nearly all such devices are packaged in hermetic, gas-
filled enclosures.  These hermetic lasers are widely used in
optical fiber communications, optical interconnects, sensors, and
printing.  Hermetic enclosures add to the complexity of
manufacturing processes, reduces yield, and increases the cost of
the devices.  The AT&T researchers sought a highly reliable laser
facet coating stable in the ambient atmosphere.

The AT&T scientists discovered that under the right processing
conditions, high quality silicon oxide (SiOx) films suitable for
use as laser facet coatings could be produced.  The key to their
work was the use of a deposition by molecular beam technique
instead of conventional thermal evaporation processes.  The surface
layer of the film is nearly always SiO2, but this layer normally
represents only about 10% of the entire film in most cases.  If
particular reflectivities are needed, the SiOx film can be combined
with layers of other dielectric or semiconductor materials
deposited using the same technique.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Poly-Optical Debutes
Scintillating Product

Poly-Optical Products, Inc. (17475 Gillette Ave., Irvine, CA 92714;
Tel: 714/250-8557) has introduced a line of scintillating optical
fibers.  Sometimes called fluorescent or light collecting fibers,
the new products include a polystyrene-based core and a polymethyl
methacrylate (PMMA) cladding.  Cladding thickness is about 3% of
the fiber diameter, reports Poly-Optical's Karen Neal.

The fibers conduct and absorb light and emit it in concentrated
form at both ends of the fiber.  Common uses include decoration and
radiation detection.  The numerical aperture of the products is
0.58, and operating temperature is -20(C to +50(.  Available colors
include blue, green, red, and orange.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Low Cost Video
Link Is Ready

Physical Optics Corp. (POC, 20600 Gramercy Place, Bldg. 100,
Torrance, CA 90501; Tel: 310/320-3088, Fax: 310/320-8067, email:
pocfiber@aol.com) has introduced a reliable, low cost, video link
that transmits one NTSC RS-170 video signal from a camera to a
remote location via fiber optic cable.  Designed primarily for
process control, security and surveillance applications, the
trademarked Fiber View POC100 system includes one transmitter and
one receiver and uses highly linear amplitude modulation with
automatic gain control circuitry to provide adjustment free
transmission of the video signal.

The inexpensive, single channel fiber optic video transmission
system, priced at about $400, eliminates electromagnetic and radio
frequency interference and ground loop problems typically
associated with coaxial cable transmission.  The high-performance,
light emitting diode (LED)-based, 850 nanometer (nm) Fiber View
POC100 system can extend the transmission range of a video signal
up to one mile. It features a robust bandwidth range of 2 hertz
(Hz) to 10 megahertz (MHz).

Two-color LED status indicators enable the user to monitor
activity.  Housed in modular enclosures, these compact (1.25 inches
high x 2.00 inches wide x 4.00 inches deep) systems can be
installed quickly and easily.  The units consume less than 150
milliamps (mA) and operate from either 12-24 AC or 15-24 DC power.
Greg Stoner is the POC contact.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Lightest Route
to Tube Links

Berk-Tek (132 White Oak Rd., New Holland, PA 17557; Tel: 717/354-
6200 or 800/BERK-TEK, Fax: 717/354-7944) has commercialized its
UNI-Lite fiber optic cables said to represent the smallest,
lightest solution for building gel-filled loose tube links.  The
single tube design makes the product ideal for large campus trunk
lines.  The UNI-Lite cables meet Bellcore TR-NWT-000020 and ICEAS-
87-640-1992 requirements.

Standard UNI-Lite cables have a rugged, abrasion resistant,
ultraviolet (UV) resistant, medium density polyethylene jacket to
withstand all outdoor environmental hazards.  The cables are
suitable for lashed aerial, direct burial, underground ducts and
outside trays.

Riser rated UNI-Lite cables have a UV stabilized polyvinyl chloride
(PVC) jacket and can be direct buried, pulled through conduit,
lashed aerially or placed in outside tray environments.  Berk-Tek
says that they are the only riser rated, fully water blocked cables
available and offer the advantage of extending loose tube cable
installations indoors.  Armored UNI-Lite cables with a steel armor
overjacket are available for added protection against rodents.
Stephen Martin is the Berk-Tek contact.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Energy Pumped
into MRI Diagnosis

Researchers are using high power diode lasers from Opto Power Corp.
(OPC, 3321 E. Global Loop, Tucson, AZ 85706; Tel: 520/746-1234,
Fax: 520/294-3300, email: opc_info@ix.netcom.com) in a new, gas-
based magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) procedure that may detect
emphysema, asthma, pulmonary embolisms, and other lung diseases
that have been difficult or impossible to diagnose with
conventional proton MRI.  Employing this experimental "laser-
polarized" gas MRI method, physicists at Princeton University and
scientists with Duke University's Center for In Vivo Microscopy
acquired the first high resolution images of a human lung, reports
OPC's Merrill Apter.

Since they are filled with air and not water, a human lung is
difficult to image effectively using proton MRI because they lack
the necessary hydrogen atoms to produce a resolute picture.  While
x-rays of the lungs can show some accumulation of fluid and scar
tissue, their exposures are too short to reveal porous lung tissue.


Other diagnostic procedures for imaging the lungs, such as
ventilation scans with radioactive isotopes, expose the patient to
significant levels of radiation and often fail to produce
sufficiently high-resolution images.  The noble gases used in the
laser-polarized gas MRI technique--usually helium (He) or xenon
(Xe)--are inert and nonradioactive and therefore are harmless
inhalants, posing no health risk to the patient.

Tuned to 795 nanometers (nm), the diode laser stimulates an atomic
transition in the alkali metal rubidium (Rb) which is driven into
a vapor in a small oven heated to about 180C.  The Rb vapor
becomes polarized in the process and subsequently transfers some of
the polarization to the nuclei of 3He or 129Xe during gas phase
collisions in a 50-100 cubic centimeter (cc) sealed cell.  After
sufficient polarization is generated in the noble gas it can then
be cooled to room temperature (condensing the rubidium vapor) and
inhaled into the lungs for imaging.

Physicist Hunter Middleton of Princeton University (223 Jadwin
Hall, Princeton, NJ 08544; Tel: 609/258-2843, Fax: 609/258-1124,
email: midleton@princeton.edu) describes how the research team
relies on intense light from OPC's high power, diode lasers to
produce the required volumes of polarized gas.  "The highly
polarized state of the noble gas allows images taken with the new
MRI technique to be generated in seconds, compared to the minutes
often required for conventional MRIs," says Middleton.  When the
project began they were using five sets of large titanium:sapphire
laser systems pumped by argon ion lasers to achieve the required
levels of polarization, but it was found that they were too
expensive and inefficient.

Turning to diode lasers, they were able to dramatically lower their
operating costs. The compact 20-watt open heatsink diode laser
initially employed in the new MRI technique was priced at about
$4,000 and used less than 80 watts of electrical input power.  By
comparison, the argon ion and titanium:sapphire lasers together
were priced in the neighborhood of $500,000 and used about 250 kW
of electricity to produce the same output power. "The
titanium:sapphire setup was so big it required a separate room,"
explains Middleton.  "The diode laser array, on the other hand, is
so small and efficient that it allows us to move the laser
polarized gas MRI station easily from the laboratory to a hospital
environment equipped with only a standard 110 volt wall outlet."

The 20-watt array was more than adequate for imaging the lungs of
a guinea pig, but couldn't produce enough polarized gas necessary
for human tests.  For the first test of a human lung, a 120-watt
array produced nearly 1 liter of polarized gas in 4 hours.  "Though
the spectral distribution, or emission bandwidth, of the diode
laser array (about 2.5 nm) is much broader than that of
titanium:sapphire lasers and exceeds the absorption line of the
rubidium as well, it's nevertheless extremely efficient in this
application," says Middleton.  "We believe that imaging the
function of the lungs and other organs and tissues filled with air
spaces using laser polarized gas has vast potential and may evolve
into a nice complement to conventional proton MRI."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

DOE's Nonproliferation
Program Uses Device

Tunable infrared (IR) lasers under construction at Deacon Research,
Inc. (2440 Embarcadero Way, Palo Alto, CA 94303-3313; Tel: 415/493-
6100) will be used in Dept. of Energy (DOE) nuclear
nonproliferation program.  Douglas Bramford believes that such
devices are essential because of their ability to remotely detect
effluents resulting from the processing of nuclear material.
Conventional devices are tabletop laboratory models not easily
adaptable to deployment on an airplane or in an inspector's
briefcase.

The Deacon Research project will involve the building of a compact,
tunable IR laser source based on the diode laser pumping of a new
nonlinear optical material, periodically poled lithium niobate
(PPLN).  The pump laser and nonlinear crystal can be integrated
into a small package with no mechanical tuning elements.

A device with the required spectral properties--a narrow bandwidth
and a wide range--can then be manufactured.  Applications outside
the nuclear field may include environmental monitoring,
manufacturing process control, medical diagnostics and analytical
chemistry.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Fuji Photo Film Co.
Improves Accuracy

A highly accurate laser diode pumped solid laser has been built by
engineers at Fuji Photo Film Co., Ltd. (2-26-30 Nishi-Azabu,
Minato-Ku, Tokyo 106, Japan; Tel: 3/34062111, Fax: 3/34062395).
Hisashi Ohtusuka reports that the temperature in the region inside
the case housing the optical module is kept constant, preventing
the output power and the wavelength of the produced beam from
fluctuating.

Laser diode pumped solid lasers include a solid laser medium to
which a rare earth metal, e.g., neodymium (Nd) is added.  The
medium is pumped by a semiconductor laser, or laser diode.  In
order for a laser beam from such a device to have as short a
wavelength as possible, a crystal of a nonlinear optical material
is located in the resonator of the laser.  The nonlinear optical
material alters the wavelength of the laser beam.

The temperature of the optical module of such a device is
ordinarily kept at a constant level in order to keep the output
power of the laser diode and the wavelength of the laser beam from
fluctuating.  This temperature is normally maintained by placing
the optical module on the surface of an electronic temperature
adjusting device.

The temperature in the vicinity of the laser diode or nonlinear
optical crystal is detected and adjusted as needed.  The problem is
that when both the optical module and the cooling device are housed
in the same case, the temperature adjustments are often not
accurate enough to keep the laser diode output and the laser beam
wavelength from fluctuating.

The optical module of the Fuji Photo Film laser includes a laser
diode, a solid laser crystal which is excited by the beam produced
by the laser diode, and a resonator.  All three components are
placed in an inner case.  An outer case contains the temperature
adjustment device, temperature sensors, control circuitry and the
inner case.  The new construction makes it easier to maintain an
accurate temperature in the optical module, which in turn increases
the accuracy of the laser diode output and the laser beam
wavelength.  U.S. Patent 5,446,750 details the Fuji Photo Film
work.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

LiNbO3 Improves
Disk Drives, Printers

A waveguide layer has been formed on the surface of a lithium
niobate (LiNbO3) electrooptical material by scientists at Hitachi
Koki Co., Ltd (1060 Takeda, Katsuta City 312, Ibaraki, Japan; Tel:
292/738111, Fax: 292/741730).  Keiji Kataoka reports that the layer
is incorporated in a light control device that includes a light
diffraction device mounted on the surface of the electrooptical
material and electrodes on the front and back surfaces.  The new
device, described in U.S. Patent 5,444,567, is intended for use in
laser printers and optical disk drives.

Some conventional light control devices take advantage of an
electrooptical effect in which the refractive index of a
transparent medium is altered by applying an electric field.  In
one type of these devices, light is directed through an
electrooptical material.  In the other type, light is directed
through a waveguide layer formed on an electrooptical material.

In devices of the first type, an electrooptical material is formed
in the shape of a triangular prism, and electrodes completely cover
the opposite major surfaces.  When a voltage is applied to the
electrodes, an electric field is generated.  Ingoing light is
applied to the prism, and outgoing light is deflected by the
electric field.

In devices of the second type, a waveguide layer on the upper
surface of the electrooptical material.  Electrodes are formed on
an exposed surface of the waveguide layer, and when a voltage is
applied between the electrodes an electric field is generated along
the exposed surface.  Light passing between the electrodes is
deflected.

To produce a large deflection of the outgoing light in the first
type light control devices, the electric field must be increased,
and the beam diameter of the incoming light must also be increased.
Also, in order to obtain a large electric field with a small
applied voltage, the thickness of the electrooptical material must
be reduced.  As a result, in order to produce a large deflection of
the outgoing light, a transversely extended oval shaped light must
be made to enter a relatively thin electrooptical material.  The
problem is that it is difficult to attain this configuration.

To cause a large deflection of the outgoing light in the second
type of light control devices, the electric field intensity must be
increased and the width of the light must also be increased.  In
order to increase the electric field intensity, the interval
between the electrodes is decreased.  The problem here is that when
the width of the light is increased, the electrode interval should
also be increased.  As a result, it is very difficult to produce a
large deflection of light.

The goal of the Hitachi scientists was to build a light control
device in which a large deflection angle or a large change in the
light focusing position can be achieved with only a small applied
voltage.  The waveguide laser was formed by titanium (Ti) diffusion
on the surface of the LiNbO3.  Incoming light is led by a grating
into the waveguide layer and becomes directed light.  Since the new
light deflection device is effective in controlling the light path,
it can be applied to a wide range of devices.

In a laser printer the size of dots recorded on the recording
material must be rapidly changed so that half tone recording can be
accurately performed.  New light control devices can increase the
number of gradations from black to white, improving half tone
pictures.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Achieving Stability
Over Longer Times

Optical waveguides with improved stability over extended periods of
time have been constructed by scientists at NEC Corp. (5-7-1 Shiba,
Minato Ku, Tokyo 100, Japan; Tel: 3/34541111).  Naoki Kitamura and
Hiroshi Nishimoto disclosed that one of the new NEC devices
includes two optical waveguides formed in lithium niobate (LiNbO3)
substrate.  A blocking layer is formed on the device to block the
diffusion of lithium (Li) ions from the substrate, and a silicon
dioxide (SiO2) buffer layer is formed on the blocking layer.  The
electrodes, from which operating voltages are supplied, cover each
coupling part of the two waveguides via the blocking and buffer
layers.

Conventional waveguide optical switches fabricated on a LiNbO3
crystal substrate have low light absorption, low loss, and good
efficiency due to their high electrooptical effect.  In such
devices, a buffer layer is formed on an LiNbO3 substrate, which
includes two titanium (Ti)-diffused waveguides.  Metallic
electrodes are formed on a coupling portion of each waveguide via
the buffer layer.

The buffer layer prevents light propagating along the waveguides
from being absorbed by the electrodes.  SiO2 is used for the buffer
layer because its refraction index of 1.45 is smaller than the 2.2
refractive index of the LiNbO3 substrate and because SiO2 exhibits
low light absorption.  When the buffer layer's refractive index is
small, it is more feasible to reduce its thickness to prevent the
absorption of light than it would be for a material with a large
refractive index.

When switching voltages are applied to the electrodes, an external
electric field concentrates on the buffer layer because the
dielectric constant of the buffer layer is smaller than that of the
substrate.  The electric field in the substrate is relatively
small.  The magnitude of the switching voltages needed for
switching and modulation becomes higher for larger thicknesses of
the buffer layer.

The small refractive index and extremely low absorption of light of
SiO2 makes it the best known material for the buffer layer.  The
problem is that when a DC voltage is applied between electrodes, Li
ions, diffused from the substrate into the buffer layer during
fabrication, are pulled by the electric field and collected under
the electrodes.  As a result, an electric field counter to the
external electric field is generated between the electrodes.

The magnitude of the counter electric field increases as the total
number of ions increases because SiO2 has a high ion conductivity
despite its relatively high electric insulating property.  If the
externally applied voltages are kept constant, the resultant
electric field applied to the waveguides is reduced by the
generation of the counter electric field, causing a deterioration
of the device characteristics.  This shift in operating voltage
point for switching or modulating operation, or DC drift, becomes
a problem when putting the device into practical use.

The key to the NEC device, disclosed in U.S. Patent 5,479,552, is
the blocking layer formed to block the diffusion of lithium (Li)
ions from the substrate.  Suitable materials for the blocking layer
include silicon (Si), silicon (tri-) tetranitride (S3N4), and
magnesium fluoride (MgF2).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Interactive Holography
Will Be Evaluated

American Propylaea Corp. (555 S. Woodward, Birmingham, MI 48009;
Tel: 810/642-7000) has been awarded a $100,000 research contract by
the U.S. Air Force to evaluate the integration of interactive
holography in manufacturing.  James Fischbach, president and CEO,
reports that the contract represents Phase 1 of a projected 15-
phase $200 million project if Phase 1 is successful.  Phase 2 would
involve $750,000, and Phase 3 would be worth $5 million.

American Propylaea, which developed the world's first full color
commercial hologram in 1993, scored a major breakthrough in 1994
when it achieved a 42 inch x 45 inch, full motion, true color
holographic display system, the largest yet developed.  Fischbach
predicts that holography will be a $5 billion per year business
within 10 years and identifies the automotive, entertainment,
medical, and retail markets as those with the greatest potential.

Fischbach says that interactive holography could make it possible
for automakers to cut design and development time by 50%, enabling
them to bring new car models to market in under 20 months, compared
with the present 42 months in the U.S. and 36 months in Japan.
Holography could also reduce the need for exploratory surgery and
assist in the training of surgeons, enabling them to view 3-D
information in free space in front of a monitor screen to help them
detect and locate abnormalities and rehearse operations.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Coherent, Uniphase in
License Agreement

Coherent, Inc. (5100 Patrick Henry Dr., Box 54980, Santa Clara, CA
95056-0980; Tel: 408/764-4000) has signed a license and asset
purchase agreements with Uniphase Corp. (163 Baypointe Pkwy., San
Jose, CA 95134; Tel:408/434-1800).  Under the terms of the license
agreement, Uniphase obtained a limited, nonexclusive sublicense for
fundamental solid state laser technology.  In exchange, Coherent
acquired the assets of Uniphase's diode laser operation in
Torrance, CA.

"This license gives us access to a critical technology, which will
allow Uniphase to move forward more aggressively with its solid
state laser programs," says Kevin Kalkhoven, president and CEO of
Uniphase.  "Uniphase can now better focus its resources on its core
businesses, our newly acquired telecommunications operation,
Uniphase Telecommunications Products; our semiconductor equipment
subsidiary, Ultrapointe; as well as our green and blue micro solid
state laser program."

"This is an important strategic acquisition for Coherent," says
Bernard Couillaud, VP and general manager of the Coherent Laser
Group.  "The addition of semiconductor laser technology to our
diode pumped solid state business, which has been strengthened by
the acquisitions of Adlas GmbH and the nontelecommunications part
of Amoco Technology, will allow Coherent to expand its leadership
position, especially in the medical and OEM markets.  Development
of an internal capability will enable us to move very quickly into
some proprietary laser diode applications."

Coherent's product lines will be directed toward supplying the OEM
and medical markets with a broad range of laser diode devices, and
the company says that it intends to continue buying laser diodes
from outside suppliers.

Laser diodes are made from aluminum gallium arsenide (AlGaAs) and
indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs) using semiconductor manufacturing
technology.  They operate at 600-1,000 nanometers (nm) with up to
15 watts of power.  Because of their small size and high
efficiency, laser diodes are ideal for certain types of OEM and
medical applications and are incorporated into other laser devices
as well.

OPTICAL MATERIALS AND ENGINEERING STOCK WATCH
(At Close January 4, 1996)

                               Current   Last
Company              Symbol    Price     Month      Change

APA Optics           APAT      5.750     7.000      -1.250
Circon               CCON      20.000    22.000     -2.000
Coherent             COHR      35.000    41.500     -6.500
EG&G                 EGG       22.250    19.375     +2.875
Galileo Elect-Opt.   GAEO      10.625    10.625     --------
OIS Opt. Imaging     OVON      4.000     3.000      +1.000
Orbotech             ORBKF     12.250    13.125     -0.875
PSC                  PSCX      8.375     9.625      -1.250
Spectran             SPTR      5.250     5.500      -0.250
Spire                SPIR      2.125     2.375      -0.250
Summit Tech.         BEAM      32.500    48.500     -16.000
Zygo                 ZIGO      25.000    29.750     -4.750




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Briefly Noted:

  Walter L. Robb has joined the board of directors of Molecular
OptoElectronics Corp. (877 25th St., Watervliet, NY 12189; Tel:
518/270-8208).  Robb, president of Schenectady, NY-based Vantage
Management, Inc. was previously senior VP of corporate R&D at
General Electric Corp.

  Lew Brown has been appointed Asia Pacific Sales Manger for
Melles Griot (Irvine, CA 92714; Tel: 714/261-5600, Fax: 714/261-
7589).  Brown previously held various sales and marketing positions
at Coherent and Spectra Physics.

  Opto Power Corp. (OPC, 3321 E. Global Loop, Tucson, AZ 85706;
Tel: 520/746-1234, Fax: 520/294-3300, email:
opc_info@ix.netcom.com) has joined a growing list of optics
companies headquartered in Tucson, AZ by moving into a custom
built, 30,000 sq. ft. manufacturing facility located near the
airport.  OPC president John Tracy says that the company was
formerly based in the City of Industry, CA.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

AT&T Wins
German Contract

AT&T Corp. (600 Mountain Ave., Murray Hill, NJ 07974; Tel: 201/582-
3000) has been awarded an estimated $10 million (14 million DM)
contract to supply fiber optic cable to Deutsche Telekom, Europe's
largest telecommunications company.

The fiber cable will be used mainly to help upgrade the former East
Germany's telecommunications infrastructure, and will be part of
Deutsche Telekom's optical passive access line (OPAL '96) network.
"This contract is an important win for Network Systems," says
Detlef Linssen of AT&T.  "This contract underscores our commitment
to Germany's telecommunications equipment market and an intent to
strengthen our presence here."

Roughly 90% of the optical fibers and fiber optic cables purchased
in this 1-year order from AT&T Network Systems will be installed in
areas of the former East Germany, and the other 10% will be
deployed in areas of the former West Germany.  Delivery of products
will be completed by the end of 1996.

AT&T Network Systems fiber cable manufacturing facility in
Augsburg, Germany, will produce the cables.  The factory, which
opened in June 1995, manufactures products for customers in Europe,
the Middle East and Africa.  Denmark-based LYCOM A/S, a subsidiary
of AT&T, will manufacture and supply to the Augsburg facility the
single mode optical fiber for the Deutsche Telekom order.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Growth Predicted
to End of Decade

The U.S. market for laser materials and components, currently
believed to be $551.3 million, is forecast to grow at an annual
rate of 9.8% and reach $879.4 million in 2000, says a new BCC
business opportunity report.  As diode lasers experience rapid
growth in a variety of applications, components for these lasers
are expected to show the greatest gains in sales.  Laser materials
and equipment such as chillers and power supplies should also
experience substantial growth through the end of this decade.

The world market for laser materials and components is estimated by
BCC to currently stand at $1,059.3 million.  The world market is
projected to grow at an average annual growth rate of 9.1% to
$1,637 in 2000.  The U.S. dominates the world laser materials and
components market, accounting for some 40% of total sale, followed
by Europe and the Pacific region.  Countries in the Pacific region
are expected to experience the highest average annual growth rates
in sales, 10.3%.  In the next few years, the Pacific region is
expected to replace Europe as the second largest market.

Growth in sales of laser materials and components is highly
dependent on the sales of the laser systems with which they are
used.  Laser markets that are expanding rapidly include material
processing, medical therapy and telecommunications.  The research
area, traditionally a major consumer of laser components, is in a
period of flux.

While some research areas are being slashed due to military
cutbacks, research into lasers is expected to continue at a steady
pace.  Lasers have become key components of advanced weapons
systems, and military spending in this area should not decline as
rapidly as in other areas.  Nevertheless, sales of laser materials
and components for research applications are expected to grow at a
rate significantly slower than those for other applications.  As a
result, component manufacturers will have to more aggressively
target industrial customers in the future.

The report analyzes five major market segments: laser materials,
optical components, equipment, instruments, and diode laser
components.  Laser materials include laser crystals, gases and dyes
used in solid state lasers, as well as optical substrates and
coatings which form the basis of optical components.  Sales in each
of these areas should experience average annual growth rates of
about 8% as demand for solid state lasers and their associated
optical components continues to expand.  Particular strength should
occur in sales of tunable laser materials which have made
considerable inroads into the scientific market.

Optical components include lenses, mirrors, prisms and beam
splitters, windows, filters, fiber optics, and modulators and
deflectors.  As key elements of laser systems, lenses, mirrors, and
fibers are the largest markets in this segment.  Sales of these
components should match sales of the lasers in which they are used
and should see healthy growth in the years ahead.  Fiber optic
waveguides, while only a small part of this market segment, should
experience an average annual growth rate of nearly 13% due to a
rapid rise in medical application sales.

Equipment covers power supplies and cooling systems, which should
both see strong gains.  Sales of power supplies will be paced by
demand from carbon dioxide lasers used in material processing.
This application should also generate significant demand for
cooling systems.  Instruments include beam analyzers, detectors,
vibration isolation systems, and positioning equipment.  These
instruments are generally used in research applications, and this
market is not expected to grow rapidly. The average annual growth
rate for this market segment is expected to be 5.8%.  The lone
bright spot in this area is beam analyzers, which are expected to
see much greater use in the fast growing diode market.

Diode laser components include diode laser drivers and diode laser
optics.  Sales in both of these areas should continue to be robust
since the use of diode lasers is expanding rapidly in may
applications.  The new study, Growing Markets For Laser Materials
And Components, is available from BCC for $2750.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

New Chinese
Products Ready

Casix (Box 1103, Fuzhou, Fujian 350014, People's Republic of China;
Tel: 86/591/366 6957, Fax: 86/591/362 1248) has introduced several
new lines of optical glasses.  Among the products, reports
marketing manager Jiwu Ling, are BK7 grade optical glass wedges.
Designed for a wavelength of 632.8 nanometers (nm), these wedges
are priced at $12-$15 each.

The company's fused silica wedges, designed for a wavelength of 308
nm, are priced at $21-$32 each.  Casix sapphire windows are made
from anisotrophic synthetic sapphire (Al2O3) and are priced at $22-
$35 each.  Calcium fluoride (CaF2) windows, with a transparent
range of 0.13-10.00 microns, carry a price of $105-$185 each.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Diffuser/Condenser
Improves Process

In an effort to overcome undesirable variations in brightness and
light uniformity, Kulicke & Soffa Industries, Inc. (K&S2101 Blair
Mill Rd., Willow Grove, PA 19090-1795; Tel: 215/784-6000, Fax:
215/659-7588), a producer of semiconductor manufacturing equipment,
has incorporated a holographic diffuser/condenser lens assembly
from Physical Optics Corp. (POC, 20600 Gramercy Place, Building
100, Torrance, CA 90501; Tel: 310/320-3088, Fax: 310/320-8067) in
the machine vision system of its model 1488 turbo wire bonder.  The
wire bonder relies on ultrasonic technology to bond gold or
aluminum wire to a silicon chip, or die, preparing it for
installation into a printed circuit board.

The new lens assembly helps the wire bonder's machine vision system
locate reference points on the die during the semiconductor
manufacturing process.  Prior to adopting this new optical
component, K&S manually glass bead blasted and lacquered a diffuser
surface to one side of an off-the-shelf condenser lens, a time
consuming and unpredictable technique that, combined with the
inherent problems of the light emitting diode (LED) light sources,
often diminished the performance of the machine.

The new optics assembly in the computerized K&S wire bonder
integrates two complex optical elements, a POC holographic
trademarked Light-Shaping Diffuser (LSD) epoxy replicated to the
plano side of a standard glass condenser lens.  Epoxy replication
is a precision process used in the fabrication of high performance
optics, from optical flats to diffraction gratings.  LSDs are
surface relief holographic elements that shape light by precisely
controlling the energy distribution along the horizontal and
vertical axes, allowing engineers to match the light source with
the area requiring illumination.

The LSDs--which can be mass produced using a variety of surface
relief manufacturing processes, including injection molding--
homogenize and shape the LED light before feeding it through the
focusing condenser lens, allowing the wire bonder's pattern
recognition system to easily locate reference points on the die
pad.  The diffuser/lens component works with fewer surfaces, is
prealigned, and possesses the ability to perform tasks that are
either difficult, impossible or very expensive to do separately,
says POC.

The lens assembly takes advantage of the uniform light distribution
and high diffusion rate of LSDs to overcome some of the problems
common among LED light sources, including variations in brightness,
structure, light distribution and alignment.  By doing this, it
enables the wire bonder to attach the tiny wires--typically about
0.001 inch in diameter--with more precision and accuracy than was
possible with the manually applied diffuser surface.

POC manufactures holographic optical elements used in machine
vision, LCD backlights, inspection lighting, and auto displays.
The company works closely with product designers to pursue new
industrial, military, and commercial applications for its
technologies.  Rick Shie is the POC contact.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Possible Reduction
of Passive Losses

A new laser crystal, chromium:lithium strontium gallium fluoride
(Cr3+:LiSrGaF6) is under evaluation by scientists at Lightning
Optical Corp. (431 E. Spruce St., Tarpon Springs, FL 34689-4015;
Tel: 813/938-0092).  Potentially superior to chromium:lithium
strontium aluminum fluoride (Cr3+:LiSrAlF6), the new crystal is
being considered for use in tunable laser systems which can operate
in the 250-400 nanometer (nm) range, reports Arlete Cassanho.

Cr3+:LiSrAlF6 is presently the only crystal that can challenge
titanium:sapphire as a broadly tunable, near infrared (NIR) laser
source.  The Cr3+:LiSrAlF6 materials and their isomorphs have an
advantage for use in rugged, compact, solid state lasers because
they can be efficiently pumped by diode lasers.  So far, though, it
is not clear that the Cr3+:LiSrAlF6 is the best choice.  Negligible
passive loss, coupled with its potentially superior
thermomechanical and thermooptical properties make Cr3+:LiSrGaF6
worthy of consideration.

Initially, Lightning Optical will work with previously grown
samples of Cr3+:LiSrGaF6 to characterize its benefits.  The crystal
can be grown with practically zero passive loss, and in a large
boule size when the company's proprietary synthesis process is
used.  The same synthesis will be used for Cr3+:LiSrAlF6 to reduce
its passive losses to the same level as that measured in the
Cr3+:LiSrGaF6 crystals.

The project also calls for the development of other critical
components, antireflection coatings, capable of withstanding the
rigorous temperature cycling required for the tunability and
frequency conversion, while maintaining a high damage threshold.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

NIST Finds That
Disorder Is Useful

Scientists using x-ray diffraction crystallography know that few
crystals have ideal diffraction patterns. Most materials exhibit
diffuse scattering caused by a number of factors grouped under the
name "disorder."  These disorders result in a variety of physical
properties useful in optoelectronics, semiconductors, and high
temperature superconductors.

A new paper from the Thermophysics Div. of the National Institute
of Standards and Technology (NIST) Chemical Science and Technology
Laboratory, in collaboration with the Australian National
University, presents a broad overview of the many areas where
diffuse x-ray scattering has been important in understanding the
structure and function of crystalline materials.

Topics covered include alloy systems, simple inorganic systems such
as mixed oxides or halides, low-dimensional conductors, inclusion
compounds, molecular crystals, macromolecular crystals, and quasi-
crystals.  To obtain a free copy of Report 5-95, Diffuse X-Ray
Scattering From Disordered Crystals, contact Sarabeth Moynihan
(NIST, Div. 104, Boulder, CO 80303-3328; Tel: 303/497-7765, email:
moynihan@bldrdoc.gov).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Low Temperature
Growth Method

A chemist at Washington University in St. Louis (St. Louis, MO
63130) has discovered a new method to grow semiconductor crystals
at temperatures far lower than ever reported.  The method is the
first to use solution phase chemistry to grow the micrometer-sized
crystals at low temperature.  The semiconductors made by the new
method may be used in devices such as light emitting diode (LED)
displays, laser pointers, grocery scanners, compact disc players
and computer components.  The breakthrough offers intriguing
possibilities of developing integrated devices consisting of
semiconductors and polymers, plastics or composites.

Present ways of growing semiconductor crystals prohibit combining
other materials with the semiconductors because of the very high
temperatures required to grow the crystals.  Crystals are currently
produced at temperatures of 500-1,200(C, but the method William E.
Buhro (Tel: 314/935-4269, email: buhro@wuchem.wustl.edu), associate
professor of chemistry at Washington University in St. Louis, has
discovered allows growth at 200(C.  Buhro's technique, the
solution-liquid-solid (SLS) growth method, is similar to the vapor-
liquid-solid (VLS) gas phase growth method which has been used for
some 30 years.

Buhro and other materials chemists had been stymied by the
nonmolecular structures of the semiconductor materials, which do
not allow crystal growth from conventional solvents at low
temperatures.  Buhro made a solution suspension of indium and
indium-gallium nano-sized metal droplets.  The droplets are the
sites from which the semiconductor crystal compounds indium
phosphide, gallium arsenide and indium arsenide (type III-V
semiconductors) nucleate and grow.

Buhro explains, "We refer to this as the solution-liquid-solid
mechanism, a three phase system where the chemistry occurs in
solution, then elements of the semiconductors are deposited into
the liquid--the molten metal droplets--and the product crystallizes
out as a solid."  An important goal in materials chemistry is to
turn down the heat on solid state synthesis.  This new method
expands the range of possibility for these semiconductors.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Building a New Flat
Panel Video Screen

A researcher at the Dept. of Energy (DOE) Brookhaven National Lab
(Box 5000, Upton, NY 11973-5000) has invented a flat panel video
screen that uses lasers as a light source.  Uses of the device may
include video advertising displays, television, computers,
automotive dashboard and aircraft cockpit displays, as well as
portable military maps and wall-sized displays for home
entertainment.  Since the Brookhaven device has advantages in
brightness, contrast, and viewing angle over the new generation of
liquid crystal cockpit displays, the U.S. Air Force is funding
development of the flat panel device for use in its new planes.

In another project involving the new technology funded by the Dept.
of Defense (DOD) Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA),
Brookhaven also is working on a 5 ft. plastic television screen for
military use.

The Clinton Administration has identified developing flat panel
displays as vital to the economic future of the U.S.  Brookhaven
engineer James Veligdan (Tel: 516/282-5400) invented the device and
developed the display screen prototype, which is 9 in. wide by 5
in. high and approximately 1 in. thick.  The new flat panel screen
has several advantages over current technologies.

Many video display systems now on the market use cathode ray tubes
(CRTs).  Although reliable, they are very large, heavy, and not
easily transportable.  Other than CRTs, the major current video
display technology is limited to liquid crystal displays (LCDs),
which are comparatively difficult and expensive to manufacture.

The Brookhaven technology works by directing light from a miniature
laser to a scanner, which guides the light beam into the proper
sector of laminated wave guides.  Composed of multiple sheets of
laminated borosilicate glass or polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA)
plastic, the waveguides direct the light to the screen to display
the video image.

"The system is totally eye safe, high-contrast, and offers
exceptionally wide viewing angles.  Also, the screen can be used in
cold weather, whereas liquid crystals thicken and freeze as
temperatures dip below freezing.  The technology can be adapted to
display 3D images if the viewer wears polarized glasses.
Maintenance is easy and inexpensive," says Veligdan.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Reimaging Units
Improve Focus

Opto Power Corp. (OPC, 3321 E. Global Loop, Tucson, AZ 85706; Tel:
520/746-1234, Fax: 520/294-3300, email: opc_info@ix.netcom.com), a
manufacturer of high power diode lasers, diode laser subsystems and
modules, fiber-coupled diode laser arrays, and related accessories,
has introduced a line of optical reimaging units (ORUs) designed to
focus light from its high power, fiber-coupled diode lasers and OEM
modules into smaller or larger spot sizes.  Developed primarily for
industrial users such as laser marking, soldering, heat treating,
and materials processing, these (ORUs) reduce or enlarge diode
laser spot sizes by as much as three fold, depending on the model,
reports OPC's Merrill Apter.

The ORUs focus the laser light into free space and are available
with working distances of 20-68 millimeters (mm).  Equipped with
antireflective coated lenses that transmit up to 97% of the laser
light to the target, OPC's ORUs also help protect the diode lasers'
fiber bundles from harsh environments.  All ORUs are housed in
rugged cylindrical aluminum enclosures 37 mm in diameter and have
thread patterns standard in the industry.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Advances in
Quantum Wire

Advances in the production of quantum wires is reported by a
research group at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
(Urbana, IL 61081).  The team, headed by Keh-Yung Cheng (Tel:
217/333-6642, Fax: 217/244-6375, email: kcheng@uxl.cso.uiuc.edu),
have used molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and strain induced lateral
layering ordering (SILO) techniques to build quantum wires,
nanoscale atomic structures believed to dramatically increase the
efficiency and reliability of light emitting devices such as laser
diodes.

Many of the advances in computing, data storage and
telecommunications have come as a result of the evolution of
semiconductor materials.  While silicon has been utilized to
stretch the bounds of computer processing power and speed, other
semiconductors have been applied to create photonic devices.  Such
devices can emit or detect light; for example, semiconductor laser
diodes can be used to read data from compact disks.

Over the past 30 years, the techniques for creating these
semiconductors have been refined.  Using a MBE method, scientists
can grow semiconductors in layers as thin as one atom.  By
selecting the types of semiconductor material, properties such as
the color of its light emissions can be engineered.

An ultrathin layer, or quantum well, has done much to improve the
reliability and efficiency of light emitting devices.  This quantum
well is the center of a semiconductor sandwich that is only a few
dozen atoms thick.  When structures approach this nanoscale,
electrons begin to change their characteristics and exhibit quantum
size effects.  Such changes can affect and improve the overall
performance of optical devices, such as achieving more light
generation for a laser diode.

The next step in quantum devices are structures that utilize
quantum wires.  Similar to quantum wells, quantum wires have atomic
scale thickness in two dimensions instead of one.  With this
additional degree of quantum confinement, it is theorized that even
higher levels of efficiency and reliability can be observed in
practical optical devices.

The color of a standard laser diode's output light can vary with
time and temperature.  Quantum wire lasers, though, are thought to
maintain uniform characteristics over a broader range of
environmental variables.  Until now, very little success has been
achieved in preparing such quantum wire structures.

In the Illinois work, the SILO process used MBE to grow
alternating, ultrathin layers, less than two atoms thick, inside
semiconductor structures.  The number of atoms in each layer is
slightly different, either lesser or greater, than would normally
be required.  The resulting atomic imbalance creates a strain force
inside the growing crystal.  The strain force, in turn, causes
certain atoms to group together along lines on the growing surface.
When the SILO process is combined with quantum well fabrication
techniques in MBE quantum wire regions are formed almost
automatically.

Cheng's group has demonstrated laser devices emitting in the
visible and infrared (IR) spectra range using quantum wires.  The
devices, showed various new and unexpected optical characteristics,
are the subject of further research at the university.  Eventual
end uses may include improved supermarket checkout scanners and
home fiber optic communications.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Miniature NIR
Spectrometer

Ocean Optics, Inc. (OOI, 1237 Lady Marion Lane, Dunedin, FL 34698-
5314; Tel: 813/733-2447, Fax: 813/733-3962, email:
75461.2007@compuserve.com) has introduced its PbS-256 miniature
fiber optic near infrared (NIR) spectrometer system designed to
record spectral data from 1-3 microns at 256 wavelengths
simultaneously.  Engineered to meet the needs of the broad-based
NIR spectroscopy marketplace, including applications in
telecommunications, biomedicine, chemistry, microelectronics and
environmental monitoring, the new PbS-256 complements OOI's
existing family of small ultraviolet (UV) and visible (VIS) fiber
optic spectrometers.

The PbS-256 features a 256-element lead sulfide linear charge
coupled device (CCD) focal plane array with an on-board
multiplexer.  User adjustable integration times of 1.0 microsecond
to about 100 milliseconds provide essential dynamic range and
sensitivity for measurements at low and high light levels.  The
dynamic range of the new NIR spectrometer is further enhanced,
reports OOI's Rob Morris, by detector-based dark current
subtractors that utilize global and individual pixel adjustments
via digital to analog converters (DACs).  This minimizes unwanted
current that flows in a detector's pixels when no photons are
hitting the detector.

The PbS-256, like Ocean Optics' other miniature spectrometers,
employs special optics designed for use with single strand optical
fibers.  The light from the fiber is dispersed by a fixed grating
across the detector.  Spectra are captured in milliseconds and
brought into a Microsoft Windows-based data acquisition and
processing software program that allows the user to set and control
a host of functions, including sensor integration time, auto dark
current correction, signal averaging and optical measurement
technique.  The system's operating software provides users with the
ability to view full spectra in real time as voltage or as percent
transmission or absorbance, and to store them as ASCII files.

At $15,000 per unit, the PbS-256 is believed to offer NIR spectral
coverage for a fraction of the cost of scanning devices such as
fourier transform IR (FTIR) spectrometers.  The system has no
moving parts and is dramatically smaller, more durable and easier
to transport for field work than bulky mechanical scanning systems.
OOI also offers a line of optional fiber optic light sources,
probes and sensors compatible with the PbS-256.

Established in 1992, OOI manufactures low cost, miniature fiber
optic spectrometers, probes, light sources and accessories for
industrial process control, environmental monitoring, and medical
and research applications.  The company's line of UV, VIS and NIR
spectrometers includes PC plug-in, benchtop and notebook platforms,
available in 12 different diffraction gratings and 5 standard input
fibers for configurement to a wide range of application needs.  All
OOI spectrometers can be optimized to measure spectral
characteristics such as absorbance, transmission, reflection,
irradiance and fluorescence.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Chemical Monitor
under Construction

Engineers at Inrad, Inc. (181 Legrand Ave., Northvale, NJ 07647-
2498; Tel: 201/767-1910 are building a mid infrared (IR) laser for
the remote sensing of chemicals.  Sergei Govorkov reports that many
environmentally sensitive chemicals, including chemical warfare
agents, have signature absorption lines in the mid IR spectral
region.  A differential absorption light (DIAL) detection and
ranging system, if it were continuously tunable in the fingerprint
IR wavelength region, would serve as the basis for an accurate,
real time chemical monitor for a wide range of gases.

The Inrad project will involve the construction of a solid state
optical parametric oscillator (OPO)-based transmitter for a DIAL
system.  The engineers will design and build a zinc germanium
phosphide-based OPO pumped by a Q-switched, flashlamp pumped,
erbium-doped yttrium scandium gadolinium garnet laser.  The
performance of the system will be evaluated with respect to
conversion efficiency, tuning range and emission linewidth.  Based
on the results, a conceptual design for an OPO-based DIAL system
will be developed.

The successful completion of the Inrad project could lead to the
remote sensing of stack gases, greenhouse gases, chemical warfare
agents and precursors for chemical used in the manufacture of
illegal drugs.  The technology may have some defense applications
in target designation and countermeasures.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Reflectance Control
Method Discovered

An optical recording media which permits manufacturers to more
accurately control light reflectance has been constructed by
researchers at Pioneer Electronic Corp. (1-4-1 Meguro, Meguro-Ku,
Tokyo 153, Japan; Tel: 3 3494111, Fax: 3 34954428).  Fumio Matsui
reports that the new medium includes a transparent substrate, a
metal phthalocyanine-based optical recording film, a metal
reflective film, and a protective layer.

Optical recording media normally have advantages over competitive
materials in memory capacity with respect to write-in or read-out
operations. Operations do not involve contact of components.  There
is a trend to standardize such media, e.g., optical disks, with
respect to optical and mechanical characteristics.

The reflectance or reflectance ratio, one of the optical
characteristics of a recording film, must be 10-90% before
recording and 27-90% after recording, and the uniformity of
reflectance must be less than 12%.  Conventional techniques for
controlling this reflectance call for either mixing different kinds
of materials or producing films with variable thicknesses.

There are several problems with existing techniques.  First, when
different materials are mixed, some internal reactions may occur.
In such cases, it is extremely difficult to control the resulting
reflectance.  Second, it is difficult to manufacture films with
uniform thicknesses.  This also makes control of reflectance
difficult.

The Pioneer Electronic scientists built an optical recording medium
that includes a transparent light transmission substrate of
polycarbonate (PC), polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) or amorphous
polyolefin (APO) resin.  The substrate, formed by a
photopolymerization technique, has a thickness of 1.0-1.5
millimeters (mm).  A recording film is formed on the substrate by
heating a metal phthalocyanine and circulating it in toluene for
12-24 hrs.  The aggregated portion, obtained by removing the
toluene, is then dissolved in tetrafluoropropanol.

The solvent fractions containing the aggregated and nonaggregated
fractions were applied to the substrate using a spin coating
technique at a thickness of about 130 mm.  A gold, aluminum, silver
or copper reflective film is then formed by vacuum evaporation,
sputtering, or ion plating techniques.  An epoxy, acrylic,
silicone, or urethane resin is then used to provide a protective
layer on the reflective film.  The improved control of the medium's
reflectance stems from the ability to mix the aggregated and
nonaggregated portions of the solvent in precise ratios.  U.S.
Patent 5,439,778 covers details of the Pioneer Electronic
invention.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Improved Near
Infrared Absorbers

Phthalocyanine-based near infrared (NIR) absorbers formulated by
scientists at Mitsui Toatsu Chemicals, Inc. (3-2-5 Kasumigaseki,
Chiyoda-Ku, Tokyo, Japan; Tel: 3/5937111, Fax: 3/5924267) are
intended for use in optical recording media, NIR absorption
filters, and liquid crystal display devices.  Hisato Itoh reports
that the advantages of the new absorbers include light, weather and
thermal resistance, as well as high molar extinction coefficients.

NIR absorbers play an important role in optoelectronic applications
such as information recording media, display media, sensors, and
goggles.  Conventional absorbers, based on cyanine, anthraquinone
or naphthoquinone dyes or dithiol complexes, suffer from several
disadvantages.  Cyanine dyes do not have sufficient light and
thermal resistance.  The absorption wavelength of phthalocyanine
dyes is 600-700 nanometers (nm), extremely short.  Anthraquinone
and naphthoquinone dyes have low molar extinction coefficients.
Dithiol complexes are not thermally stable, and they also have low
molar extinction coefficients.

The Mitsui Toatsu Chemicals formulation is based on phthalocyanine
derivatives in which each of the 4 benzene rings contained in the
molecule have 1-4 substituent groups.  The intermediates are
reacted with a metal halide, acetate, or sulfate by heating in a
solvent such as urea.  The absorber is coated onto a transparent
substrate using a spin coating process.  The Mitsui Toatsu
Chemicals discovery is covered in U.S. Patent 5,446,141.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

New FOTP
Standards

The Telecommunications Industry Assn. (TIA, 2500 Wilson Blvd.,
Suite 300, Arlington, VA 22201; Tel: 703/907-7700, Fax: 703/907-
7727) has published the American National Standard Interconnection
Device Insertion Loss Test, or TIA/EIA-455-34A.  Originally
published as EIA-455-34, the revised standard defines the procedure
by which the optical insertion of a complete fiber optic
interconnection can be measured.  This fiber optic test procedure
(FOTP) was formulated under the guidance of TIA's engineering
subcommittee on fiber optic connection devices.

TIA has also published American National Standard Measurement of
Fiber Strain in Cables Under Tensile Load, or TIA/EIA-455-38.  This
FOTP is intended to provide an accurate method for measuring
changes in the average longitudinal strain on a cabled optical
fiber.  The document, which outlines a method for measuring changes
in strain from one loading condition to another, was formulated
under the guidance of TIA's subcommittee on fiber optic cables.
Sharon Grace is the TIA contact.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Partnership in
Color Chemistry

X-Rite, Inc. (3100 44th St. SW, Grandville, MI 49418; Tel: 616/534-
7663, Fax: 616/534-9212), a supplier of optical instruments and
software for the quality control of color, has formed a partnership
with Leeds-Bradford, England-based Leeds University's Color
Chemistry Dept.  X-Rite will support and participate in color
chemistry and color physics research and teaching.

The primary goal of the university's research is the understanding
of the optical properties of colored materials and the technology
of color reproduction.  U.S., European, and multinational chemical,
textile, surface coating, printing, photographic, cosmetic, and
medial companies use the Leeds University research team.

"The X-Rite and Leeds University partnership will create a center
for color physics and chemistry study and research," says Bruce
Jorgensen, X-Rite president and CEO.  "It recognizes the long term
commitment of both parties to the understanding of color and the
technology for its measurement and control."  X-Rite, which has
offices in Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Hong Kong, Germany and
England, has two major product lines: instruments that measure
color and appearance instruments that measure optical or
photographic density.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

BOOKS

Every Aspect
of VCSELs

Vertical Cavity Surface Emitting Lasers, by Terence Edward Sale of
the U.K.-based University of Sheffield, covers the principles,
theory, design and operation of vertical cavity surface emitting
lasers (VCSELs).  Semiconductor lasers have advanced a long way
since their first demonstration in the early 1960s and have a large
impact on many devices today.

They act as sources for optical fiber systems and permit the
reading of data from compact discs and barcode labels.  VCSELs have
many advantages over conventional semiconductor lasers.  The most
obvious is the possibility of very large arrays and a narrow
circular output beam, which can be efficiently coupled into the
core of a fiber.  As a result, the author believes that the time
for a book devoted to VCSELs has come.

The first chapter of the volume describes the history and prospects
of VCSELs and the choice of material systems for emission in
different wavelengths.  The second chapter concerns the optical
properties of short vertical cavities, and the quantum mechanical
processes facilitating optical gain and spontaneous emission
processes are the focus of the third chapter.  Concepts are
developed from basic principles, and the effect of strain on the
optical processes in quantum wells is also covered.  Readers are
introduced to techniques for epitaxial crystal growth and the
fabrication of VCSEL devices in Chapter 4, and Chapter 5 explores
the resistance problems that can arise due to the many
heterojunctions in dielectric reflector stacks.

Chapters 6 and 7 are case studies which describe measurements made
on 2 VCSEL structures, one grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE)
and the other by metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD).
In Chapter 8, experimental data from these case studies are
analyzed using models, and the final chapter describes other
aspects of VCSELs such as modulation response, arrays and noise
performance.

The book does a good job of covering the VCSEL field and should be
of value to those experienced in the optics field, as well as to
novices and students.  Vertical Cavity Surface Emitting Lasers is
published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (605 Third Ave., New York, NY
10158; Tel: 212/850-6336). 1995.  Price: $89.95




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
OPTICAL MATERIALS & ENGINEERING NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

CALENDAR

March 24-29, 1996, Spring 1996 American Chemical Society (ACS)
Meeting, Chicago, IL.  Contact: ACS, 1155 16th St. NW, Washington,
DC 20036-4899; Tel: 202/872-4398.

April 8-12, 1996, Materials Research Society Fall Meeting, San
Francisco, CA.  Contact: Materials Research Society, 9800 McKnight
Rd., Pittsburgh, PA 15237; Tel: 412/367-3004, Fax: 412/367-4373,
email: info@mrs.org.

May 21-24, 1996, 11th International Conference on Optical Fiber
Sensors, Sapporo, Japan.  Contact: OFS-11 Secretariat, EC, Inc.,
President Building 3F, Minami 1-jo Nishi 5-chome, Chuo-ku, Sapporo
060, Japan; Tel: +81/11/231 2289, Fax: +81/11/221 0496.

May 30-31, 1996, Society of Glass Technology Spring Meeting,
Durham, England.  Contact: Jill Costello, Society of Glass
Technology, 20 Hallam Gate Rd., Sheffield S10 5BT, England; Tel:
0114/266 3168, Fax: 0114/266 5252.

June 2-7, 1996, 16th Annual Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics
(CLEO '96) and 6th Quantum Electronics and Laser Science Conference
(QELS '96), Anaheim, CA.  Contact: Optical Society of America (OSA)
Conference Services, 2010 Massachusetts Ave. NW, Washington, DC
20036-1023; Tel: 202/223-0920.

July 22-25, 1996, Borate Glasses, Crystals, and Melts, Abingdon,
England.  Contact: Jill Costello, Society of Glass Technology, 20
Hallam Gate Rd., Sheffield S10 5BT, England; Tel: 0114/266 3168,
Fax: 0114/266 5252.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-35</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B019-235</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ml06.html 205.156.212.5 19970122034833 text/html 39182
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:46:31 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:48 GMT
Content-length: 38995
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ml06.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ml06.gif"><BR><BR>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
PERFORMANCE MATERIALS via NewsNet <BR>
January 8, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>||||||||||</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>FIBERITE TO BUY HERCULES&nbsp;Industry Consolidation Continues as Weaver/Prepregger&nbsp;Signs Letter for $135-Million Buy of Carbon Fiber Maker</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(400 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>SMARTweave for RTM&nbsp;The U.S. Army and Delaware Institute&nbsp;Have an RTM Cure-Monitoring Method</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(214 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>GOETZ MASTS&nbsp;Change in Racing Rules Spurs Demand&nbsp;For Composite Masts for Sailing Yachts</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(127 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>CULVER CITY&nbsp;New Products Key Former SP Gameplan;&nbsp;Parent AMP Seeks to Buy More, Go Public</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(379 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>FROM PUFFS TO PUTTS&nbsp;Cobra Golf and its Shaft Lines Bought&nbsp;By American Brands After Tobacco Sale</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(548 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>ALDILA ACTION, TOO&nbsp;Premiere Shaftmaker Has New President&nbsp;And a Highly Automated Finishing Line</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(167 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>THIOKOL -- THE PREPREGGER&nbsp;Present Posture Can Be Traced to Amoco's&nbsp;Exit;&nbsp;Rocketmaker Offers Wovens on All Fiber Types</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(280 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>|||||||||||||||||||||||</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>NOW IT'S ITALY&nbsp;Lanxide Has Another Deal for Brakes,&nbsp;This Time it's MMCs for Italy's Brembo</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(220 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>|||||||||</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>'PURGE'&nbsp;Past Mistakes Done, Mistakemakers Gone,&nbsp;Says Quadrax: 'Basics Have Been Rebuilt'</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(287 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>||||||||||||</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>RECOVERY&nbsp;A Better Market Situation for Graphite&nbsp;Prompts 14-Percent Soficar Expansion</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(156 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>|||||||||||</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>35,000 LAKHS&nbsp;Owens-Corning Teams with Mahindra&nbsp;For $100-Million Fiber Plant in India</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(508 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>||||||||||||||||||||||||</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>ARMY SATELLITES&nbsp;UAVs and Space Control Among Areas&nbsp;Of Interest as the U.S. Army Floats a BAA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(103 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>||||||</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>Thiokol and The Carlyle Group have closed on</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(63 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>Earl Benton is joining Toray Industries as</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(59 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>Airbus is contracting with Malaysian</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(90 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>General Motors said at presstime that it will</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(62 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>||||||||||||||</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><LI>BUILDING BRIDGES&nbsp;Getting Composites Approved for Structures&nbsp;Poses Material Durability Database Challenges</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(613 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>||||||</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><LI>TURBINE MATERIALS&nbsp;Ceramics and Composites in Charleston;&nbsp;DoE Program Conference Fee is Just $95</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(137 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>ELSEWHERE SOON...</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(160 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ml06.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
PERFORMANCE MATERIALS via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

FIBERITE TO BUY HERCULES
Industry Consolidation Continues as Weaver/Prepregger
Signs Letter for $135-Million Buy of Carbon Fiber Maker

Consolidation in the advanced composites
industry continues at breakneck pace as
Tempe, Arizona-based Fiberite -- itself
freshly spun off from Britain's ICI -- has
signed a letter of intent to acquire the Utah
carbon fiber and prepreg activities of
Hercules.
    The combined company would have sales
in excess of $300 million per year, says
Fiberite CEO Jim Ashton.
    "This announcement should come as no
surprise," Hercules chairman Thomas Gossage
said in a statement. "In light of declining
defense spending, our strategy has been to
couple Composite Products with another
composites business to create a major
supplier for growing commercial markets."

Carbon to be Separate

    The sale nonetheless marks the end of
an era of Hercules in aerospace, as the
company sold its composite structures
business to Alliant Techsystems last year.
The various Hercules Composite Products
operations have annual sales of about $100
million, some 80 percent of which is believed
to be in fiber.
    "We view the graphite fiber business
effectively as a separate business and will
run it that way," Ashton told PM. He notes
that a chronic overcapacity situation in
carbon fiber has largely evaporated, with
some grades of material now in short supply.
    Fiberite already holds license rights
to some Hercules prepreg, notably 3501-6, a
high-volume epoxy with applications on U.S.
Navy aircraft.
    Fiberite, which last year absorbed the
former U.S. Polymeric business of BP
Chemicals, will be the second largest U.S.
weaver-prepregger if the pending merger with
Ciba Composites boosts Hexcel to the $600-
million annual sales level. But Fiberite will
have a clear edge in vertical integration if
it is able to acquire Hercules and its AS-4,
IM-7, and other carbon fiber lines. Hercules
is basic in carbon fiber precursor too,
making white polyacrylonitrile material at a
plant in Decatur, Ala. that is to be part of
the Fiberite buy. Hexcel and Ciba have no in-
house fiber-making capability.
    [Ciba once held just shy of 25 percent
of the Akzo-Tenax PAN-based fiber operation
in Wuppertal, Germany, relinquishing its
share when Japan's Toho Rayon took a
controlling interest in the European venture
with Akzo Nobel as a minority partner.]
    Besides Decatur and the Hercules carbon
fiber operation in Magna, Utah, Fiberite will
acquire a Hercules prepreg unit in Spain.
Hercules Composite Products employs some 470
people counting the three plants and
headquarters staff in Wilmington, Del.
Fiberite president Carl Smith, 602-730-2200;
fax 602-730-2290




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ml06.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
PERFORMANCE MATERIALS via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

SMARTweave for RTM
The U.S. Army and Delaware Institute
Have an RTM Cure-Monitoring Method

The Center for Composite Materials (CCM) at
the University of Delaware is promoting a new
process for controlling resin flow in resin
transfer molding part fabrication. The
process was developed via a collaboration
with the U.S. Army Materials Directorate.
    Dubbed SMARTweave, (SMART is an acronym
for sensors mounted as roving threads), the
process is described as "a patented system
for sensing the existence and state of cure
of the resin in RTM manufacturing. The sensor
grid, which comprises two orthogonal sets of
conductive filaments separated by one or more
preform layers, is placed within the
composite mold.
    As resin fills the mold, the gaps
between the filament planes are filled with
conductive resin, which completes an
electrical circuit. Associated
instrumentation detects the signal and can
infer resin location and, in some resins,
cure state."
    The SMARTweave process was initially
developed in the late 1980s but work has been
revived due to "the recent rise in popularity
of RTM." Recent improvements have included an
increased number of sensors and better
instrumentation.
    The process is related to smart
structures technology, too, as CCM notes that
the sensors embedded in the parts can
continue to function during the service life
of the parts.
for the U.S. Army at CCM, Bruce Fink, 302-
831-8645; fax 302-831-8525; fink@ccm.udel.com




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ml06.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
PERFORMANCE MATERIALS via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

GOETZ MASTS
Change in Racing Rules Spurs Demand
For Composite Masts for Sailing Yachts

Last year's change in IMS standards governing
the use of carbon fiber on racing yachts has
spurred demand for the material, reports
Goetz Marine Technology of Bristol, R.I.
    "For years this rule has prohibited
carbon material in masts and spars," says
Goetz marketing manager Ben Sprague. Now the
company has a new opportunity to move the
lightweight masts, which it builds via
"proprietary fiber compaction techniques"
which maintain fiber alignment and minimize
voids.
    "The parts we build at Goetz Marine
have a void content of less than 1 percent,
equal in strength yet without the
complication of an autoclave," the firm says.
Goetz claims a perfect performance record for
over 100 carbon fiber masts it has placed in
service.
Goetz Marine, Ben Sprague, 401-253-8802; fax
401-253-9395




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ml06.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
PERFORMANCE MATERIALS via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

CULVER CITY
New Products Key Former SP Gameplan;
Parent AMP Seeks to Buy More, Go Public

A new epoxy for large jet engine parts and a
fire-safe phenolic for transportation system
interiors are key to the business plan of
Culver City Composites Corporation, a new
company formed following the acquisition of
Los Angeles' SP Systems.
    The former SP prepreg operations were
bought by The American Materials &
Technologies Corporation, which is headed by
Paul Pendorf, formerly of Fiberite and XXsys
Technologies.
    The SP sale, which had been pending
since at least last summer (PM, July 17), was
wrapped up in Boston on December 20.
    The purchase price was not disclosed.
    Pendorf is acting president and general
manager of Culver effective January 1
following the resignation of SP president
John Shoemaker. Pendorf plans to recruit a
new Culver chief as he returns his attention
to the acquisition entity AMT.
    Plans are to take AMT public by mid-
year while pursuing further advanced material
acquisition opportunities, Pendorf told PM.
    Culver City hopes to capitalize on its
position in high-temperature (primarily PMR-
15) composites for jet engines with a new
epoxy, CE-9013, said to combine advantages of
250F-cure self-adhesive and 350F-cure
structural materials, says Culver R&D chief
Jerry Hartman.

'Not Autoclave-Oriented'

    The material boasts 30-day tack
retention at ambient temperatures, says
Hartman, and SP has achieved void contents as
low as 3 percent on woven fibers using
straight vacuum bagging. Many jet engine and
nacelle manufacturers use subcontractors for
relatively large parts, he says, and "a lot
of them are not autoclave-oriented."
    Culver's new phenolic, designated CPH-
2400, draws on the company's experience in
materials for aircraft interiors, says
Pendorf, but the new company plans to tackle
bus, subway, intercity train "and even cruise
ship" markets.
    The product's distinction is its fire
performance, as it has been tested for 20/20
OSU peak/total heat release as compared to
the current Federal Aviation Administration
standard of 65/65.
    "There's a crying need for this type of
material" if advanced composites are to
seriously penetrate mass transit markets,
Pendorf says.
    Both the CE-9013 epoxy and CPH-2400
phenolic will be formally unveiled this year.
One venue will be the big spring SAMPE
meeting in late March, where Culver will
abandon SP's "hospitality suite only" policy
and mount a full display.
Culver City Composites, acting president Paul
Pendorf, 310-841-5200; fax 310-837-2845




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ml06.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
PERFORMANCE MATERIALS via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

FROM PUFFS TO PUTTS
Cobra Golf and its Shaft Lines Bought
By American Brands After Tobacco Sale

American Brands has formed a new golf
powerhouse by acquiring the Cobra Golf line
of clubs as a complement to its Titleist ball
line. The overall $700-million acquisition
includes the West Coast Composites carbon
fiber autoclave shaft operation at Carlsbad,
Calif. that was bought by Cobra in 1991.
    "Together, the Cobra and Titleist
brands will strengthen American Brands'
position as the world leader in the estimated
$4 billion golf industry," said Standard &
Poor's, which noted that American Brands
bankrolled the purchase with proceeds from
divested tobacco and life insurance
businesses.

Competitor Callaway Supports the Deal

    "As a very small owner of Cobra stock,
Callaway Golf Company will vote in favor of
the proposed merger," said a statement by the
rival clubmaker. "We see strong positives
developing long term for Callaway Golf, and
for golf in general" behind the Cobra-
Titleist marriage, Callaway said
    Cobra-West Coast makes upwards of 8,000
shafts a day at Carlsbad, primarily with
carbon fiber prepreg with a limited amount of
glass in the shaft tips, says West Coast
Composites GM Rich Bayer. For 1996, "It's
going to be Newport getting the bulk of our
business," Bayer says, although West Coast
also buys from Fiberite and Toray Industries.
The company uses standard, medium and high-
modulus fiber grades from a variety of
suppliers.
    "We're one of the few companies that's
autoclave-curing graphite shafts," Bayer
says. The process yields stronger clubs
containing less material per unit, and allows
West Coast to avoid the cell-wrapping that
necessitates extra sanding and finishing
steps.

Independent in Shafts

    "We're very close to a net part out of
the autoclave," Bayer says.
    The West Coast GM also notes that Cobra
Golf is one of the few manufacturers to be
successful in full sets of golf clubs,
manufacturing and marketing both woods and
irons. Cobra also makes all its own shafts,
at West Coast: "We don't go to anybody else,"
Bayer told PM.
    Callaway, which is also based in
Carlsbad, took the opportunity of media
attention on the American Brands-Cobra deal
to talk up its own clubs, including the "Big
Bertha" line with shafts from Aldila.
    "Significant expansion in the world's
golf club markets occurs only when one
creates truly innovative golf clubs which
prove to be especially rewarding to the great
majority of golfers, Callaway said, citing
the example of Aldila graphite shafts in the
early 1980s.
    "As for the expected commercial
possibilities in enlarged metal wood club
heads made of titanium," Callaway said, the
"Great Big Bertha" driver with a Ruger
Titanium head "has already achieved 25
tournament wins this year, and is now being
used regularly by approximately 150
professional golfers on the five major
tours."

It's Not the Metal

    But, "We believe the success of Great
Big Bertha is more related to the S2H2 design
concept in conjunction with the War Bird
soleplate and the ultra-light Great Big
Bertha shaft, than with the use of any
particular metal.
    "Unless a truly superior shaft and a
unique club head with truly great design is
used, the metal itself is not the answer,"
Callaway said. "This has been true with
stainless steel and we think that this will
be equally true with titanium."
Cobra-West Coast, GM Rich Bayer, 619-431-
9336; fax 619-431-9680




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ml06.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
PERFORMANCE MATERIALS via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

ALDILA ACTION, TOO
Premiere Shaftmaker Has New President
And a Highly Automated Finishing Line

Former Hillerich & Bradsby Powerbilt golf
president Ed Abrain took over as Aldila
president last week as Gary Barbera assumed
the position of chairman of the board.
    San Diego-based Aldila has also
instituted a 100-foot-long, 140-second,
automated shaft finishing inspection line at
its Poway facility . The line has 10
interchangeable modules and will help provide
"greater consistency and repeatability for
our customers," Barbera said in a statement.
    Also new at Poway are an automatic
shaft wash/dry system, an automatic mandrel
clean/release system, and two conveyorized
paint curing systems.
    The Poway enhancements were engineered
by an Aldila team headed by Lisa Burgett
(manager of manufacturing engineering) and
Kevin Egelhoff (product design manager).
Their two-year project included "three months
of production testing prior to full
implementation," the company says.
    "The consistency of the blank shafts we
have been producing is impressive," Burgett
said in a release.
    Aldila says it's invested some $7
million in automation over the past three
years.
Aldila, John Castle, 619-592-0404; fax 619-
592-0403




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ml06.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
PERFORMANCE MATERIALS via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

THIOKOL -- THE PREPREGGER
Present Posture Can Be Traced to Amoco's
Exit;
Rocketmaker Offers Wovens on All Fiber Types

Thiokol's new presence as a prepregger is
based in large part on technology it
developed in the wake of Amoco's departure
from the prepreg business, when Thiokol was
forced to step up development of its own
matrix material for the Castor 120 solid
rocket motor.
    Thiokol replaced Amoco's ERL-1908 epoxy
with its own UF-3323 material for the Castor
120, which is filament wound with premium T-
1000G carbon fiber from Toray Industries. The
change was made some two and a half years
ago.

Tailored Properties, Room-Temperature Storage

    UF-3323 is now the basis for a family
of prepregs available both as towpreg for
filament winding or as woven broadgoods, says
Thiokol's Rolf Johns. Prepregs are made at
Brigham City, Utah.
    The company works with several
suppliers of dry woven fabric, and has
prepregged aramid, carbon (both PAN- and
pitch-based) and glass fiber from nearly all
of the fiber suppliers, including vendors of
large-tow carbon fiber material such as Akzo
Fortafil and Zoltek.
    As for resin, "We will tailor the
formulations to what people need processing-
wise," Johns says. The original UF-3323
required a 24-hour cure at 270F, he says by
way of example; now Thiokol offers UF-3325
with a four-hour cure. Another key selling
point is a product line that requires no
refrigeration, with room-temperature shelf
life "measured in years, not weeks" (PM,
December 18).
    Besides the UF-3323 towpreg for case
filament-winding, Thiokol now employs its own
woven prepreg for the Castor 120 skirts. It
also supplies prepreg as the cosmetic outer
layer for ski poles.
    The company hopes to mount a display at
this year's SAMPE spring meeting in Anaheim.
Thiokol, Rolf Johns, 801-863-6441; fax 801-
863-2271




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ml06.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
PERFORMANCE MATERIALS via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

NOW IT'S ITALY
Lanxide Has Another Deal for Brakes,
This Time it's MMCs for Italy's Brembo

Delaware-based Lanxide, a specialist in
ceramic-reinforced wear materials, has
notched another licensing deal with an
automotive brake manufacturer. Brembo, a
$200-million company in Curno, Italy, will
use Lanxide knowhow to make metal-matrix
composite brake disks and drums in Europe.
    Lanxide late last year publicized a
deal allowing several companies to make
ceramic-reinforced brake components at the
Lanxide facility in Newark, including Japan's
Nihon Cement and Lanxide affiliate Kanematsu.
Ceramic-reinforced aluminum rotors using
Lanxide material are on Britain's Lotus Elise
sports car. The Lotus parts are made by
Waupaca Foundry, a Lanxide licensee in
Waupaca, Wisc.
    Lanxide has a pressureless metal
infiltration technology, dubbed "Primex," it
says "has enabled it to engineer a new class
of high performance materials which offer
superior combinations of properties tailored
to meet specific customer needs."
    Brembo's license allows it to make
Lanxide-style silicon carbide or alumina
particulate-reinforced aluminum components
via the Primex process or by conventional
casting, says Lanxide corporate development
VP Mike Hollins. Brembo makes brake parts and
systems for cars, trucks and motorcycles,
supplying both OEMs and the aftermarket.
    Lanxide also said last month that A.P.
Green Industries had acquired a 51-percent
interest in its high performance refractory
materials business, Lanxide ThermoComposites,
Inc.
Lanxide, VP Mike Hollins, 302-456-6213; fax
302-454-1712
Brembo, Roberto Vavassori, +39-35-605-223;
fax 35-605-590
Waupaca Foundry, 715-258-6611; fax 715-258-
6131




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ml06.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
PERFORMANCE MATERIALS via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

'PURGE'
Past Mistakes Done, Mistakemakers Gone,
Says Quadrax: 'Basics Have Been Rebuilt'

Quadrax is still losing money, but revenues
are up dramatically, and the yearlong
president of the Rhode Island thermoplastic
specialist says the turnaround "reflects the
impact of actions taken to bring to an end
the effects of the decisions made by those
who previously controlled the company."
    Quadrax lost just under $7.04 million
for the first nine months of 1995 compared
with a loss of $5.96 million for the first
nine months of 1994. But sales were up to
$3.49 million for the nine-month period last
year as compared to sales of just $521,000
for the first nine months of 1994.

Cannondale Bicycles and Bicycle Parts

    Most of the Quadrax loss -- $4.12
million -- thus far for 1995 is from the
third quarter as the company made payments
related to loans and stock obligations
leftover from previous management, and paid
compensation to departed executes and
consultants, president Jim Palermo has
advised stockholders. "We have purged the
problems of the past," he said.
    The company has shifted away from high-
end thermoplastics, employing nylon-matrix
composites for sporting goods applications
and even more economical materials like
polypropylene where warranted.
    Quadrax has a heavy emphasis on tennis
racquets, but is also involved in lacrosse
sticks, athletic protective gear, and, more
recently, in bicycles, where it is working
with Cannondale on a monocoque composite
bicycle frame. Quadrax is also gearing up to
supply such bicycle parts as thermoplastic
composite seat posts, handlebars and wheels.
    Quadrax has licensed its manufacturing
process to Taiwan's Topkey for tennis
racquets in what Palermo calls the first of
"a limited number of licensing arrangements."
The Topkey license may be expanded from
tennis racquets to other "rolled tube"
products.
Quadrax, 401-683-6600; fax 401-683-6606




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ml06.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
PERFORMANCE MATERIALS via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

RECOVERY
A Better Market Situation for Graphite
Prompts 14-Percent Soficar Expansion

Soficar, an affiliate of Japan's Toray
Industries that makes carbon fiber in Abidos,
France, is expanding its production
capability by just over 14 percent, from 700
to 800 metric tons (from 1.42 to 1.62 million
pounds) per year.
    Soficar (Societe des Fibres de Carbone)
cites an international carbon fiber market
recovery and forecasts for increased
industrial use of the high-strength material.

No New Investment

    The carbon fiber company further says
that it will effect the expansion "due to an
optimized working organization ... without
any new investment, and without any process
modification."
    "This additional capacity enables
Soficar to reaffirm its leadership [of the]
European carbon fiber market and consolidate
the number one position in this field of
Toray Industries," says a statement.
    The expansion will give the Toray group
a worldwide production capability for 3,700
metric tons per year of carbon fiber, just
under 7.5 million pounds.
Toray-Soficar, Cedric Abad, +33-59-60-71-08;
fax +33-59-60-71-10




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ml06.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
PERFORMANCE MATERIALS via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

35,000 LAKHS
Owens-Corning Teams with Mahindra
For $100-Million Fiber Plant in India

U.S.-based Owens-Corning disclosed plans last
month for a glass fiber reinforcements plant
in India via a joint venture with the
Mahindra Group.
    The plant is planned for Taloja, north
of Bombay, with a total investment of some
3.5 billion Indian rupees, or $100 million
U.S. Initial capacity upon completion in 1998
will be 30,000 metric tons, or more than 66
million pounds of glass fiber per year.
    The plant will be expandable to 90,000
metric tons of material per year. The
Mahindra partnership and the plant at Taloja
mark O-C's first direct participation in the
Indian market.
    "We have targeted India as a strategic
growth segment and intend to be a long-term
direct participant in this important and
growing economy," O-C chairman and CEO Glen
Hiner said in statement.
    "It is important to partner with the
right local firm in India, and the Mahindra
Group is an excellent choice. We look forward
to working closely with them to develop our
business," Hiner said.
    Financial details were not disclosed.
    About 25 percent of the production from
the Taloja plant will be sold in India, the
partners say, "and the rest will be available
for the global composites market." Most of
the production from India will be sold in
Southeast Asia and the Middle East, with the
automotive industry singled out by Madhusudan
Dewan, managing director of Owens-Corning's
operations in India.

Marketing in '95, a Tech Center in '96

    O-C earlier last year established
offices in the south-central Indian city of
Bangalore and secured land rights for the
Taloja plant site near Bombay.
    "Owens-Corning will establish an
Application Development Center in Bangalore
in 1996," Dewan said, "to help companies
operating in India develop new end-use
products using building and glass composite
materials and technology."
    The announcement last month was O-C's
third during the quarter detailing plans to
increase capacity for glass fiber over the
next three years. In early October, the
company unveiled plans to add 45,000 metric
tons of capacity to existing facilities in
Brazil and South Korea. Later that month,
Owens-Corning reported plans to add 135,000
metric tons of capacity to existing
facilities in Western Europe and North
America.
    The three total well over 460 million
pounds of new production capability.

Capacity Seen Stimulating Use

    "We expect the use of composite
materials to continue to grow and we are
actively developing plans to support that
growth with additional capacity. The
expansion plans being developed now are over
and above the increases we announced earlier
this year," said Carl Hedlund, Owens-Corning
president for Asia Pacific. "We are committed
to supporting the growth of the global
composites business."
    The market for composites is expected
to grow by about 5 percent per year in North
America and Western Europe, and by more than
10 percent per year in Asia and the Pacific,
Hedlund said, predicting that O-C's
commitment will encourage new advanced
materials applications.
    O-C has annual sales of some $3.4
billion with 17,000 employees in more than
100 facilities in 30 countries around the
world.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ml06.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
PERFORMANCE MATERIALS via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

ARMY SATELLITES
UAVs and Space Control Among Areas
Of Interest as the U.S. Army Floats a BAA

Unmanned Aerial Vehicles and innovative
control systems are among the areas eligible
for funding under the U.S. Army Space and
Strategic Defense Command's Army Space
Applications Technology Program (Huntsville,
Ala.).
    UAVs are generally built with
composites while the integration of flywheel
energy and power storage devices with
traditional gyroscopic control may afford
designers a new way to cut space platform
weight or enhance satellite capabilities.
    USASSDC has floated a Broad Agency
Announcement stating that it expects to make
awards beginning early in 1997 for six- to
24-month projects "anticipated not to exceed
$1 million per contract."
USASSDC, Linda Bentley, 205-955-3000; fax
205-955-4240




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ml06.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
PERFORMANCE MATERIALS via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

Thiokol and The Carlyle Group have closed on

Thiokol and The Carlyle Group have closed on
their $750-million purchase of Howmet
Corporation from France's Pechiney. Thiokol
holds the minority stake in the venture but
according to the agreement with Carlyle can
buy out the merchant banker in three years.
Each organization has reportedly anted $100
million, "financing the $550 million balance
with non-recourse debt and the issuance of
preferred stock."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ml06.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
PERFORMANCE MATERIALS via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

Earl Benton is joining Toray Industries as

Earl Benton is joining Toray Industries as
national sales and marketing manager, tasked
to help the Japanese company move output from
its Seattle-area plant beyond aerospace and
sporting goods. Benton has worked the
advanced composites marketplace for firms
including Hercules, BASF and BP Chemical
Advanced Materials. He starts for Toray next
Monday, January 15. Toray, 206-846-1777; fax
206-846-3897.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ml06.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
PERFORMANCE MATERIALS via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

Airbus is contracting with Malaysian

Airbus is contracting with Malaysian
officials for manufacture of composite
aircraft components, states a Reuter report,
suggesting that the Europeans are trying to
mollify the Asians for a denial of increased
landing rights in Paris for Malaysian
Airlines. Malaysia sees composite parts
manufacturing as a way to boost its
participation in the world aircraft industry
(PM, June 19, 1995). Military spending by
Asian Pacific nations will come to $40
billion over the next five years, the
Malaysian defense minister said at a
conference at last month's Langkawi air show.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ml06.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
PERFORMANCE MATERIALS via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

General Motors said at presstime that it will

General Motors said at presstime that it will
go ahead with sales of its Impact electric
vehicle, reportedly via its network of Saturn
dealerships. The Impact is an aluminum-
spaceframed vehicle with polymeric body
panels; its commercial kickoff is a key
advance to the nascent electric vehicle
sector, which is expected to evolve into a
large-scale consumer of lightweight composite
materials.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ml06.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
PERFORMANCE MATERIALS via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

BUILDING BRIDGES
Getting Composites Approved for Structures
Poses Material Durability Database Challenges

The infrastructure, both new construction and
seismic retrofits, represents an almost
infinite market for composite materials,
where boosters feel they can bring bottom
line and life cycle advantages into play, and
even, largely because of weight savings,
effect significant reductions in overall
project costs.
    But infrastructure markets have been
slow to develop and engineers are learning
that a systems approach involving materials,
processes and application mechanisms, as well
as committed construction industry partners,
is the only way that advanced materials will
be accepted.
    "It's the total system that's going to
be qualified," says Fiberite's Ray Williams,
who has been pursuing the infrastructure
market for composites for eight years.
"That's the material, and the process used,
and the apparatus. It's the total system."

Composites Seen Process-Dependent

    "Composite materials can strengthen
structural elements, such as columns or
beams, and may possess economic potential in
retrofitting deficient structures," Mohsen
Sultan of the Engineering Services Center of
the California Department of Transportation,
or Caltrans, says in a paper delivered at a
federally sponsored seismic retrofit
conference last month in San Diego (the paper
was co-authored by Gary Hawkins of The
Aerospace Corporation). "Unfortunately, the
physical properties of composites are
extremely process dependent and may change
from batch to batch and from contractor to
contractor.
    "As a result, composites cannot be
procured like steel, which has very well
known and reproducible properties," Sultan
said. "Even though the [composites] industry
is rich in data related to aerospace and
marine applications, the data we need,
relevant to civil engineering applications,
is very limited."
    Caltrans, accordingly, has devised a
testing scheme aimed at developing standards
for composite building applications with an
initial focus on seismic retrofits. The
overall framework includes a $180,000 federal
grant for column testing at the University of
California at Irvine, the first-ever
administration of testing fees by SAMPE (the
Society for the Advancement of Material and
Process Engineering), and the active
participation of The Aerospace Corporation to
evaluate materials, particularly with an eye
to their long-term durability.

Five Organizations in Testing

    The five organizations that have thus
far contracted with SAMPE for $25,000 worth
of testing by The Aerospace Corporation are

 --> Mitsubishi/Obayashi,

 --> Tonen/Niccho Iwai,

 --> Newport Adhesives & Composites,

 --> Hexcel-Fyfe, and

 --> The American Materials & Technologies
Corporation.
    "The reproducibility and durability of
these systems does exist," says SAMPE
technical director Charlie Hamermesh. "We
just want to confirm it."
    The process is slow, but the stakes are
high. "We don't want to have a mistake made
and ruin it for everybody," says The
Aerospace Corporation's Gary Hawkins. A
highly visible bridge disaster would be the
worst possible thing if linked in the
public's eye with composites, but even a less
obtrusive mistake that required a building
job to be repeated could cast a pall over
composites in the eyes of the civil
engineering community.
Caltrans is Critical
    Another concern is that standards be
developed that encompass the whole range of
composite seismic retrofit techniques. "We'd
rather see a performance spec than a process
spec," says Hamermesh.
    "The State wants to do this and push it
through," Hawkins says of the Caltrans
effort. "We just want to do it carefully."
Hawkins notes too that if the composites
industry can convince Caltrans of the worth
of advanced materials, then other markets
will fall into place. Once Caltrans gives its
nod, he says, "not only do all the other
states fall into line, but a lot of countries
follow too. They really do lead the way."
SAMPE, Charlie Hamermesh, 818-331-0616, ext
602; fax 818-332-8929
Aerospace Corporation, Dr. Gary Hawkins, 310-
336-7379; fax 310-336-1474
Fiberite, Ray Williams, 619-489-8589




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ml06.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
PERFORMANCE MATERIALS via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

TURBINE MATERIALS
Ceramics and Composites in Charleston;
DoE Program Conference Fee is Just $95

The Advanced Turbine Systems Materials
Workshop will take place February 13-14 at
the Hawthorn Suites Hotel in Charleston, S.C.
    The Department of Energy meeting is co-
sponsored by the South Carolina Energy
Research and development Center and the Oak
Ridge National Laboratory.
    Approximately two dozen papers will
provide an overview of the Advanced Turbine
Systems program, an eight-year, $700-million
effort funded by DoE's Office of Fossil
Energy and Office of Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy.
    The ATS target is cleaner, cheaper and
more efficient gas turbine systems for
utility and industrial power generation and
related applications; "a significant task of
this program involves the development of
enabling material technology," organizers
say.
    Sessions are planned on casting and
alloy development, coatings, and ceramics and
ceramic-matrix composites.
    The conference fee is just $95.
ATS Workshop, 410-290-0370; fax 301-621-3329




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ml06.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
PERFORMANCE MATERIALS via NewsNet
January 8, 1996

ELSEWHERE SOON...


January 15-17, ICCI '96, The First
International Conference on Composites in
Infrastructure, Tucson, Ariz. Organized by
the National Science Foundation and the
University of Arizona. Prof. Hamid
Saadatmanesh, 602-621-2148; fax 602-621-2550;
hamid@ccit.arizona.edu.

January 18-21, National Association of Music
Merchants at the Anaheim Convention Center.
Some 50,000 expected for trade-only
exhibition. $50 on-site registration fee.
NAMM, Amy Edgington, 619-438-8001, ext 119;
fax 619-438-7327.

January 22-24, Composites Manufacturing '96,
sponsored by the Society of Manufacturing
Engineers. Marriott Hotel at the Anaheim
Convention Center. SME, 313-271-1500, ext
629; fax 313-271-2861.

January 26-29, PGA Merchandise Show, Orlando,
Fla. Sponsored by the Professional Golfers'
Association of America. PGA, Susan McMillan,
407-624-8400; fax 624-8585.

February 4-7, The Sporting Goods "Super
Show," Georgia World Congress Center,
Atlanta. More than 3,000 manufacturers.
Sporting Goods Manufacturers Association,
407-842-4100; fax 407-863-8984.

February 5-7, SPI Composites Institute's 51st
Annual Conference & Exhibition. Cincinnati
Convention Center, Cincinnati, Ohio. SPI,
Peggy Stabach, 212-351-5410; fax 212-370-
1731.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-36</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B019-260</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ml09.html 205.156.212.5 19970122034843 text/html 5156
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:46:54 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:48 GMT
Content-length: 4970
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ml09.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
PLASPEC PLASTICS NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
January 2, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>ACQUISITION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>BAYER FINALIZES ACQUISITION OF MONSANTO ABS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(64 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ADDITIVES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>NEW TALC ANTIBLOCK CONCENTRATE FOR LDPE/LLDPE FILM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(99 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>BLOW MOLDING</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>NEW STACK MOLD DOUBLES OUTPUT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(102 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>EXTRUSION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>DAVIS-STANDARD INTRODUCES TWIN-SCREWS FOR PVC</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(86 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>LIQUID CRYSTAL POLYMERS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>NEW LCP AVAILABLE FROM HOECHST CELANESE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(94 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
PLASPEC PLASTICS NEWS via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

BAYER FINALIZES ACQUISITION OF MONSANTO ABS

     Executives at Pittsburgh-based Bayer Corp. were busy over
the holidays preparing for former Monsanto employees to return
to work today as Bayer Corp. employees.  Bayer has finalized
the acquisition of Monsanto's ABS business and plans to mark
the occasion with a Bayer sign unveiling and reception at the
Addyston, Ohio plant.

     The acquisition moves some 1,400 Monsanto employees
worldwide to Bayer's rolls today.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
PLASPEC PLASTICS NEWS via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

NEW TALC ANTIBLOCK CONCENTRATE FOR LDPE/LLDPE FILM

     A new talc antiblock concentrate for LDPE (low density
polyethylene) and LLDPE (linear low density polyethylene)
blown and cast film reportedly does not contain residual
silica and therefore does not need the hazardous labeling
required for products that contain diatomaceous earth.
Product 100520 from Ampacet Corp., Tarrytown, N.Y., is a 20%-
active concentrate in an LDPE carrier.  At typical use levels
of 2.5%, the product can provide 5000 ppm of active antiblock
in films exhibiting 96^ light transmission and 12.8% haze,
Ampacet says. The antiblock is also said to combine the
properties of silica with those of magnesium silicate.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
PLASPEC PLASTICS NEWS via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

NEW STACK MOLD DOUBLES OUTPUT

     A novel stack-mold concept for a wheel-type blow molding
machine permits twice the output of a dual-parison machine
while using no more clamp force than is required for a single
parison.  The original version of this stack mold from
Wilmington Machinery, Inc., Wilmington, N.C., used a
stationary center platen.  In the newest version, the center
platen moves, providing better parison positioning, according
to Wilmington president Russ LaBelle.

     Although the machine concept was first discussed at NPE
'94, Wilmington delivered its first stack-mold rotary machine
in the second quarter of 1995.  The machine has an output of
20,000 bottles/hr., the company says.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
PLASPEC PLASTICS NEWS via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

DAVIS-STANDARD INTRODUCES TWIN-SCREWS FOR PVC

     Davis-Standard Corp., Pawcatuck, Conn., will soon launch
its first parallel twin screw extruders for PVC windows,
siding, and pipe.  The screw technology was developed by
Repiquet of France, which Davis-Standard acquired last year.
An all-U.S.-made 90-mm extruder designed for 1200 lb/hr. will
be available by the end of February and a 115-mm model will be
offered later this year.  Both will have approximately 25:1
L/D  .A. 135-mm model for over 2000 lb/hr is due to come out
in 1997.  Davis-Standard previously offered 40-65 mm conical
twin-screws.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
PLASPEC PLASTICS NEWS via NewsNet
January 2, 1996

NEW LCP AVAILABLE FROM HOECHST CELANESE

     Hoechst Celanese, Summit, N.J. has commercialized a
higher performance version of its VECTRA E130 developed
specifically for molded circuit boards.  E130i offers improved
thermal stability and 50 percent regrind approval for circuit
boards.  It is suitable for use in long, thin-walled
electronic connectors that are fabricated using SMT soldering.

     Molding temperatures can also be reduced about 15C from
E130 and it has a wide processing window.  Like E130, it is UL
94 V-0 rated in sections 0.8 mm inch thick.  Properties and
characteristics of E130i are available in the PLASPEC
Materials Selection database.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-37</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B019-303</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ml01.html 205.156.212.5 19970122034902 text/html 69825
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:47:03 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:49 GMT
Content-length: 69638
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ml01.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996   <BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>CORRECTION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>DEC 28, 1995, METALS WEEK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(45 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ELSEWHERE IN ALUMINUM...</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>ALCAN RAISES JANUARY PRICE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(41 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>BRAZIL TO SEE FOUR MORE CAN PLANTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(70 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Intalco buys more power: Intalco Aluminum Corp of Ferndale, Wash., said it</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(169 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>KRASNOYARSK FACING LOSSES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(129 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>INDIAN AL EXPORTS UP, EARNINGS DOWN...</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(166 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI> ...ALUMINUM OUTPUT RISING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(184 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>JAPAN'S ALUMINUM IMPORTS DECLINE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(114 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ELSEWHERE ALUMINUM...IN</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>ORMET CLOSE TO POWER DEAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(160 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ELSEWHERE IN FERROALLOYS...</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>HC FECR PRICES SOFTER AGAIN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(89 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>JAPAN BUYS TRANSALLOYS SIMN AT $750/MT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(153 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>JAPAN COBALT IMPORTS DOWN ON 1994</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(87 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>Japan nickel imports fall: Japan's customs-cleared unalloyed unwrought</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(110 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>COBALT TO STAY AROUND $30/LB NEAR TERM--DRI</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(113 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>COPPER</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>CODELCO SERVES WRIT ON SOGEMIN METALS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(640 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>ZALDIVAR PREPARES FOR EXPANDED PRODUCTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(724 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>WARBURG SAYS COPPER HAS PEAKED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(80 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ELSEWHERE IN LIGHT METALS...</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>JAPAN TI SPONGE EXPORTS UP...</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(157 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI> ...MILL PRODUCT EXPORTS DOWN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(94 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>JAPANESE MAGNESIUM IMPORTS RISE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(116 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>TIN</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>Indonesian tin producer PT Tambang Timah expects an increase in its tin</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(265 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ELSEWHERE IN LEAD & ZINC...</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>ZINC PRODUCTION DOWN IN NOVEMBER--EZI</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(135 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>JAPAN ZINC OUTPUT DOWN, SALES UP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(144 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>METALEUROP SEES IMPROVED TURNOVER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(142 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>PERU ZINC OUTPUT TO GROW</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(55 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ECONOMICS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>ECONOMIC GROWTH TO CONTINUE IN 1996 WITH LOW INFLATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1226 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ALUMINUM</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>CHINA FACING 1-MIL MT ALUMINA DEFICIT IN 1996</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(632 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>65 YEARS AGO...</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>PLENTY HAPPENED IN THE WORLD OF METALS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(50 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PRECIOUS METALS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>RHODIUM PRICES PLUNGE TO 22-YEAR LOWS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(572 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ELSEWHERE IN COPPER...</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>US GROUP BUYS MAGMA SHARES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(133 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>SPCC INVESTING $600-MIL IN ILO SMELTER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(92 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>PRINCETON MINING GETS OKAY FOR BC MINE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(121 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>METALS WEEK PRICE INDEX</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>METALS WEEK PRICE INDEX</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(47 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FERROALLOYS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#34"><LI>US SILICON IMPORTERS WIN TEMPORARY ASSURANCE ON DUITES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(348 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>COMMODITIES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#35"><LI>BRAZILIAN MERGER WILL PRODUCE MINING GIANT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(504 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>LIGHT METALS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#36"><LI>US COMMERCE DEPT AMENDS INTERLINK MAGNESIUM DUTY ORDER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(235 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ELSEWHERE IN PRECIOUS METALS...</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#37"><LI>PRICE ADJUSTMENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(34 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#38"><LI>EAGLE MINING POURS FIRST GOLD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(93 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#39"><LI>MK GOLD WRITES OFF JEROOY PROJECT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(119 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>LEAD & ZINC</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#40"><LI>US EPA UNCONCERNED OVER LEAD-ACID BATTERY COMBUSTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(286 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MONTHLY PRICES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#41"><LI>MONTHLY PRICES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(101 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PRICING FOLDOUT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#42"><LI>DAILY PRICES -- WEEK ENDED DECEMBER 29, 1995</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(28 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#43"><LI>WEEKLY PRICES -- WEEK ENDED DECEMBER 29, 1995</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(28 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

DEC 28, 1995, METALS WEEK

US secondary aluminum producer Alreco Metals owes $56,495.32 of accrued
vacation pay to terminated employees, not $56.5-mil as stated in the Dec 28
edition of Platt's Metals Week. The other debt figures listed were correct
according to bankruptcy filings.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

ALCAN RAISES JANUARY PRICE

Alcan will increase its US aluminum transaction prices 1 cents for January
shipments. The company's remelt ingot price will be 93 cents/lb, with
extrusion billet at the company's standard 10 cents premium rising to
$1.03/lb.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

BRAZIL TO SEE FOUR MORE CAN PLANTS

American National Can Co has announced plans to open four more factories in
Brazil by 2000, even before completing its first factory in Extrema, Minas
Gerais. ANC plans to invest $310-mil in the four units. Each factory will
have a 1.5-bil unit/year capacity on its first two production lines and an
additional 800-mil to 900-mil cans with the installation of a third
production line.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

Intalco buys more power: Intalco Aluminum Corp of Ferndale, Wash., said it

Intalco buys more power: Intalco Aluminum Corp of Ferndale, Wash., said it
has agreed to buy 770 GWh of energy and up to 145 MW of capacity per year
for five years from Powerex, the export arm of BC Hydro of Vancouver, to
diversify its power supply from the Bonneville Power Administration. The
deal went into effect Nov 22 and will continue through Sep 30, 2000, with
the power moving over BPA lines. Intalco has a 460 MW load when at full
production. It signed a new five-year power supply contract with BPA this
fall which goes into effect Apr 1 for 360MW for 12 months a year. From Apr
15-Jul 15, BPA is selling Intalco 450 MW. BPA already had given its
directly served industrials permission to buy a portion of their power
starting Oct 1, 1995 from other suppliers. The price for power was not
disclosed, but Powerex said it is competitive with current markets and
BPA's price of 2.26 cents/kWh.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

KRASNOYARSK FACING LOSSES

The Krasnoyarsk Metallurgical Plant (KraMZ), one of Russia's biggest
processed aluminum producers, could post year-end losses of around
Rb100-bil ($215-mil), a senior company official told the Interfax news
agency. KraMZ financial manager Alexander Bocharov said output in October
and November was down by half on the previous year, resulting in losses of
Rb42-bil by the start of December. The downturn had been caused mainly by
an imbalance between domestic and world prices for primary aluminum,
Bocharov said. Costs inside Russia had soared to $2,500/mt against
$1,600/mt for the London quoted price because of rising electricity, rail
and other charges, he said. In 1994, KraMZ produced 67,660mt of aluminum
ingots and 21,570mt of rolled aluminum products, of which 23.4% and 33.1%
respectively were exported.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

INDIAN AL EXPORTS UP, EARNINGS DOWN...

India's aluminum exports will rise to about 105,000mt in the current fiscal
year ending in March 1996, from 91,000mt in the previous fiscal year, but
earnings are unlikely to rise because of a fall in international prices,
according to Chemicals and Allied Products Export Promotion Council
executive director D Kar. Kar said exports in the previous 1994-95 were
valued at Rupees 3.87-bil (about $112.2-mil), but this fiscal year's
increased export volume is only expected to earn Rupees 3.9-bil. Although
the aluminum industry is keen to expand its existing capacity on optimistic
views of the future, an uncertain electricity supply and volatile aluminum
prices on the LME have defied financial projections. Indian Aluminium Co,
which had been slowly putting its Belgaum smelter in Karnataka back into
production, has again run into acute power cuts, Kar said. A recent
decision by National Aluminium Co to stop all sales because of its problems
with excise authorities will also affect India's exports, he said.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

 ...ALUMINUM OUTPUT RISING

Kar also said that India's aluminum industry stood a good chance of earning
more from alumina exports in the current fiscal year. This year's alumina
exports will total about 500,000mt, flat from the previous fiscal year, but
earnings might jump to Rupees 3-bil, from Rupees 2.3-bil a year before
because of this year's soaring prices. Meanwhile, India's aluminum metal
output during November 1995 was 41,362mt, below the official target of
43,583mt, according to the latest data from the federal mines ministry. The
total output from April to November in the current fiscal year was
340,480mt, compared with 308,644mt for the corresponding year-earlier
period. State-owned National Aluminium Co Ltd reported April-November 1995
output of 123,480mt, up from year-earlier levels of 112,026mt. Bharat
Aluminium Co Ltd, another state-run company, reported April-November 1995
output at 61,194mt, up from 60,678mt for the same 1994 period. The two
private-sector producers--Hindalco and Indian Aluminium Co Ltd--also
reported higher output. Hindalco's April-November 1995 output was 112,924mt
compared with 106,684mt for the corresponding period last year, while Indal
reported a sharp increase to 42,814mt from 29,256mt.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

JAPAN'S ALUMINUM IMPORTS DECLINE

Japan's customs-cleared unwrought aluminum imports reached 202,878mt in
November, down from 220,680mt in October, and down from 247,622mt in
November 1994, the Ministry of Finance announced. Slow domestic demand, as
well as seasonal factors, reduced the imports, one trader said. Of the
total, imports of standard aluminum (Al max. 99.9%) reached 143,185mt in
November, up from 141,881mt in October, but down from 179,896mt in November
1994. High-grade aluminum imports were 10,085mt in November, down from
16,185mt in October, but up from 8,645mt in November 1994. Imports of
unwrought aluminum alloy were 49,608mt in November, down from 62,614mt in
October, and down from 59,081mt in November 1994, MOF said.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

ORMET CLOSE TO POWER DEAL

Ohio Power is ``making some pretty good progress'' in negotiating a power
supply contract extension with Ormet's Hannibal, Ohio, aluminum complex and
is expected to sign an agreement soon, according to Henry Fayne, controller
for American Electric Power, Ohio Power's parent company. Ohio Power's
30-year contract to supply 536MW of electricity to the 255,000mt/year
primary aluminum smelter at Hannibal is scheduled to expire in March 1997.
Earlier this year, Ormet issued a request for proposals to find a long-term
replacement for Ohio Power, saying it was shopping around for less
expensive power. The two companies are believed to be close to an agreement
to extend the 1997 contract by an additional two or three years. Fayne
declined to comment on whether the extension will include rate concessions.
He told Platt's his company also is working with Ormet on a second front.
``We're trying to see how a third-party supply agreement would work,'' he
said.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

HC FECR PRICES SOFTER AGAIN

In a generally quiet week for the US bulk alloys markets, high-carbon
ferrochrome prices weakened further on the news that a US consumer had
bought a bargeload of material at a price below 62 cents/lb. The Platt's
Metals Week dealer price was lowered to 62-65 cents/lb, as the sale in
question also included a prompt payment discount. Elsewhere, prices were
generally static, with low-carbon ferrochrome prices continuing to hold up
relatively well; 0.15% C material reportedly changed hands at prices around
$1.10/lb FOB.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

JAPAN BUYS TRANSALLOYS SIMN AT $750/MT

Japanese traders have contracted to buy a total of 1,750mt of
silicomanganese from South Africa's Transalloys at $750/mt CIF Japan, up
from the current $650/mt, provided the shipments are made in time to meet
Japan's GSP duty free customs-clearance deadline, traders said. ``Since the
1996 [GSP] applications will start Apr 1, the cargo must be ready at a
Japanese port by the end of March,'' said one trader. If they fail to meet
the deadline, buyers would have to pay a 3% duty, or $22.50/mt, on top of
the agreed price. Transalloys apparently offered 3,000-4,000mt of the
metal, but only succeeded in finding buyers for 1,750mt. ``Prices of
$750/mt are still too high for us, duty unpaid or not,'' said one consumer.
Meanwhile, Samancor has yet to settle its Q1 price talks with Japanese
buyers; the company is also looking for a $100 price hike to $750/mt.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

JAPAN COBALT IMPORTS DOWN ON 1994

Japan's customs-cleared unwrought cobalt imports reached 444mt in November,
up 20.7% from 368mt in October, but down 1.3% from 450mt in November 1994,
the Ministry of Finance announced. Imports for January-November totaled
4,950mt, down 3.9% from 5,149mt for the same period in 1994. Of the total,
imports from Zaire rose 20.8% to 1,220mt from 1,010mt. Imports from Canada
also increased 20.2%, to 876mt from 729mt. However, eleven-month imports
from Zambia fell 37.7% to 712mt from 1,143mt for the same 1994 period.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

Japan nickel imports fall: Japan's customs-cleared unalloyed unwrought

Japan nickel imports fall: Japan's customs-cleared unalloyed unwrought
nickel imports reached 4,798mt in November, down from 5,501mt in October,
and down from 5,187mt in November 1994, the Ministry of Finance announced.
Imports from Russia reached 1,666mt in November, down sharply from 2,388mt
the previous month, but up from 1,088mt a year earlier. Imports totaled
57,837mt for the January-November period, up from 42,637mt for the first
eleven months of 1994. Imports from Russia jumped to 21,675mt from 9,205mt.
Meanwhile, Japan's customs-cleared ferronickel imports reached 3,214mt in
November, down from 5,911mt from November 1994. January-November imports
totaled 60,029mt, up from 46,562mt for the same 1994 period.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

COBALT TO STAY AROUND $30/LB NEAR TERM--DRI

DRI-McGraw-Hill has revised upward its projection for 1996 cobalt prices to
some extent, but remains bearish for the longer term. While DRI states that
markets now appear to remain in deficit through most of 1996, for the
longer term, it expects African production will rebound. New production
from a number of sources will impact the markets slowly, in all likelihood
not until 1998, with the strongest effect in 1999. ``This additional
material will close the gap between production and consumption and could
throw markets into a surplus,'' DRI said, adding: ``As a result of the new
supplies, prices are now forecast to fall across 1998 and 1999.''

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

CODELCO SERVES WRIT ON SOGEMIN METALS

(London, Santiago)
Chilean state-owned copper-molybdenum producer Codelco has launched its
first formal overseas legal action in response to the company's 1994
futures trading losses. London-based lawyers Herbert Smith, acting on
behalf of Codelco, confirmed Friday that a writ was served on LME
ring-dealer Sogemin Metals Ltd on Dec 21, alleging conspiracy to defraud
the Chilean company. Both Sogemin Metals Ltd and US subsidiary Sogemin
Metals Inc--which acted as introducing broker--are named in the action,
together with two Chilean companies who acted as Sogemin agents in Chile,
and individuals dealing with former Codelco trader Juan Pablo Davila. No
specific financial claim is made in the writ.
Codelco's losses in the 1994 copper futures trading debacle are estimated
at $174-mil, and the claim is expected to cover ``a significant part of
Codelco's losses'', according to Tim Parkes, partner at Herbert Smith.
   He said he expected further legal proceedings to be instigated by
Codelco against other trading companies in both London and New York as the
investigation into the losses continues, but could not give a timescale for
these actions. Sogemin, a subsidiary of Belgium's Union Miniere, now has 14
days from the serving of the writ to decide whether it will defend the
action, and a further two-to-three weeks to lodge a defense.
   Sources close to the company said the matter is now in the hands of its
lawyers. Sogemin chairman Michel Moser could not be reached for comment.
   Judge Jose Benquis, who is conducting the international investigations
into Codelco's losses, said earlier in the week that the next order of
business will be a summons to testify issued to Juan Marcelo Avendano,
Davila's brother-in-law and a Sogemin employee. Benquis said Avendano is
not currently living in Chile, and that his whereabouts are still unknown.
   Also under investigation, said Benquis, is whether Davila's sizable
private accounts in Caribbean banks, valued at over $1-mil, are linked to
the Sogemin payments. Davila has thus far failed to satisfactorily explain
the origin of the funds, charged Benquis: ``In fact, the situation, in my
opinion, has worsened.''
   Meanwhile, Chilean Deputy Luis Valentin Ferrada, of the Renovation
Nacional party and a member of the Congressional investigating committee,
said Codelco's case against Sogemin only confirms the commission's original
contention that Davila could not have acted without the collusion of
brokers and intermediaries. Ferrada is calling for a beefed-up
investigation in the US, where Codelco suffered losses in gold and silver
speculation.
   On Dec 26, when the presidentially appointed joint State Defense
Council-Codelco commission investigating Codelco's losses announced at a
press conference in Santiago that a suit had been filed against Sogemin,
Council president Luis Bates said that the commission must act
``cautiously'' and ``with reserve'' in disclosing details in the case to
comply with confidentiality restrictions mandated by foreign courts. ``It
is not our intention to be close-mouthed. Reserve and caution are demanded
by foreign legislation, namely US and British, that prevents us from
providing more information and jeopardizing progress in the case,'' said
Bates. While internal investigations abroad are ``very advanced, we must
proceed at a different pace at the level of coordinated international
inquiries,'' he added.
   Codelco CEO Juan Villarzu, who was also present at the conference,
conceded that Codelco will have to abandon hope of recovering the lion's
share of financial losses, as they were incurred by financial
``mismanagement'' at the hands of one of its own employees. Nevertheless
Codelco aims to recover some of the loss by exacting damage payments from
third parties involved. ``Our goal is to learn the truth, punish those
responsible, and to recover costs for Codelco and the country,'' said
Villarzu.
   The commission, headed by Bates, launched its investigation abroad in
December 1994 to determine whether foreign operators were linked to
Codelco's 1993 futures trading losses. Until now only Davila had been
formally charged.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

ZALDIVAR PREPARES FOR EXPANDED PRODUCTION

(Santiago)
While other mining companies scour the Chilean Andes hoping to find their
own Escondida, Compania Minera Zaldivar has gone into production with a
somewhat more modest deposit located in the same neighborhood.
   Owned in equal parts by Outokumpu and Placer Dome, Zaldivar produced
its first copper cathode in June 1995 and estimates total 1995 production
at 23,000mt. The plan is to boost production to 85,000mt in 1996, and hit
full capacity of 125,000mt/year in 1997.
   Zaldivar has been blessed with a deposit that allows it to get into
production with very little capital cost. Before moving on to the main zone
it will first extract the primarily oxide ore that lies almost exposed at
the surface of the Pinta Verde zone. Although this segment, with an average
of 0.75%, is lower-grade ore than the 0.86% main zone, it has a low
stripping ratio making for quick cheap extraction with little waste.
   ``From a cash flow point of view, it is ideal to develop this type of
mine,'' said Tapani Jarvinen, Zaldivar's general manager.
   A short leaching cycle for the oxides from the Pinta Verde section was
an added bonus that could not be ignored when Zaldivar engineers designed
the production schedule. The Pinta Verde oxide leach cycle is about 150
days. For comparison, Quebrada Blanca, controlled by Cominco Ltd and Teck
Corp, has a leach cycle of 210 days.
   Zaldivar will be ready to begin working the high-grade main segment of
its deposit by the middle of 1996. While Zaldivar's reserves of 316-mil mt
grading 1.14% don't compare to Escondida's 1.8-bil mt or Collahuasi's
3.1-bil mt, it is still a hefty deposit.
   Jarvinen said Zaldivar uses standard heap leaching technology with the
addition of some novelties like water flushing in the tertiary crushing
process. Even though the mine is located at a high enough altitude to
warrant special precaution for humans, who lose 20-30% of their cognitive
ability, and specially designed diesel engines, the bacteria, it seems,
don't suffer from the effects of the altitude.
   Zaldivar has the largest solvent extraction and electrowinning complex
in the world built in one stage on an undeveloped site. It is also the
first large-scale use of Outokumpu's Vertical Smooth Flow technology, first
used at a cobalt/nickel plant in Finland in 1991. The system has been
tested on a pilot plant scale at Codelco's Chuquicamata since 1992, and
will produce 90% recovery from pregnant leach solution.
   The first productive phase--called ``Stage 0''--consists of extracting
the oxides, which have some secondary sulfides mixed in, in order to feed
the SX-EW operation. While this is happening, stripping will begin in the
main zone. When the oxides are depleted, extraction will start at the Stage
1 pit while the Stage 2 pit is being stripped and so on. Seventeen years
later, Zaldivar expects to be finishing up on Stage 5.
   The acid leaching will use about 200,000mt of sulfuric acid annually,
and slightly more at the beginning. Like most new mines that see their
productive lives extending into the 21st century, Zaldivar uses a
Geopositioning Satellite realtime dispatch system, allowing one central
office to monitor all equipment movements and optimize their use.
   Zaldivar and Escondida have decided to make the best of their physical
proximity, turning the lack of elbow room into an advantage for both of
them, particularly Zaldivar. The ``synergy factor,'' as Jarvinen calls it,
consists of cooperative infrastructure development, property leasing, and
some old-fashioned gentlemen's agreements. The two jointly built a 170km
access road connecting both sites to the Pan American Highway junction
outside Antofagasta. The double circuit 220 kilovolt transmission line that
runs from the Zaldivar SX-EW plant substation to the El Crucero substation
was also a joint venture and serves both mines.
   Zaldivar has signed an agreement with Escondida, giving it rights to
incur on Escondida property when digging some of its pits, to obtain the
required slope grade. Zaldivar's processing plant is even located on
Escondida property, through a special leasing agreement.
   Zaldivar pumps process water from Negrillar, 100km to the east. In the
case of a hypothetical future water shortage by either mine, Zaldivar
considers that the good neighbor policy it has sustained thus far with
Escondida, which has rights to a closer well, would lead the two companies
to draw up an agreement for water sharing.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

WARBURG SAYS COPPER HAS PEAKED

Illustration(s):
Illustration: Graph: Newly released research from S.G Warburg estimates
that copper's $1.325/lb price in the second half of 1995 is as high as it
will go for the next three years. Their research shows a steady decline
right on through the second half of 1998 when the price will be 80
cents/lb. Basic to this price is the easing concentrate markets, increasing
production of refined copper, and a falling rate of consumption growth.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

JAPAN TI SPONGE EXPORTS UP...

Japan's customs-cleared titanium sponge exports reached 574mt in November,
up 47.2% from 390mt in October and up 38% from 416mt in November 1994, the
Ministry of Finance reported. Exports to the US rose to 345mt, up 72.5%
from October's 200mt and 205% from 113mt a year ago. The November mean
export price to the US averaged Yen 825/kg ($3.68/lb) FOB in November, up
from Yen 722/kg ($3.25/lb) the previous month, and up from Yen 706/kg
($3.28/lb) a year earlier, MOF said. Japan's titanium sponge exports to the
European Union totaled 228mt in November, up 20% from 190mt in October, but
down 24.8% from 303mt in November 1994. Meanwhile, Japan's titanium sponge
exports during January-November reached 4,790mt, up 18.5% from 4,042mt for
the same period a year earlier. Exports to the US rose 30.4% to 1,490mt
from 1,143mt, and those to the EU increased to 3,136mt, up 8.7% from
2,884mt, MOF said.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

 ...MILL PRODUCT EXPORTS DOWN

Japan's exports of titanium mill products reached 297mt in November, down
from 436mt in October, and down from 343mt in November 1994, MOF said. Of
the total, exports to the European Union reached 198mt, down from 253mt a
month earlier, but up from 74mt a year earlier. November exports to South
Korea and the United States also dropped, while those to Taiwan increased a
little, MOF said. Meanwhile mill product exports for the January-November
period edged lower to 4,159mt, from 4,234 for the first eleven months of
1994.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

JAPANESE MAGNESIUM IMPORTS RISE

Japan's customs-cleared imports of unwrought magnesium reached 3,286mt in
November, up 64.7% from 1,995mt in October, and up 36.7% from 2,404mt in
November 1994, the Ministry of Finance reported. China accounted for the
majority of the increase, exporting to Japan 1,938mt, up from 847mt in
October, and up from 813mt in November 1994, MOF said. Meanwhile, Japan's
unwrought magnesium imports from January-November totaled 32,115mt, up from
20,621mt for the same period a year before. Imports from China reached
15,597mt, up from 7,449mt. Those from Russia totaled 3,624mt, up from
1,012mt, while imports from the US totaled 6,602mt, up from 6,178mt.
Imports from Canada rose to 3,525mt from 3,208mt, MOF said.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

Indonesian tin producer PT Tambang Timah expects an increase in its tin

(Hong Kong)
Indonesian tin producer PT Tambang Timah expects an increase in its tin
production next year, given strong market fundamentals and expectations of
firmer prices, President Director Erry Riyana Hardjapamekas said last
week.
   ``We expect world tin prices to firm with both a reasonable
international economic outlook and stronger tin market fundamentals,''
Hardjapamekas said, describing the year of 1996 as ``a good year for tin
prices.'' He said that Timah is planning to raise its tin metal production
by 18.3% in 1996 from 1995's planned production.
   Timah now has an installed tin production capacity of 42,400mt/year at
its Mentok smelter, with planned production in 1995 of about 37,000mt. All
the tin concentrates produced by the country's two producers, Timah and
Koba, are smelted at the Mentok smelter. Hardjapamekas also said that Timah
is now planning to add another furnace next year at the Mentok smelter to
boost production.
   At the end of 1994, Timah added its sixth furnace at Mentok to increase
production capacity from 33,500mt/year to the current 42,400mt/year. He
said Timah's tin production and exports are forecast to rise over the next
few years, anticipating a demand growth worldwide, helped by a current
shift in demand to less-costly metals. ``Timah is still strongly focused on
reducing its own cost of production and we intend to consolidate our
position as the lowest-cost producer in the world over the next few
years,'' he said.
   For 1996, Indonesia is expected to export 40,000-45,000mt of tin, up
from an estimated 34,000mt of exports in 1995, a government official said
earlier.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

ZINC PRODUCTION DOWN IN NOVEMBER--EZI

Total primary zinc production fell to 452,100mt in November from 458,600mt
in October, the European Zinc Institute said last week. European production
fell to 179,900mt from 180,200mt, while outside Europe, production fell to
272,200mt from 278,400mt.Year-on-year figures show total production fell
from 455,000mt in November 1994. Outside Europe, year-on-year production
fell from 279,900mt, but within Europe, it rose from 175,100mt. Total
producer stocks were 323,300mt, down from 341,500mt in October but up from
315,200mt in November 1994. European stocks were 110,400mt, down from
122,200mt in October and 131,200mt a year earlier. The EZI announced its
statistical deprtment at Obertshausen in Germany will shut down Jan 1. The
EZI said it had decided to close the department and to stop all statistical
reports. It gave no reason for the decision.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

JAPAN ZINC OUTPUT DOWN, SALES UP

Japan's zinc production reached 52,779mt in November, down 9% from October,
and down 11.3% from November 1994, the Ministry of International Trade and
Industry announced last week. Shipments reached 53,058mt, up 2.9% from the
previous month, but down 9.7% from year-earlier levels. Inventories at the
end of November fell to 78,744mt, down 5.7% from end-October, and down
11.4% from a year earlier, MITI said. With Mitsubishi Materials gradually
winding down output at its Akita smelter in preparation for the plant's
eventual shutdown next June, Japan's zinc supplies are getting tight, one
trader source said. The Ministry of Finance announced last week that
Japan's zinc imports reached 6,604mt in November, up 23.6% from 5,341mt in
October, and up 100% from 3,300mt in November 1994. January-November zinc
imports reached 107,983mt, up 81% from 59,766mt for the same period in
1994.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

METALEUROP SEES IMPROVED TURNOVER

Franco-German lead-zinc producer Metaleurop posted a loss of FFr122-mil for
the financial year ending Sep 30, 1995. However, consolidated turnover for
the group saw a 16% increase on year-earlier levels at FFr4.133-bil, thanks
to higher metals production and--particularly in the case of lead--higher
metals prices. Parent company Metaleurop SA showed a net profit for the
year of FFr200,000. Over the year, Metaeurop invested FFr354-mil--twice as
much as in the previous year--mainly at its zinc refinery in
Noyelles-Godault, the new lead plant in Nordenham and the smelting reactor
in Oker. In the current business year, Metaleurop said it will focus on
cost-cutting and productivity programs. The new lead smelter at Nordenham
will start up in spring 1996, with production costs nearly 20% below the
cost of the old plant which was closed at the end of November.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

PERU ZINC OUTPUT TO GROW

Peru's zinc production is set to increase 10% next year, according to
Energy & Mines Minister Amado Yataco. Production is likely to continue
increasing as privatization concludes and new projects are brought online
before the end of the decade, according to a study by local consultants
Apoyo Consultorio SA.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

ECONOMIC GROWTH TO CONTINUE IN 1996 WITH LOW INFLATION

(New York)
For much of 1996, economic growth in the US, Japan, and much of Europe will
largely maintain its current pace, with no major surprises expected. The
dollar will decline slightly against some currencies, the inflation rate
will move higher, and both short-and long-term interest rates will continue
trending lower.
   This is the prognosis of many economists despite the current
less-than-rosy economic picture. Economic growth has slowed in recent
months, with the index of leading US indicators--the barometer of economic
growth about nine months ahead--slumping 0.5% in October, the steepest drop
in six months. October's fall followed a 0.1% decline in September. In
other bad economic news, the unemployment rate rose to 5.6% in November
from 5.5% in October, new home sales fell 2.7% in October from September,
and 10-month sales were running at 2% below 1994 levels.
   But these declines tempered by a surge in spending for new construction,
which the Commerce Dept said rose 2.7% in October, the second consecutive
monthly increase and the largest in more than three years.
   According to Anirvan Banerji, economist with the International Business
Cycle department at Columbia University in New York, the leading indicators
point to a continuation of relatively slow growth through the first half of
1996 for the current US economic expansion, which began in March 1994. He
noted that the slow growth stems from a backlog of inventories due to weak
retail sales. Inventories are ``having a drag on production,'' he noted.
   ``Once the inventory correction is over, there will be a slight pickup
in the economy some time in the first half, but it will be not robust,''
Banerji said. Beyond the second quarter, his crystal ball becomes blurred.
He does not rule out a mild recession, but notes: ``For the second half of
1996, the indicators are not yet giving us a clear signal.''
   The Conference Board's chief economist Gail Fosler is more optimistic.
She said that with long-term interest rates remaining low, economic growth
will be much stronger during the first half of 1996 than it was in the
first half of 1995. ``By heightening financial market expectations and
pushing long-term interest rates lower than economic fundamentals warrant,
the Fed has unwittingly set the stage for the next phase of the
expansion,'' she said.
   Fosler noted that the budget now under debate in Washington will more
likely help US economic growth than hurt it, because about one-third of the
$90-bil in proposed spending cuts in fiscal years 1996 and 1997 shifts
program responsibility to the states and may not ``materially affect total
government activity.'' The remaining two-thirds represent Medicaid and
Medicare reform. The economic effect of these reductions will be very
different from defense cuts in the 1980s, she claims, since they represent
decelerations in spending growth, not outright reductions.
   ``This will still leave the growth in federal health care spending at
twice the rate of growth in business spending or non government health care
costs,'' Fosler said. She added that the accompanying tax cuts will boost
consumer income as well and further stimulate the economy.
   Charles Schultz, an economist at the Brookings Institution, also
believes the economic expansion will continue. ``I don't see any great
dangers of a recession in 1996, but I think it [growth] will be a bit
soft,'' he said.
   Similar views were expressed by Cynthia Latta, senior financial
economist with DRI-McGraw-Hill. ``GDP growth will depend on what happens in
the budget talks,'' she said. But she noted that GDP will increase by
2-2.5% in 1996. Third-quarter GDP growth was unchanged from the Q2 level at
3%. She does not anticipate a decline in the economy and noted: ``I think
the Federal Reserve has made anticipatory moves, to a greater degree than
it did in the past, and preempted a downward move in the economy.''

Low interest rates
   Economic growth in 1996 will get a further boost from low interest
rates. The Fed recently lowered its Federal Funds Rate by 0.25% to 5.5%,
its first reduction since July. Most observers believe the Fed might be
willing to make further cuts to nudge the economy along, once there is an
agreement on the budget.
   But interest rates must eventually rise with any boost in economic
growth. While higher interest rates may be delayed by ``excessive
optimism'' about this year's budget package, the longer this ``necessary
adjustment'' takes, the higher interest rates will ultimately rise, the
Conference Board's Fosler said.
   The Brookings Institution's Schultz noted that the budget outcome will
play a key role in determining future economic growth and also the level of
interest rates. ``If there is some compromise, I would expect interest
rates to remain in the same general area where they are now. I don't seen
any particular reason why they should move up or down significantly from
where they are,'' he said. Schultz added: ``The likelihood is that any
changes over the short term will be down rather than up.''
   However, further economic growth will accelerate the increase in the
inflation rate, according to Fosler. ``The Federal Reserve Board's recent
success in curbing inflation may prove to be its own undoing,'' she said.
And although inflation is currently running at a rate of 2-3%, it is more
likely to rise than decline, even though prices of consumer goods are still
rising at a 2% annual rate at the producer level and discounting appears to
have ended at the retail level. Fosler noted that prices respond quickly to
changes in demand and, therefore, a reacceleration in consumer demand will
raise prices.

Inflation under control
   According to Schultz, inflation ``has been behaving very well and is not
getting out of hand.'' He added: ``I don't see any pressure being built up
in the economy.'' He noted that raw materials prices and wages remain
subdued. DRI's Latta agrees, saying: ``I would not expect inflation to come
in at over 3% next year. We could get a spike up in food and energy prices,
but I would not expect the CPI core rate to go above 3%.'' The November CPI
remained unchanged at 0.1%.
   Further evidence that the US will not face any serious economic shocks
in 1996 are the states of affairs in Japan and Europe, where economic
growth remains anemic at best. One economist described Japan as ``a basket
case,'' but Latta said: ``I think the Japanese economy will remain fairly
weak but will slowly come out of its slump, because the government is
beginning to handle the banking problem.''
   Economic problems facing the major US trading partners will help keep
the dollar from skidding against the major foreign currencies. David
Abramson of the Bank Credit Analyst believes the dollar will ``go higher
because the European economy is weaker than the US economy,'' adding: ``We
are not going to be too worried about the dollar until we see signs that
the US economy is strengthening.''
   Based on the assumption that Japan keeps interest rates low and expands
bank reserves to keep its stock market strong, Abramson forecasts the yen
at Yen 108 to the dollar for much of 1996. Latta pegged it at Yen 100-105.
As for the Deutschmark, Abramson said, ``Europe needs to do more to turn
its economy around, and the pressure on the German economy will keep its
currency at about DM1.55 to the dollar.''

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

CHINA FACING 1-MIL MT ALUMINA DEFICIT IN 1996

(Hong Kong)
China is likely to have a 1-mil mt deficit in the domestic alumina market
in 1996 despite a projected 9% increase in output from 1995 levels, Chinese
alumina and aluminum producers said. The main hope of redeucing the deficit
would be restricted output from aluminum smelters as a result of power
shortages, they added.
   China's alumina output is expected to rise to 2.5-mil mt in 1996, from
an estimated 2.3-mil mt in 1995, according to alumina producers. The
deficit in the alumina market will have to be covered by imports, they
said. And a 6% import duty cut in January may force alumina producers to
lower prices to the domestic market and to long-term contractors, or
aluminum smelters will boost alumina imports, they noted.
   Major alumina producers offer at Yuan 3,230/mt ($389) to the domestic
market and Yuan 2,999.88/mt ($361) to long-term contractors. But the rise
in alumina output in 1996 is not expected to keep pace with strong aluminum
demand. With an easing in the tight power supply situation, aluminum output
is projected to rise to 1.7-mil to 1.8-mil mt from an estimated 1.65-mil mt
in 1995, aluminum producers said.
   Many aluminum smelters, particularly those located in northwestern and
southwestern provinces, hope to be able to operate at full capacity in 1996
after power shortages in 1995 forced production cuts, the sources said.
Their heightened output is likely to marginally cover the moderate growth
of domestic consumption, they said.
   The producers' plans for 1996 hinge on electricity supply. As a result
of rapid economic growth for the past decade and slow growth of electricity
generating capacity, electricity supply is insufficient to meet demand in
many Chinese provinces.
   Most of the aluminum smelters in China's northwestern Gansu province
have failed to operate at full capacity in 1995, with insufficient
electricity in the area forcing these smelters to cut 10-30% of production
throughout the year, a local official said. Total aluminum production
capacity in Gansu is estimated at 300,000mt/year, the official said, and
may be achieved in 1996 as the electricity supply is likely to increase. In
Qinghai province, adjacent to Gansu, inadequate electricity supplies
limited Qinghai Aluminum Smelter's production to only 110,000mt in 1995
compared with its capacity of 200,000mt/year, a company source said.
Although Qinghai Smelter is hoping to boost its production in 1996, the
necessary increase in power availability is still uncertain, he said:
``Local authorities have been unable to promise a supply rise.''
   Meanwhile, in China's southwestern Guizhou province, an electricity
shortage forced the 190,000mt/year Guizhou Aluminum Smelter to cut 1995
output to 150,000mt, a smelter source said. ``We were able to produce
enough alumina to support our full aluminum capacity production, but no
electricity,'' said the source. Guizhou Aluminum is planning to run at full
capacity in 1996 despite uncertain electricity supply, the source added.
   Alumina producers will try to keep up with the increased aluminum
output. In 1996, China Great Wall Aluminum Corp, China's largest alumina
producer, plans to run at full capacity of 800,000mt/year after failing to
reach its target capacity in 1995 because of continual technical problems,
a company source said.
   Shanxi Aluminum Smelter, China's second-largest producer, also plans to
operate at its full capacity of 800,000mt/year in 1996, with hopes that the
firm will fully utilize its new facilities after completing a capacity
expansion earlier this year, a company source said. Shanxi Aluminum is
expected to produce about 700,000-720,000mt of alumina in 1995, the source
added.
   Meanwhile, Shandong Aluminum Corp and Guizhou Aluminum Smelter will also
lift their alumina production to 540,000mt and 310,000mt, respectively,
company sources said. But production at Guizhou will also depend on the
power supply in the province. 1995 production totaled around 470,000mt for
Shandong and 300,000mt for Guizhou, company sources said.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

PLENTY HAPPENED IN THE WORLD OF METALS

Having started production in October this year, Pingguo Aluminum will be
able to produce only 40,000-45,000mt of alumina in 1995, but the firm is
hoping to boost its alumina output to 100,000-150,000mt in 1996 to cover
its aluminum production demand, a company source said.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

RHODIUM PRICES PLUNGE TO 22-YEAR LOWS

(New York)
Much to the dismay of dealers and producers alike, rhodium prices have
continued to decline, plunging to a low of $256/oz early last week before
bouncing back slightly by week's end. Prices are currently at their lowest
levels since 1973.
   The rebound came when a European buyer, believed to represent a Swiss
banker, sought to take advantage of the low prices by placing several buy
orders. Even though the total purchase was about 50kg, the price shot up
into the $270-$290 range. ``The buying seems to emanate from a Swiss
bank,'' one London dealer noted. ``The metal was readily available at $245
to $250 yesterday [Dec 28], and this guy came in this morning and took out
some cheap metal and that pushed the price up.''
   The market has been at a virtual standstill in recent weeks, and one
trader noted that last week's burst of activity was the first real buying
since October, when Johnson Matthey was believed to have been a major
player. ``I won't be surprised if it [the price] goes to $200,'' one trader
said.
   One London dealer noted that ``there's plenty of metal around,'' adding:
``Consumers are still working off their stocks, and there's no additional
demand to soak up the metal that is available.'' He said the increased
supplies have been coming from recyclers while mine supplies have been
holding steady.
   The state of the market has confused most analysts, who believed that
consumers would be attracted by the relatively low prices of the metal and
take the opportunity to build their inventories. But so far that has not
happened.
   One analyst explained that the major auto manufacturers, who are the
largest end users of rhodium, already have their cupboards full.
``Consumers are locked in with long-term contracts from the producers and
there is not enough additional demand to soak up the supplies,'' he said.
   Another analyst noted that when rhodium prices hit $7,000/oz in 1990,
auto manufacturers began making improvements in both their engine designs
and catalyst technology with the aim of reducing rhodium consumption. ``The
switch away from rhodium is a one-way street, and it has not turned around
once prices began to fall,'' he said.
   In recent years, Ford Motor Co and the major Japanese auto manufacturers
have made big strides in increasing engine efficiency to reduce the need
for heavy loadings in catalytic converters. For many car models,
palladium-based catalysts can do the job of meeting antipollution
standards, because of cleaner-burning engines.
   Another blow to rhodium is that demand from the European auto market has
not panned out as anticipated, and smaller quantities of the metal are
being used there. On top of that, mine supplies are up and more is on the
way.
   According to Johnson Matthey's Interim Review of the PGM markets,
Zimbabwe's Hartley PGM mine will produce 11,500oz/year of rhodium when the
mine gets up to speed by early 1997. For 1995, rhodium supplies rose to
438,000oz from 426,000oz in 1994, outstripping demand, which rose to
422,000oz in 1994 from 386,000 oz in 1993.
   Producers are in the unenviable position of not being able to curtail
supplies, even though prices are falling. Rhodium is a byproduct of PGM
refining and producers depend on their chief products (platinum and
palladium) to make a profit. Rhodium is frosting on the cake, but in recent
years the layer of frosting has been getting thinner.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

US GROUP BUYS MAGMA SHARES

Australian mining giant Broken Hill Proprietary may have to lift its bid
for takeover target Magma Copper after an aggressive New York fund
management group grabbed an 8% stake in the US company, according to an
Australian newspaper report. The Sydney Morning Herald said records filed
with the US Securities and Exchange Commission shows Gabelli Funds spent
$95.41-mil acquiring shares in Tucson-based Magma after BHP made its
A$3.28-bil ($2.39-bil) takeover bid on Dec 1. The newspaper said most of
the shares were purchased for about $27.80, just short of BHP's $28 per
share cash tender for Magma. BHP made no comment on the move by Gabelli,
but noted its offer has the support of Magma's long-time major shareholder,
investment group Warburg Pincus, which has a 26% stake.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

SPCC INVESTING $600-MIL IN ILO SMELTER

Southern Peru Copper Corp is planning to construct a new smelting facility
at its Ilo complex on Peru's southern coast over the next six years at a
cost of $600-mil, a company source told the Santiago daily newspaper El
Mercurio Dec 26. The new plant will use continuous anode casting
technology--an upgrade from the current remelting and refining methods--to
reduce energy consumption and minimize sulfuric acid emissions. The
facility will also include a sulfuric acid plant that will help SPCC keep
emissions within permissible international standards.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

PRINCETON MINING GETS OKAY FOR BC MINE

Canada's Princeton Mining has announced that the development of its
Huckleberry copper and molybdenum mine has been approved by the British
Columbia government. Copper production is forecast to average 65-mil
lb/year during the first five years and total 1-bil lb over the life of the
mine. Molybdenum production is expected to average more than 1-mil lb/year.
The mine will cost $137-mil to develop with construction starting in
January and lasting 18 months. A strategic alliance has been formed by
Princeton with a consortium of Japanese companies--Mitsubishi Materials
Corp, Marubeni Corp, Dowa Mining Co, and Furukawa Co--who will take a 40%
stake, senior finance a $60-mil project loan, and buy the mine's total
copper concentrate production.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

METALS WEEK PRICE INDEX

                METALS WEEK PRICE INDEX
                                 Week    Month   Year
                         Dec. 28 Ago     Ago     Ago
MW Base Metals           159.7   160.4   160.7   172.5
MW Precious Metals        90.1    90.8    92.2    97.0
MW Nonferrous Composite   131.9   132.6  133.3   142.3


Illustration(s):
Illustration: Graph: Nonferrous Composite Index

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

US SILICON IMPORTERS WIN TEMPORARY ASSURANCE ON DUITES

(Washington)
US importers who brought in silicon metal from Silarsa of Argentina during
the period Sep 1, 1993, through Aug 31, 1994, have received assurance that
their antidumping duty will remain 24.62%, following the completion of a
Commerce Dept administrative review. In addition, the deposit rate for
Silarsa silicon remains 24.62% for future imports, until the completion of
another review, or unless a court appeal causes it to change. Commerce Dept
officials completed the review prior to the US government shutdown.
   Commerce decided to keep the rate unchanged, despite the fact that US
producers American Silicon Technologies, Elkem, Globe, and SKW argued that
the duties should be increased punitively because Silarsa did not cooperate
in this review or a previous one. Silarsa asked to be excused from
responding to Commerce's questionnaire because it exported only 331mt
during the period of review, in October 1993, and it stopped manufacturing
silicon metal in January 1994 and has no near-term plans to resume
production.
   The US companies urged Commerce to increase the rate to the average of
the petition rates, 81.31%, or, at a minimum, to the lowest petition rate
of 49.35%, because they said the current rate is not sufficiently adverse
to induce Silarsa's cooperation.
   Silarsa dismissed the US industry's claim, saying the 24.62% margin
constitutes an insurmountable barrier which precluded it from participating
in the US market and precipitated its decision to cease production. US
trading company Hunter Douglas also submitted comments, arguing that an
increase in the rate would have punished unrelated US importers who must
actually pay the antidumping duties even though they have no control over
foreign exporters or their decisions about whether to cooperate in Commerce
reviews. Commerce agreed with Silarsa that ``there is no evidence to
indicate that, if Silarsa resumes production, the current rate is
insufficient to ensure Silarsa's cooperation in a subsequent review.''
   However, US importers are not in the clear retroactively yet; the US
industry still has several appeals pending before the US courts, and it has
the option of appealing this review as well.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

BRAZILIAN MERGER WILL PRODUCE MINING GIANT

(Sao Paulo)
Brazil's Eluma, Caraiba Metais, Paranapanema, and Paraibuna mining groups
were merged Dec 22 into a new company, Companhia Brasiliera de Metais Nao
Ferrosas (CBMNF), after several months of negotiations. A group of
Brazilian pension funds, headed by Bank of Brazil pension fund Previ--which
already controlled Eluma--will pay $300-mil for control of the other
companies. The new company will be set up officially in one month after an
audit performed by the pension companies on Caraiba, Paranapanema, and
Paraibuna.
   CBMNF's shareholders' equity is $900-mil, with yearly sales of $1.1-bil.
The new company has plans to invest $600-mil and increase yearly income to
$1.8-bil. CBMNF will be one of the world's largest tin companies, the only
Brazilian producer of electrolytic copper, and the second-largest
Brazilian producer of zinc. Daniel Birmann, president of the Arbi
Group--which sold its shareholding in Caraiba Metais--commented, ``a large
megacompany was an old idea of the Arbi Group, but we weren't able to
achieve it.''
   The funds will control 98% of the voting capital of Paraibuna, 71% of
Paranapanema, and 66% of Caraiba. Previ's partners in the new company are
Petros (Petrobras' pension fund), Aeros (the Brazilian airline companies'
pension fund), and Sistel (Telebras' pension fund). $30-mil of the $300-mil
price tag was paid on the signing of the protocol. Previ president Jose
Valdir Ribeiro dos Reis said that other groups are interested in buying
into the newly-merged group, though no definite commitment has been made;
potential Brazilian partners include CVRD pension fund Valia, CVRD itself,
Companhia Siderurgica Nacional, and BNDES, the national development bank.
   Foreign groups have also expressed an interest, Ribeiro dos Reis said,
citing Australia's BHP plus another unnamed company. ``We have discovered
many synergies among these mining companies in Brazil and we believe that
the new holding will be competitive internationally,'' he added.
   Analyst Roberto Vinhaes of Investidor Profissional noted that ``since
the mining sector has not gone through significant technological
improvements, one of the ways out is to gain economies of scale.'' He added
that, among other advantages for large companies in the mineral sector,
``if the price of tin drops, the company could offset it, for example, by a
rise in the price of copper.''
   Caraiba Metais produces 170,000mt/year of electrolytic copper for the
internal market and exports what it does not sell in Brazil. Paranapanema
owns one of the world's largest tin mines, the 18,000mt/year Pitinga mine
in the Amazon, and also controls the operations of the Bom Futuro reserves
in Rondonia through its Ebesa subsidiary. Pitinga's 1995 output was
expected to reach 11,000mt, up 2,000mt from 1994. Production at Bom Futuro
was projected at 3,500mt for 1995, giving a total of 14,500mt for the
Paranapanema group.
   Zinc producer Paraibuna is currently heavily in debt, and is looking to
invest in hydroelectric energy generation to reduce costs. The company
currently produces 70,000mt/year of primary zinc. Eluma, which produces
copper products and copper/zinc and copper/tin alloys, recently underwent a
restructuring process using technology from Italy's Europa Metalli group.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "36"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

US COMMERCE DEPT AMENDS INTERLINK MAGNESIUM DUTY ORDER

(Washington)
The US Commerce Dept has amended its final antidumping duty order for
magnesium from Russia to clarify that Interlink has a zero dumping margin
when importing from either of the two Russian producers. The recent
decision answers a complaint stemming from the end of the investigation
earlier this year.
   Commerce published its final determination in the antidumping case on
Mar 30, and the final duty order was published May 12. Interlink alleged on
May 11 that a ministerial error had been made in that Commerce incorrectly
assigned a margin for its sales of magnesium supplied by Russian producer
Solikamsk Magnesium Works. Commerce found the allegation constituted a
ministerial error, but because the US industry had already appealed the
decision to the US Court of International Trade, Commerce was unable to
correct the error and publish the amended final determination.
   Subsequently, the court granted Commerce leave to correct the
ministerial error, which it did in a Dec 20 Federal Register notice, which
was prepared prior to the latest US government shutdown. The notice
clarifies that Interlink has a zero antidumping deposit rate for magnesium
from Avisma and from Solikamsk, but faces 100.25% from any other Russian
producer. Avisma and Solikamsk are the only Russian producers currently in
operation.
   Six other trading companies also have zero duty rates: Gerald Metals,
AIOC, Greenwich Metals, Hochschild Partners, Hunter Douglas, and MG
Metals.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "37"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

PRICE ADJUSTMENTS

Platt's Metals Week has made the following adjustments to its NY dealer PGM
prices: platinum declined to $399-407/oz; palladium fell to $128-132; and
rhodium went down to $240-265.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "38"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

EAGLE MINING POURS FIRST GOLD

Australia's Eagle Mining said last week the first gold has been poured at
its Nimary gold mine near Wiluna. The mine--in the Yandal Greenstone belt
of Western Australia--is expected to produce approximately 100,000oz/year
of gold for five-and-a-half years at an average cash operating cost of
A$260/oz. The mine's construction and development took less than five
months, with operations beginning Dec 14 when low-grade ore was introduced
into the mill. The plant was expected to reach its full design capacity of
650,000mt/year by the end of the month.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "39"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

MK GOLD WRITES OFF JEROOY PROJECT

US miner MK Gold said last week it will to write off $6-mil of its $14-mil
investment in the Jerooy gold project in Kyrghyzstan. The company said the
gold recovery from first underground mine and mill and then heap leach test
results suggest Jerooy is unlikely to become an economically viable project
as originally designed. The company has asked Kilborn Engineering to
prepare a new engineering and cost study, to be completed by March 1996,
based on a design that includes open pit mining and milling of the gold
ore. MK Gold will evaluate the new study and discuss the outcome with the
Kyrghyzstan government to determine whether there are viable project
alternatives.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "40"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

US EPA UNCONCERNED OVER LEAD-ACID BATTERY COMBUSTION

(Washington)
The US Environmental Protection Agency continues to maintain that it does
not need to prohibit the combustion of lead-acid vehicle batteries in
municipal waste combustors. EPA decided in 1991 that it would not prohibit
the combustion of lead-acid vehicle batteries, but the decision was
challenged in the US Court of Appeals, which remanded the issue back to EPA
in June of 1992.
   In a published notice prepared prior to the current partial US
government shutdown, EPA stated that it concludes it is unnecessary to
include lead-acid battery combustion restrictions because additional
efforts to remove batteries from municipal waste combustors would have
little impact on the amount of lead entering the waste combustors and
little effect on controlled lead emissions.
   EPA cited tests and studies showing that the facilities typically have
only one battery per 300 megagrams (Mg) to 700 Mg of municipal solid waste,
and that a significant percentage of batteries do not make it to municipal
combustors. EPA assumed a lead-acid battery recycling rate of 94.4%, so
that only about 5-mil out of 87.8-mil batteries generated were not recycled
in 1992. It noted that 37 states have battery recycling laws based on the
Battery Council International model rule, with mandatory take-back and
deposit requirements.
   As many as 45-mil batteries may be stored in individual households, EPA
maintains, so ``battery storage by households, therefore, may represent a
significant reservoir of automotive-type lead-acid batteries that do not
immediately enter the municipal solid waste stream or the recycling
system.''
In addition, a test program conducted at the Burnaby, BC, municipal waste
combuster found that ``lead-acid batteries do not appear to be a measurable
source of stack gas Pb emission,'' EPA said.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "41"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

MONTHLY PRICES

Illustration(s):
Table: Major Metals (This table is not available electronically. Please
see January 1, 1996, issue.)

Table: Precious Metals (This table is not available electronically. Please
see January 1, 1996, issue.)

Table: Minor Metals (This table is not available electronically. Please
see January 1, 1996, issue.)

Table: Light Metals (This table is not available electronically. Please
see January 1, 1996, issue.)

Table: Ferroalloys (This table is not available electronically. Please
see January 1, 1996, issue.)

Table: Exchange Rates (This table is not available electronically. Please
see January 1, 1996, issue.)

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "42"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

DAILY PRICES -- WEEK ENDED DECEMBER 29, 1995

Illustration(s):
Table: Daily Prices -- Week ended December 29, 1995 (This table is not
available electronically. Please see January 1, 1996, issue.)

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "43"></A>Copyright
PLATT'S METALS WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   

WEEKLY PRICES -- WEEK ENDED DECEMBER 29, 1995

Illustration(s):
Table: Weekly Prices -- Week ended December 29, 1995 (This table is not
available electronically. Please see January 1, 1996, issue.)

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-38</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B019-345</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ml08.html 205.156.212.5 19970122034942 text/html 42329
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:47:44 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:48 GMT
Content-length: 42142
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ml08.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JUNE 1991<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>From The Editor's Desk</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(193 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PROCESS NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>Modelling of Chemical Vapor Deposition</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(112 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>New Thick- and Thin-film Coating Method</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(109 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>New Low-Temperature CVD Process for TiN Coatings</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(270 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Jet Vapor Deposition Ready to Compete with CVD, PVD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(350 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>More on Lasers for Surface Modification</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(223 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>IMPROVED SURFACES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Ceramic Coatings Possible for High Temperature Auto Parts</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(383 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>SUBSTRATE NEW</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Researchers Grow Diamond on Nickel Substrate</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(163 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>COATING CHARACTERISTICS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>Diamond Coating for Erosion Protection</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(473 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>Toyota Develops Material with Controlled Hardness</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(150 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>Zinc Coating On Site</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(182 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>INDUSTRY NEWS - Spire Corporation Announces First Quarter Sales and&nbsp;Earnings</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(237 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>DOD Center for Technical Information on Metals</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(153 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>Surface Engineering Facilities Expanded</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(89 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>Spire Wins Army Research Contract for Advanced Surface Texturing</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(445 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>U.S. Navy Chooses American Cyanimide Aluminum Core</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(130 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>RECENT COMPUTER SEARCHES AND ABSTRACTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(94 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><LI>Ion Beam Sputtering.  December 1976-November 1989.  (A Bibliography&nbsp;from the Compendex Database).</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(92 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><A HREF = "#19"><LI>Spray Deposition: A Fundamenatl Study of Droplet Impingement,&nbsp;Spreading and Consolidation.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(182 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>Method of Preparing a Thin Diamond Film</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(103 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>Laser Assisted Cladding of Refractory Materials</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(151 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><A HREF = "#22"><LI>Chemical Cleaning of Aluminum Alloy Surfaces for Use as Vacuum&nbsp;Materials in Synchrotron Light Sources</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(208 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>SPECIAL PATENT ABSTRACTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(520 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>OF GENERAL INTEREST</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>Market for Abrasive Materials to Expand</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(112 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

From The Editor's Desk

This month's issue of Surface Modification Technology News includes
a wide variety of topics.  Although there is no "lead" or special
article on a particular process or new material, several items are
key to the future of surface modification.

We review a new process called Jet Vapor Deposition.  Its
co-founders claim that this evolutionary procedure has several key
advantages in thin film deposition: low cost, uniformity, and high
throughput.  According to all reports, it bears watching in the
future.

Following on our feature in the April issue, we again discuss the
use of the laser for surface modification.  A short but important
article features laser chemical vapor deposition for
microelectronic packaging operations.

Continuing our efforts to keep on top of various diamond film
developments, we describe the epitaxial growth of diamond on a
nickel substrate accomplished by researchers in Japan.  In addition
we include another article on the use of diamond coating for
erosion protection.

We are continually searching for new developments in surface
modification and materials.  Again, we welcome any input our
readers have on these subjects.  Please let us hear from you.


Robert H. Moran



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

Modelling of Chemical Vapor Deposition

Researchers at Los Alamos National Laboratory in Los Alamos, New
Mexico, are working on the modelling of isothermal deposition in
single fiber bundles.  They believe this will aid in producing
high-quality ceramic-matrix composites.  A model has been developed
that takes into consideration the growth, and eventual overlap, of
deposition fronts about individual fibers.  In addition, a
mathematical model for woven fiber bundles has been developed.
With these models, the effects of changes in operating conditions
and weave architectures can be investigated through simulation.
Spatial variations in composite density can also be estimated.

For additional information contact: R.P. Currier, Materials Science
and technology Division, Los Alamos National Lab, Los Alamos, N.M.
87545.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

New Thick- and Thin-film Coating Method

Through the use of supercritical fluids, researchers at the
University of Colorado in Boulder have developed a new method of
applying a variety of thin- and thick-film coatings.  The process
consists of mixing a coating compound with the supercritical fluid
and then spraying the mixture onto a heated surface where a
chemical reaction forms a stable coating.  Carbon dioxide or
nitrous oxide are the supercritical fluids used.  The mixture is
sprayed through a nozzle onto a heated surface.  The pressure and
temperature of the surface depend on the coating.  The ratios of
the metal precursors can be controlled somewhat precisely to form
films such as mixtures of metal oxides.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

New Low-Temperature CVD Process for TiN Coatings

Injection molding dies for plastics is one of the leading
applications of a patented low-temperature CVD process developed by
Liburdi Engineering of Canada.  The lubricity of the TiN coating
improves plastic flow and reduces sticking during the injection
molding process.

The even coating of complex shapes, deep crevices, and runner
passages in the dies is a major advantage of this new method. In
addition, the low coating - temperature (500-650 Degree C)
maintains tool hardness and minimizes distortion which can occur
with conventional CVD at 1000 degree C.  No postcoating heat
treatment is needed.

The low coating-temperature is achieved by using a subchloride of
titanium, TiCl3, to produce the TiN.  The TiCl3 is made in the
reaction chamber by chlorination of Ti pellets in a reducing
atmosphere.  The coatings can be made more adherent as well as more
corrosion- or wear-resistant by controlling the gas flow rates, the
total pressure, and the chlorinator and coating temperatures.

Other applications for these adherent and wear-resistant coatings
are carbide inserts, stainless steel turbine compressor blades, and
dies used in metal forming operations.  An investigation to
establish correlations between coating parameters, composition,
structure, and properties is now going on with the objective of
improving the ability to tailor the coatings for specific
applications.  The company is interested in providing coating
services to the plastic-molding and metal-forming industries and
are also looking at joint development of new applications for these
TiN coatings.

For additional information contact Liburdi Engineering Ltd., 400
Highway 6 North, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada L9J 1E7.  For coating
services information, contact Liburdi at 23565 Outwood Drive,
Southfield, MI 48034.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

Jet Vapor Deposition Ready to Compete with CVD, PVD

Jet Process Corporation, New Haven, Connecticut, was started in
1984 by two Yale University graduates.  Co-founders Richard E. Hart
and Jerome J. Schmitt claim that the jet vapor process brings many
advantages to thin film deposition.  They include low cost, great
uniformity and high throughput.  Unlike CVD and PVD, jet vapor
works in a rough vacuum at low temperatures, and doesn't use toxic
gases.  The largest part of the JVD system is a standard,
fan-cooled mechanical pump.

An R&D model is expected to cost about half as much as other
deposition methods, according to Mr. Hart.  Right now, they are
working with a small group of companies and are acting as custom
fabricators.  It took four years to get the first JVD patent and an
R&D unit should be ready this year.  Production units may be
several years away.

In addition to CVD and PVD, the jet system may compete with e-beam
systems used for evaporation.  Compared to e-beams, JVD can operate
at much higher pressure, but in a low vacuum, and still produce
good results.  Mr. Schmitt added that since JVD doesn't need high
vacuums, it also doesn't require long pump down times.

JVD works with a mix of known principles of compressible gas
dynamics, fast flow systems, high temperature processes, plasma
chemistry and film deposition.  A supersonic jet flow of inert
carrier gas is formed by a nozzle.  This flow is directed into a
low vacuum chamber.  This chamber is continuously evacuated by a
high-speed mechanical pump.  Depositing vapor molecules are seeded
into the jet flow from a vapor source positioned within the nozzle.

Finally, the jet transports the vapor species to the prepared
substrate's surface, where a hard, dense, adherent coating is
formed.  This process is distinct from plasma spray methods where
droplets of molten metals or various ceramics are deposited.

The founders say that JVD offers important advantages for the
fabrication of integrated circuits and to the broad applications in
optics and aerospace.  Whether this process can obtain sufficient
market share from the current entrenched deposition methods remains
to be seen.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

More on Lasers for Surface Modification

Several issues ago we featured the use of lasers for surface
treatment.  Although a small part of the overall picture at the
present time, this technology is expected to increase in volume in
the near future.

We were recently attracted to a discussion about laser chemical
vapor deposition. It is one way of depositing metals on substrates
and is being used in microelectronics packaging.  In a reaction
chamber containing gaseous precursors that are inert at room
temperatures, a focused laser beam is introduced to selectively
heat regions of the substrate.  Only in these heated regions will
the gaseous precursors react with each other.  The precursors are
carefully chosen so that the desired metal is the only solid
reaction product.

For packaging applications, some metals are of particular interest.

They include aluminum, copper, gold, and tungsten.
Tungsten is an attractive choice because it is compatible with many
other metals and dielectrics, does not corrode, and is
cost-efficient.

Even though laser CVD requires placing the workpiece in an
exhausted environment, as it usually involves hazardous gases, it
can be a cost-effective solution for some applications.  IBM, for
example, recently disclosed that it is using laser CVD of metals in
the manufacturing of its System/390 computers.  IBM researchers at
Almeden, California, had previously developed laser CVD processes
for several metals including gold.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

Ceramic Coatings Possible for High Temperature Auto Parts

Automobile manufacturers are becoming more interested in using
thermal-barrier coatings (TBCs) on engine components that are
subjected to high exhaust temperatures, as well as excessively
abrasive conditions.  TBCs have been used for many years on
aircraft gas-turbine engine components.  Plasma-arc thermal
spraying is used to apply coatings of zirconium oxides containing
various stabilizers such as calcia, magnesia, yttria, ytterbia, and
ceria.

Diesel engine applications are very attractive to auto makers.
Zirconia TBCs offer many advantages including:

 Retaining heat in the combustion zone to improve efficiency.

 Reducing component surface temperature for protection from
 thermal shock and oxidation.

 Controlling heat loss to temperature-sensitive components.

 Providing improved wear-resistance.

Ceramic coatings can provide wear resistance, depending on the type
of mechanical loading involved.  Sliding wear, typically found in
valve stems and piston rings, requires a coating having  a low
coefficient of friction, such as aluminum, bronze or titanium
dioxide.  On the other hand, cam lobes and crankshafts need a
coating with a combination of high compressive strength and bond
strength, such as tungsten-carbide and chromium-carbide coatings.
The advent of higher exhaust-gas temperatures has led to research
of other types of ceramic coating methods.  A two-layer ceramic
coating for the inner passages of the ductile-iron exhaust
manifolds of diesel engines has been developed by researchers at
Hino Motors Ltd. and Hitachi Metals Ltd.  Coating is done by
passing a ceramic slurry containing a water glass binder through
the manifold.  Good adhesion between the iron substrate and the
coating is ensured by a layer of magnetite (2Fe0-Si02), which is
formed on the coating prior to coating.

The two-layer coating applied to the manifold is designed to
withstand cracking and peeling caused by the thermal shocks of
high-temperature exhaust gases. Testing of coated diesel-engine
manifolds confirms that oxidation is reduced and reliable operation
is obtained without cracking or peeling at temperatures to about
800 degree C.  But higher temperatures cause the coating to shrink.

This limits use of the coating to the temperature range experienced
by conventional, uncoated iron manifolds.  Coatings capable of
higher operating temperatures are needed if iron manifolds are to
compete successfully with stainless steel parts.

Additional research and development efforts are needed if auto
makers are to realize the protection from high temperatures
afforded by ceramic coatings.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

Researchers Grow Diamond on Nickel Substrate

The epitaxial growth of diamond on a nickel substrate has been
accomplished by Japanese researchers at STA's National Institute
for Research in Inorganic Materials (NIRIM) and Onada Cement Co.,
Ltd.

The researchers used a nickel single-crystal substrate, over which
they circulated a 0.5 percent methane gas mixture at a temperature
of approximately 880 degree C.  This produced epitaxial growth of
diamond crystal on the substrate crystal and is claimed to be the
first hetero-epitaxial growth of diamond on a substrate material
other than cubic boron nitride.

According to both organizations, the researchers have yet to
produce a single-crystal film of diamond, but NIRIM confirmed that
epitaxial growth is indeed possible on a cobalt single-crystal
substrate.  In addition, reports indicate that a copper single-
crystal substrate may be used because of its suitable crystalline
structure.

For more information contact NIRIM, 1-1 Namiki Sakuramura,
Niihari-gun, Tsukuba-shi, Ibaraki-ken 305 Japan, and the Onada
Cement Company, Ltd., 6276 Onoda, Onoda City, Yamaguchi 756 Japan.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

Diamond Coating for Erosion Protection

The Science and Technology Center of Westinghouse Electric Corp.
has developed a diamond coating process for the protection of zinc
sulphide and zinc selenide soft windows, used in infrared sensors,
from erosion caused by rain, dust, or sand.

It should be noted that previous attempts to deposit diamond
directly onto optical surfaces have been unsuccessful due to
diamond's chemical and mechanical incompatibility with the
substrate material, and to the fuzzy image created by the
unevenness of the grown film surface.  The Westinghouse method
eliminates these problems by first depositing a diamond film onto
another material using microwave plasma-assisted chemical vapor
deposition.  The diamond-coated material is embedded in a
chalcogenide glass bonding layer, and the glass is sandwiched
between the zinc compound and diamond film.  The outer surface,
which is the original substrate, is removed and exposes the diamond
nucleation surface.  The bonding process is independent of the
method used to deposit the diamond film. An immediate application
targeted for this process is the protection of infrared optics.
Quality optics in the visual range requires further work to reduce
a slight residual fuzziness caused by scattering, but visual image
distortion has been almost eliminated.  The company has filed for
a patent on its optical brazing technique.

Westinghouse researchers have coated windows up to about 40 mm (1.5
in.) in diameter.  Work on coating larger windows and curved
surfaces is under way.  The program is funded by the U.S. Naval
Weapons Center, China Lake, California, and Westinghouse.

According to the company, future applications could include
multispectral windows that pass both visual and IR wavelengths, for
missles and spacecraft, protection of photovoltaic cells in space,
shatterproof plastic eyeglasses, and scratch-free watch crystals
and mirrors.

For more information, contact Westinghouse Corp., Science and
Technology Center, 1310 Beulah Road, Pittsburg, PA 15235.
Corrosion-Resistant Carbon Steel for Producing Process Equipment

The Kemira Engineering Company of Finland has developed a technique
for bonding ordinary carbon steel and special metals together to
produce a fully corrosion-resistant coated steel.  The major
application for this kind of steel is the production of pressure
vessels and other types of process equipment.  The coating may be
a layer of acid-resistant or stainless steel, zirconium, titanium,
or tantalum.

The technique is called Chemface cladding.  Cost reductions of 30
to 50 percent are estimated over conventional designs using
expensive metals.  The company claims that the properties imparted
by this technique include absolute adhesion, vacuum integrity of
linings, and good mechanical strain resistance.

Depending on the temperature, the bond strength is estimated to be
ten to twenty times that needed for operation under vacuum.
Another application being considered for Chemface linings is the
replacement of vitreous enamel and other more conventional linings
to reduce maintenance costs.

For additonal information contact Kemira Engineering, Oulu Office,
POB 171, SF 90101 Oulu, Finland.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

Toyota Develops Material with Controlled Hardness

A material that can be stimulated by an external voltage to
increase its hardness without increasing its volume has been
developed by the Toyota Motor Company.  The new material is
composed of cobalt polymethacrylate particles dispersed in a matrix
of isoprene rubber.  When the external voltage is applied, the
binding forces between the entangled chains of particles increase,
reducing the elasticity of the chains and hardening the material.
There are no visible external changes and the volume of the
material remains constant.

The hardness of a 1 mm-thick film of this material can be adjusted
from 0.1 to 1.0 MPa.  Since the changes do not involve the
absorption or release of water, the material could be used in the
elctronic suppression of irregular vibrations in car engines and
bodies.

For additonal information contact Toyota Motor Corp., Central
Research and Development Laboratories, 1 Toyota-CHO, Toyota City,
AICHI 471, Japan.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

Zinc Coating On Site

Zinc coating can now be done on site without having to dismantle
structures, according to Galvatech Ltd. of the United Kingdom.
Described by the company as a "unique" anticorrosion product, Zinga
zinc coating can be applied by brush or spray.  It is a liquid
component which when dry contains at least 95 percent electrolytic
zinc that bonds to steel or iron, even if mildly rusted, to provide
maximum corrosion protection.

Zinga actually provides cathodic protection.  The zinc coating
rusts instead of the steel or iron base.  If the zinc coating is
scratched, the rust cannot creep under the coating and cause
bubbling.  Worn hot-dip galvanizing can be recoated.  It is not
necessary to dismantle structures like barriers, fencing or pylons.

Existing coatings of Zinga can be renewed and the new surface will
resemble its original condition.  There will be no separation
between the layers.  The company says that structures do not have
to be grit-blasted again after coating.  Mildly rusted structures
can be recoated without grit-blasting.

For more information contact Galvatech Ltd., 193 John St., London
EC1V 4QA, UK.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

INDUSTRY NEWS - Spire Corporation Announces First Quarter Sales and
Earnings

On May 14th, Roger G. Little, President and Chairman of the Board
of Spire Corporation, announced sales and revenues of $4,136,000
for the quarter ended March 31, 1991.  This compared to $4,836,000
recorded for the first quarter of 1990.  Results of operations
showed a profit of $1,000 or $0.00 per share, compared to net
earnings of $155,000 or $0.04 per share for the first quarter of
1990.

Mr. Little stated, "The decline in revenue that we experienced was
due primarily to reduced government R&D funding, principally
because of procurement delays.  This was anticipated.  We took
steps to cut nearly $2,000,000 per year in indirect expenses during
the latter half of 1990.  These cuts allowed us to break even for
the quarter with reduced revenues."

Mr. Little also said, "Our backlog has grown to $11 million.  We
have booked $5 million in new business since the beginning of 1991.

Included are major new government programs for optical component
and laser diode development as well as significant commercial
contracts.  With this increased backlog, we hope to be able to
improve quarterly revenues throughout the remainder of the year.
Improved revenues with continued cost containment could be
reflected in the Company's overall performance."

Spire produces unique epitaxial wafers, offers production ion
implantation processing services, and sells photovoltaic and
semiconductor processing equipment and related technology.  Spire's
customers span the biomedical, electronics, aerospace, defense and
energy industries worldwide.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

DOD Center for Technical Information on Metals

A U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) Information Analysis Center
devoted to metals has been established at Purdue University in West
Lafayette, Indiana.  Called the Metals Information Analysis Center
(MIAC), it is operated by Purdue's Center for Information and
Numerical Data Analysis and Synthesis (CINDAS).  The mission of
MIAC is to provide the DOD community with engineering and
scientific data on metals and alloys, intermetallic compounds,
coatings, and metal joints and welds.  The center is under the
direction of Jerome Persh, staff specialist for materials and
structures at the Pentagon's Office of the Director of Research and
Engineering (Research and Advanced Technology).

MIAC will also handle bibliographic and technical inquiries,
prepare and publish handbooks and data books, sponsor conferences
and workshops, and issue reports, critical reviews and prepare
technology assessments.  A free newsletter is published by the
center.

For more information, contact MIAC/CINDAS, Purdue University, 2595
Yeager Road, West Lafayette, IN 47906.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

Surface Engineering Facilities Expanded

The Welding Institute (TWI) of Abington, United Kingdom, has added
a high velocity oxy-fuel system and a sol-gel laboratory to its
surface engineering facilities.

According to TWI, these additions will help it to provide
additional services to industry for both ceramics and metal matrix
composites, as well as metals.

Other surface engineering services currently located at TWI include
friction and laser surfacing, electron beam transformation
hardening, and arc spraying for coatings.

For further information contact The Welding Institute, Abington
Hall, Abington, Cambridgeshire CB1 6AL, United Kingdom.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

Spire Wins Army Research Contract for Advanced Surface Texturing

In late May, Spire Corporation and the U.S. Army Materials
Technology Laboratory signed a $5 million research and development
contract, the largest in Spire's history.  It supports a three year
program to explore uses of SPI-TEXTTM surface texturing technology
for stray light suppression in advanced Army sensor systems.

Optical sensors are of vital importance to the next generation of
Army interceptors, designed to guard against ballistic missiles.
Since their mission requires extreme sensitivity and
discrimination, these sensor systems must have exceedingly dark
interior surfaces, or optical baffles, to achieve adequate stray
light rejection and pointing accuracy.  Baffle materials must
maintain their optical performance in the face of the shock loads
of interceptor launch and maneuver.  In addition, baffle materials
cannot introduce contamination which would compromise the sensor
system's signal-to-noise performance.

Today's commercially available baffle materials consist of either
black paints or acid-bath anodized metals.  The best baffle
materials have highly textured surfaces to create low reflectivity.
But these surfaces are fragile and easily damaged by incidental
contact during handling.  They also shed particles under flight
vibration.  A critical examination of failure mechanisms in current
materials suggested an innovative approach to producing superior
baffle materials.  Essentially, this approach is to texture the
metal surface directly, creating millions of light-trapping pores
and cones per square centimeter.

This leaves a sturdy metal surface without minute, fragile
interfaces subject to mechanical failure.

In an earlier research program with the Army Materials Technology
Lab, Spire developed SPI-TEXT ion beam texturing technology to
produce extremely dark surfaces which are immune to damage from
ordinary handling.  This program, sponsored by the U.S. Army
Strategic Defense Command and the U.S. Strategic Defense Initiative
Organization, produced textured aluminum surfaces as dark as the
best commercial baffle materials without compromising mechanical
hardness.  In simulated launch vibration tests, this material
produced no detectable contamination on adjacent catcher plates.
Accoring to Dr. Edward A. Johnson, Spire program manager, "SPI-TEXT
offers a technological breakthrough to meet the stray light
suppression needs of advanced sensor systems."

Roger Little, President of Spire, said, "Spire is extremely proud
of the progress made to date in this important technology
development effort and of our contribution to the Army strategic
defense program.  We believe that our approach to hardened baffle
materials technology development has provided the Army with
substantially improved materials quickly and cost effectively.  We
are eager to continue our cooperation with the U.S. Army Materials
Technology Laboratory to develop advanced material solutions to
meet the stray light suppression requirements of present and future
Army strategic defense systems."

For more information contact Dr. Edward A. Johnson, Manager,
Defense and Aerospace Projects, Spire Corp., Bedford, MA 01730.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

U.S. Navy Chooses American Cyanimide Aluminum Core

Aluminum honeycomb core from American Cyanimide in Wayne, N.J. has
been chosen by the Navy to replace the present core material
because of its superior corrosion resistance.  The honeycomb core
is phosphoric-acid anodized and primed.

Test samples were exposed to 100 percent relative humidity, and 6
to 8 percent salt spray at 140 degree F for a period of 30 days.
They were then subjetced to various kinds of damage such as dents,
cuts and holes that went through the core.  After being exposed for
an additional 60 days, they still showed no corrosion.

The PAA-Core is fabricated by laminating aluminum sheets and
expanding to form hexagonal cells.  With corrosion eliminated,
lighter structures are possible.  The end-results include extended
service life and reduction in repair costs and downtime.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

RECENT COMPUTER SEARCHES AND ABSTRACTS

Fast Drying Coatings and Finishes.  January 1980-October 1989.
(A Bibliography from World Surface Coatings Abstracts)

Published Search from National Technical Information Service,
Springfield, VA.

This bibliography contains citations concerning fast drying
coatings and finishes including lacquers, primer coatings,
acrylates and acrylic copolymers, paints, adhesives, and varnishes.

Applications in the automotive, wood finishing, and general paints
and coatings industries are presented.  Selected patents of quick
drying coating compounds are also included.  (This updated
bibliography contains 179 citations, 65 of which are entries new to
the previous edition.)

Available from NIST: PB90-860537/ABS



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

Ion Beam Sputtering.  December 1976-November 1989.  (A Bibliography
from the Compendex Database).

Published Search from National Technical Information Service,
Springfield, VA.

This bibloigraphy contains citations concerning the development and
applications of ion beam sputtering technology.  Topics include
sputter deposition of films, evaluation analysis of sputtered
materials, ion beam sources, surface modification and texturing,
and protective and optical coatings.  Methods of sputtering
semiconductor materials and silicon compounds are presented.  Ion
beam sputtering techniques examined include reactive, focused,
neutral, and double ion beam types.  (This updated bibliography
contains 225 citations, 83 of which are entries new to the previous
edition.)

Available from NIST: PB90-860511/ABS



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

Spray Deposition: A Fundamenatl Study of Droplet Impingement,
Spreading and Consolidation.

Prepared by D. Apelian, A. Lawley, and P. Mathur.  Drexel
University Department of Materials Engineering, Philadelphia, PA.

This report summarizes the objectives, approach and salient results
of a program on spray casting.  Spray casting via the Osprey<191>
process is emerging as a promising technology to produce
near-net-shaped components of advanced materials.  The process
involves the sequential stages of gas atomization and droplet
consolidation on a substrate to produce a disk, billet, tube,
and/or strip.  The major advantage of spray casting is the ability
to produce uniform, fine grained materials at deposition rates in
the range 0.25-2.5 kg/s in a single operation from the melt.
Composite materials can be manufactured by injecting second phase
particles into the spray of droplets, or by in-situ reactions
between the droplets and the gas during flight.  The objectives
were to develop a scientific understanding of the physical and
thermal phenomena that are active during spray casting and which
govern the shape and microstructural integrity of the preforms and
to evaluate the Osprey process for processing bulk high-strength
low-alloy steels.

Available from NTIS: AD-A217 202/1/ABS




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

Method of Preparing a Thin Diamond Film

Prepared by R.A. Neifield, Department of the Army, Washington, DC.
Filed December 18, 1989, 8p AD-D014 369/3.  This government-owned
invention available for U.S. licensing and, possibly, for foreign
licensing.  Copy of application available from NTIS.

This patent application provides a method of making a diamond thin
film that will be characterized by high thermal-conductivity, large
band-gap, and high electron-mobility, or the properties that are
desired for electronic devices.  A thin diamond film is prepared by
immersing a substrate in a liquid containing carbon and hydrogen
and then subjecting the substrate to at least one laser pulse.

Available from NTIS: PAT-APPL-7-451 699/ABS



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

Laser Assisted Cladding of Refractory Materials

Prepared by R.D. Creehan, Physical Sciences Inc., Andover, MA.

The objective of the study is to establish the feasibility of using
high-power lasers in a novel thermomechanical process for cladding
of high-melting substrate alloys without producing excessive
melting or thermal damage to the underlying substrate or cladding
foil.  By heating the interface of the clad material and substrate
alloy to the eutectic temperature of the binary alloy, a superior
metallurgical bond is produced with minimal melting and heating.
With the process, only a very narrow region of the clad-substrate
interface is actually fused and the clad surface retains a smooth
texture which does not require subsequent machining.  The coverage
rates which can be obtained with the process are one to two orders
of magnitude higher than reported in the literature for laser-
assisted fusion cladding processes in which the entire clad layer
is fused.

Available from NTIS: PB90-1770 15/ABS



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

Chemical Cleaning of Aluminum Alloy Surfaces for Use as Vacuum
Materials in Synchrotron Light Sources

Prepared by N. Kaufherr, A. Krauss, D.M. Gruen, and R. Nielsen,
Argonne National Laboratory, IL

Photon and electron desorption from the vacuum chamber walls of
electron storage rings such as the proposed Advanced Photon Source
(APS), are sometimes responsible for the production of large gas
loads during operation even in systems with very good static
vacuum.  The gas released by beam-induced desorption results in
scattering of the beam electrons, and a consequent reduction in the
beam lifetime.  In extreme cases, the beam-induced outgassing may
cause so much scattering that it is not possible to obtain the
design goals with regard to obtainable beam current.  Consequently,
it is important that the surfaces which are exposed to the electron
beam and photon fluxes contain as little trapped gas as possible,
and that the gas burden during operation be kept as low as
possible.  The current study investigates the effectiveness of a
chemical cleaning tratment developed at CERN for the LEP storage
ring, as applied to the 6063 alloy to be used in APS.
Additionally, depth profiling of the chemically cleaned samples and
samples which were vapor-degreased only, provides new insight on
the cleaning process as it applies to the alloy proposed for use in
APS.  14 refs., 8 figures.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

SPECIAL PATENT ABSTRACTS

Patent Number: 5,001,002

Issue Date: 3/19/91

Inventor(s): Gribbin, John D.; Bothe, Lothar; Dinter, Peter

Origin: DEX

Assignee: Hoechst Aktiengesellschaft

Title: Sheet-like structure consisting of a substrate and a coating

Abstract: A sheet-like structure consists of an adhesion-promoting
coating on at least one surface of the substrate.  The
adhesion-improving coating is produced by treating this substrate
surface with an electrical corona discharge between high voltage
electrodes and a grounded counter-electrode while simultaneously
spraying an aerosol into the corona discharge zone.  The aerosol
contains, for example, an aqueous emulsion of thermoplastic and/or
crosslinkable components as an adhesion-promoting agent.

Patent Number: 5,004,510

Issue Date: 4/2/91

Inventor(s): Yu, Meng W.; Su, Shihuai; Chen, Yue Z.; Zheng,
Ticheng; Ji, Kebin; Ling, Shou R.; Lin, Jian C.; Deng, Jianhui;
Zhang, Kunwu

Origin: CNX

Assignee: PanZhiHua Iron & Steel Co.

Title: Process for manufacturing high strength railroad rails

Abstract: Steel rails having reduced camber and improved wear
resistance provided by enhanced rail head strength and hardness
level decreasing uniformly from the rail head surface to a depth of
15 to 25 mm, are produced by a method and apparatus in which the
rail is preheated below the A.sub.c3 temperature, heated above the
A.sub.c3, cooled in air, cooled three dimensionally with compressed
air directed on the top and at an angle of 1-10 degrees onto the
sides of the rail head, and further cooled with liquid coolant.


Patent Number: 5,006,588

Issue Date: 4/9/91
Inventor(s): Miller, Robert N.

Origin: GA

Assignee: Lockheed Corporation

Title: Corrosion and crack growth-inhibiting compound, coating, and
sealant material and method of making.

Abstract: A corrosion and crack growth-inhibitor and method of
making are disclosed, the inhibitor being relatively non-toxic as
well as unreactive with elastomeric material so as to form a
coating and sealing composition for application to various metal
surfaces.


Patent Number: 5,008,153

Issue Date: 4/16/91

Inventor(s): Hayes, Deborah E.

Origin: PA

Assignee: PPG Industries, Inc.

Title: Corrosion inhibitive pretreatment for "copper free" mirrors

Abstract: A pretreatment composition comprising a combination of an
adhesion promoter and corrosion inhibitor which is applied to the
surface of a substrate, and a process for pretreating the surface
of a substrate before the deposition of thin metallic films to
prepare mirrored substrates.


Patent Number: 5,007,981

Issue Date: 4/16/91

Inventor(s): Kawasaki, Yoshinao; Kawahara, Hironobu; Sato,
Yoshiaki; Fukuyama, Ryooji; Nojiri, Kazuo; Torii, Yoshimi

Origin: JPX
Assignee: Hitachi, Ltd.

Title: Method of removing residual corrosive compounds by plasma
etching followed by washing

Abstract: A sample is plasma etched and then treated with a second
plasma to remove residual corrosive compounds formed by the etching
plasma.  Removal of the residual corrosive compounds and prevention
of corrosion is improved by washing the surface of the sample after
the second plasma treatment with at least one liquid in order to
effect at least one of (a) removal of the residual corrosive
compounds and (b) passivation of the surface. The step of washing
is followed by drying the sample.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
SURFACE MODIFICATION TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JUNE 1991

Market for Abrasive Materials to Expand

The market for cubic boron nitride (CBN) and diamond will expand at
an average annual growth rate of 8.7 percent, reaching $200 million
by 1995, according to Business Communications Co., Norwalk, CT.
Both substances are known as superabrasives.

In a recently published report, BCC says that CBN will show the
largest growth rate increasing in value by 17.3 percent annually to
1995.  Diamonds will exhibit an 8 percent average annual growth
rate in the same period.  The report is titled "Abrasives:
Materials, Processing, Applications, Economics and Markets."  Its
order number is GB-135.

For additional information contact Business Communications Company,
25 Van Zant Street, Norwalk, CT 06855.  Telephone 203-853-4266.
Fax 203-853-0348.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B08-39</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000629-B019-390</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ml13.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035008 text/html 74934
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:48:03 GMT
Last-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:47 GMT
Content-length: 74747
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ml13.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
<A HREF="../index.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="/plweb/icons/nn_home.gif" ALT="NewsNet Home Page"></A><BR>
Copyright <BR>
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>CHEMICAL VAPOR DEPOSITION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>Diamond Swings&nbsp;into Sensors</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(484 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Diamond for Electron&nbsp;Field Emitters</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(369 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>Diamond Like Materials&nbsp;in Flat Panel Displays</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(258 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>New CVD Dielectrics&nbsp;Series from Lam</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(281 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>Smoother Films for&nbsp;Machine Tool Coatings</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(305 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>Another Diamond&nbsp;Patent for GE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(189 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>Diamond Nucleation by&nbsp;Gas Phase Seeding</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(174 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>EVAPORTATION AND SPUTTERING</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>Carbon-Coated&nbsp;Metal Particles</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(359 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>Photoluminescence&nbsp;in Thin Films</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(212 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>MRC Targets&nbsp;Win Certification</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(229 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ION BEAM TECHNOLOGY</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>World's Largest&nbsp;System Underway</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(433 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>Applied Materials&nbsp;Offers New Implanter</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(119 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>Brewer Offers Unique&nbsp;Ion-Implanted Polymers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(113 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>Focused Ion Beams&nbsp;Make Smaller Chips</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(175 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><LI>Metallizing Method&nbsp;for Medical Polymers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(142 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>EPITAXY</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>Advances in&nbsp;Quantum Wire</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(508 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><LI>AT&T Develops&nbsp;Stable Facet Films</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(357 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><LI>Single Crystal Films for&nbsp;High Frequency Uses</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(433 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><A HREF = "#19"><LI>Diffusion Barrier&nbsp;Method Patented</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(148 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><A HREF = "#20"><LI>Mid-IR Laser&nbsp;Likes It Warm</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(383 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><A HREF = "#21"><LI>Photodetectors&nbsp;Set a Record</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(211 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MATERIALS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#22"><A HREF = "#22"><LI>Laser Ablation&nbsp;of Diamond</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(360 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INDUSTRY NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#23"><A HREF = "#23"><LI>OnTrak Ships First&nbsp;CMP Polishing System</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(256 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><A HREF = "#24"><LI>Team Dreams of&nbsp;Future DRAMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(104 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><A HREF = "#25"><LI>Ultratech, Photronics&nbsp;Sign Agreement</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(277 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><A HREF = "#26"><LI>ART Teams with&nbsp;European Firm</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(160 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><A HREF = "#27"><LI>Mullins Receives&nbsp;Top MRS Award</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(202 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>Briefly Noted:</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(296 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>TESTING AND ANALYSIS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#29"><A HREF = "#29"><LI>Tencor & Uniphase&nbsp;Combine Technology</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(240 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><A HREF = "#30"><LI>Product Award to&nbsp;Digital Instruments</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(156 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><A HREF = "#31"><LI>Tylan's Scotland Facility&nbsp;Gets ISO Certification</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(133 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><A HREF = "#32"><LI>Portable Analytical&nbsp;System Offered</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(87 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><A HREF = "#33"><LI>New Defect Data&nbsp;Management System</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(209 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#34"><LI>BOOKS AND REPORTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(545 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#35"><LI>MEETINGS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(237 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#36"><LI>CALENDAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(343 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Diamond Swings
into Sensors

The Fall Meeting of the Materials Research Society (MRS) included
several highlights on diamond technology.  Of particular interest
is research being done in diamond sensing applications at
Vanderbilt University (Nashville, TN 37235) by J.L. Davidson (Tel:
615/322-3479, Fax: 615/322-7996) and W.P. Kang.

Sensors used to be simple mechanical springs or thermometers, but
electronic control and processing demand more sensitive and
interfaceable devices.  The area of optic sensors has become
sophisticated, led by demands for missile guidance and clearer TV
images.  The area of mechanical and chemical sensors has lagged
behind because of the lack of an appropriate semiconductor material
to meet the requirements.

The entrance of diamond as a deposited layered film is changing the
picture.  Diamond's attractive properties such as very fast charge
carriers, high electric breakdown, and heat conductivity result in
the best estimated performance for speed and power of any material.


Recently the discovery and development of what might be called
sophisticated secondary effects in diamond are opening interesting
sensor applications.  For example, diamond containing boron becomes
a semiconductor like silicon and will change electrical resistance
with strain, called piezoresistance.

This means it can be used as a strain gauge on rugged electronic
microsensors for pressure and acceleration sensing.  CVD
polycrystalline diamond films have been applied in radiation
detectors, photodetectors and thermistors.  They have the
properties of wide bandgap, low thermal coefficient of expansion,
and high thermal conductivity.

The paper presented at the MRS Meeting by the Vanderbilt
researchers discusses some critical issues about diamond for
microelectromechanical sensing applications such as the stress
limits and high temperature responses of a diamond pressure sensor.
The authors describe an all diamond pressure microsensor that
measures pressures when the temperature exceeds 600(F.  This means
that miniature electronic sensors can be used in critical places
not previously possible, such as the end of oil well drill bits and
in power plants and engines near the combustion zones.

The researchers have also observed that layered diamond films can
behave as chemical sensors measuring oxygen, hydrogen, and many
other chemicals.  For example, a diamond-based chemical gas sensor
using layers of metal and diamond which acts directly as an
electronic device has been made and its behavior as a gas sensor
has been studied.  The adsorption of gases such as those found in
automobile exhausts by the diamond sensor causes changes in its
electrical current behavior similar to altering the sensitive
properties of a transistor. Thus, an electronic change arises from
the presence of a chemical.

This kind of input, coupled to amplifying and computing
electronics, provides sensitive, fast and accurate chemical
measurements which can be very useful in emission control.  Because
the sensor is diamond, it can perform these functions in
environments and at temperatures that would not support monitoring.
Additional information on this research can be obtained by
contacting the authors at the address and number above.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Diamond for Electron
Field Emitters

Another application for diamond technology highlighted at the MRS
Fall Meeting was presented by Wei Zhu (AT&T Bell Labs, Tel:
908/582-7659, Fax: 908/582-2783) and involved the electron field
emission properties of diamond.  Field emitters may be a potential
replacement for hot cathode tubes, because emitters are smaller and
use less power.  Diamond is a preferred field emission material due
to its durability, long lifetime and the low wattage it needs to
perform electronic tasks.

Field emitters are useful for a number of applications including
microwave power amplifiers, flat panel displays, ion guns and
electron sources for microscopes.  Typical field emitters use
metals or semiconductors like silicon with sharp tip geometries.
But the control voltage required for emission from these materials
is relatively high (about 100 V) because of their work functions.


The high voltage operation increases the probability of damaging
instabilites due to ion bombardment and surface diffusion of the
emitting tips, so high power densities have to be supplied from an
external source to produce the required emission current.  In
addition, the fabrication of uniform sharp tips over a large area
proves to be a difficult and expensive process.

Diamond has recently emerged as a desirable field emission material
because of its negative electron affinity and good mechanical and
chemical properties.  To induce stable electron emission from
diamond, however, either the bulk or the surface of diamond must be
made conductive.  And to take advantage of diamond's negative
electron affinity for low voltage emission, diamond must be doped
as a n-type semiconductor.  Unfortunately, effective and reliable
n-type dopants for diamond are not available at the present time.


The AT&T researchers have investigated the emission properties of
a variety of undoped and p-type doped diamond samples, including
CVD deposited diamond and commercial diamond produced by the
traditional high pressure, high temperature method.  They found a
strong correlation between the electrical field required for
emission and the density of defects introduced in diamond.

Low emission fields have been consistently demonstrated for
appropriately processed diamond emitters.  The present status and
future prospects of field emitters for various potential
applications with respect to the availability of suitable materials
was also discussed in the presentation.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Diamond Like Materials
in Flat Panel Displays

A specific presentation on diamond and diamond-like materials for
flat panel displays was presented at the MRS meeting by Keith
Jamison and others  of SI Diamond Technology (Houston, TX; Tel:
713/529-9040, Fax: 713/529-1147).  The next generation of flat
panel displays for computers, personal digital assistants, and
other portable displays may rely on field emitted electrons
striking phosphor as the light source.

This design is essentially a flat CRT where each pixel has its own
electron gun.  Recent experiments have shown that diamond and
diamond-like materials may make robust field emission electron
sources for this application.  Diamond has a high thermal
conductivity, relative insensitivity to contamination and, when
grown under certain conditions, can emit electrons at relatively
low electric fields.

SI Diamond Technology has constructed a prototype 50 x 50 pixel
display using diamond like carbon as the electron source as a proof
of concept for diamond field emission displays.  The company is
currently building a 1/4 VGA display that can be used in commercial
applications.

The electron emission properties of SIDT's diamond like carbon
cathode was presented and compared to other diamond and diamond-
like carbon emitters.  The emission properties were determined
using a number of novel analytical techniques that simulate a field
emission flat panel display and measure the emission uniformity of
the material and emission site density over a given area.  The
cathode requirements for SIDT's flat panel display was also
presented along with current performance of the diamond like carbon
cathode presently used by the company.  For more information,
contact SIDT.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

New CVD Dielectrics
Series from Lam

Lam Research Corp. (Fremont, CA; Tel: 510/572-6692, Fax: 510/572-
2935) announced two next generation CVD systems that answer
production level dielectric film requirements on leading edge
devices with 0.35-micron and below design rules.

The Deep SubMicron (DSM) 9900 deposits superior quality insulating
films between metal layers for intermetal dielectric (IMD)
applications, while the DSM 9800 performs premetal dielectric (PMD)
applications by depositing dielectric films prior to first
metallization.  In addition, the 9800 does a number of other
applications including Si02 spacers and Ta205 storage capacitors
for 256 megabit dynamic random access memories (DRAMs).

Together, these systems provide comprehensive dielectric film
solution for chipmakers adopting 0.35-micron and below technology.
Both systems are enhancements to Lam's prior generation systems
tradenamed Integrity PMD and Epic CVD tools introduced for advanced
development efforts in 1990 and 1993.

Lam's chairman and CEO Roger D. Emerick noted that the 9000 series
reflects Lam's intensified focus on the CVD market.  "We first
entered the market in the early 1990s with leapfrog technology.
Once the market demand caught up with our technical innovations, we
needed to prepare these tools for production proliferation," stated
Emerick.

He added that the systems were designed with technology
extendability in mind--both the DSM 9900 and the DSM 9800 have
deposited films on devices with 0.18-micron feature sizes, and the
DSM 9800 has successfully deposited high quality films on 300 mm
wafers.

To meet production requirements, the new 9000 series CVD tools
incorporate features and benefits developed over the last year in
cooperation with several leading chipmakers and SEMATECH.  Specific
changes include reduced footprint, increased throughput, lower cost
of ownership, and the development of process solutions for specific
film types.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Smoother Films for
Machine Tool Coatings

Researchers at Argonne National Lab (Argonne, IL 60439; Tel:
800/627-2596) have developed a new process for growing thin diamond
films from C60 molecules, known as buckyballs or fullerenes.  The
process, which uses fullerenes as precursors for diamond film
growth, produces nanocrystalline films with unique properties.

Very rough films are produced by conventional methods and to make
them smoother would slow the growth rate and interject graphitic
phases into the finished product.  The Argonne films can be made as
rapidly as the rough films but they are true diamond with very
small grain size and are exceptionally smooth (as much as 17
nanometers rms) even at film thicknesses greater than 10
micrometers.  They do not need the expensive post-deposition
polishing required for conventionally grown diamond films.

In this new process, diamond film is grown from fullerene molecules
instead of from hydrocarbons such as methane.  The buckyballs
collide and fragment into highly energetic carbon dimers (C2).  The
dimers then insert into the diamond lattice to form a new diamond
layer.  Since little hydrogen is added in the process compared with
conventional methods, the resulting films have very low hydrogen
content and are high quality.

Because of their smoothness, these films could be used as coatings
for machine tools and bearings.  The films have been deposited on
substrates such as silicon, silicon carbide, silicon nitride,
tungsten and tungsten carbide.  Friction coefficients are as low as
0.05 and, because of their smoothness, the wear rates of the
counterface material have been found to be as much as 100 times
lower than for conventional diamond thin films.  In addition, under
a cooperative R&D agreement funded by the Dept. of Energy's (DOE)
Office of Energy Research, Laboratory and Technology Transfer
Program, Argonne and SI Diamond Technologies (Houston, TX) are
evaluating the films as candidates for filed emission displays.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Another Diamond
Patent for GE

A microwave or flame-assisted method of depositing CVD diamond was
revealed in U.S. Patent 5,464,665, issued November 11, 1995.  The
inventors are Thomas R. Anthony and James F. Fletcher and the
assignee is General Electric in New York.

Broadly, the present invention is directed to improving a chemical
vapor phase deposition (CVD) method for synthesis of diamond
wherein a hydrocarbon/hydrogen gaseous mixture is subjected to a
combustion flame in the presence of oxygen to at least partially
decompose the gaseous mixture to form CVD diamond. The improvement
in process comprises subjecting said combustion flame to one or
more of dielectric heating, d.c. discharge, or a.c. discharge.

Dielectric heating can be accomplished by subjecting the combustion
flame to microwave (MW) frequency discharge or radiofrequency (RF)
discharge. By superimposing dielectric heating or d.c./a.c.
discharge plasma generation on combustion flame process, the carbon
utilization rate of the combustion flame process should improve
substantially. As noted above, given the low carbon utilization
rate for combustion flame techniques already, small percentage
improvements in the carbon utilization rates translate into
substantial cost savings in generation of CVD diamond by such
combustion flame technique.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Diamond Nucleation by
Gas Phase Seeding

Diamond films have been deposited on substrates without
pretreatment by placement of a nickel wire above the substrate by
a group in Germany, led by Ch. Woll (Institut fur Angewandte
Physikalische Chemie, Universitat Heidelberg, INF 253, 69120
Heidelberg, Germany; email: cc1@ix.urz.uni-heidelberg.de), reported
in Applied Physics Letters.  The nickel wire was seen to increase
the nucleation density by five orders of magnitude.  Electron
microscopy showed continuous diamond films to be produced with
Raman spectroscopy and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy showing the
presence of Ni in the diamond phase.

The diamond was grown in a standard hot filament CVD chamber with
a tungsten hot coil and a resistively heated substrate holder.  The
substrate (100 or 111 silicon or Cu) was heated to 800-850oC, 5 mm
from the filament.  Growth rates of 0.5-1 micron/hour were attained
in a 0.5% methane, 95.5% hydrogen at a 100 sccm flow rate.  When
the Ni wires were placed 0.5-1 mm from the substrate diamond was
seen to grow preferentially in the area in line with the Ni wire
and the coil.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Carbon-Coated
Metal Particles

Researchers at Northwestern University (Evanston, IL, Tel: 708/491-
3115) have discovered a way to cover tiny pellets of metal with
graphite in an airtight fashion.  Electron microscope pictures of
the pellets, which measure less than a millionth of an inch across,
show layers of single atoms of graphite running around them.  The
pictures resemble bucky tubes, a relative of buckyballs.  Instead
of being hollow tubes, however, the spherical layers totally
encapsulate the round metal pellets.

The pellets, called encapsulated nanoparticles, form spontaneously
when graphite is present during the process of vaporizing the metal
particles using a tungsten-based electric arc, according to the
researchers.  They believe the pellets could be used in a wide
range of applications such as medicine, since they could travel
through the human bloodstream without exposing the body to the
metal contained inside.  They would be useful in MRI giving greater
clarity to images inside the body, and in anti-cancer therapy and
cell separations which currently use larger magnetic particles.

The discovery was described at the Fall Meeting of the MRS in
Boston by graduate student Jon Host.  The research team was headed
by D. Lynn Johnson and Julia Weertman, Walter P. Murphy professors
of materials science and engineering; Vinayak P. Dravid, associate
professor; and Thomas O. Mason, professor of materials science and
engineering at Northwestern's Robert R. McCormick School of
Engineering and Applied Science.

The pellets have other possible uses such as magnetic strips on
credit cards, magnetic ink on checks, and in cassette tapes.  The
finding was unexpected.  The original goal of the research was to
manufacture, analyze and utilize the tiny metal particles, which
measure 10 nanometers in diameter.  When a batch of nickel
particles was soaked in acid so it could be analyzed for any
possible contamination from the tungsten, it was discovered that a
black residue remained at the bottom of the container which
continued to be magnetic.

When analyzed with the transmission electron microscope, the
researchers realized that the nickel particles had been insulated
from the surrounding acid by the layers of carbon atoms surrounding
it.  The original findings were reported in the journal Nature.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Photoluminescence
in Thin Films

Photoluminescence has been detected in thin films of partially
oxidized silicon (Si) nanoclusters by scientists at the Lawrence
Livermore National Lab (Livermore, CA 94550; Tel: 510/422-1100).
The scientists, reports Lloyd L. Chase, synthesized Si nanoclusters
with average diameters of only a few nanometers (nm) using thermal
vaporization of Si in an argon (Ar) gas background.  The first
monolayer of Si nanoclusters was deposited directly onto the basal
plane of highly oriented pyrolytic graphite, and the layer was
exposed to oxygen (O2) for five minutes.  Although, additional
monolayers were added until the film thickness reached about 250
nm, no photoluminescence was observed.

Post annealing the film in O2 produced a white photoluminescence,
which peaked at about 600 nm.  The photoluminescence increased in
intensity as a function of annealing time and temperature up to
850(C without any accompanying shift in wavelength.  The decay time
was less than five nanoseconds.

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy revealed extensive oxidation of
the film, and the photoluminescence excitation spectrum of the film
showed a strong resemblance to the optical absorption curve of bulk
Si, except for an increase in absorption at wavelengths longer than
375 nm.  The scientists attribute the photoluminescence to the
recombination of carriers in localized defect centers in the
silicon oxide layer.






<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

MRC Targets
Win Certification

Materials Research Corp. (Orangeburg, NY), a leading supplier of
thin film manufacturing equipment and materials for the worldwide
semiconductor and magnetics industries announced that it has
received certification from Applied Materials, Inc. as an approved
supplier of aluminum alloy targets tradenamed Monobloc for the
Applied Materials Endura PVD system.  To support chipmakers, MRC
has also acquired an Endura 5500 physical vapor deposition system
for its Advanced Materials Division's (AMD) Thin Film Lab--making
it the first target supplier to make this equipment investment.

The certification from Applied means that MRC's Monobloc targets
meet Applied's stringent standards for reproducibility, thus
offering consistent performance over the life of the target.
According to Ken Barry, VP and general manager of MRC's Advanced
Materials Div., MRC worked with a major U.S. captive chipmaker to
obtain the certification.  "The certification is particularly
significant because it demonstrates the consistent performance of
MRC's Monobloc targets in a 200 mm production environment--between
wafer runs and across manufacturing sites.  Targets from three
different MRC facilities were tested, and all met certification
criteria," stated Barry.

When tested, the Monobloc targets achieved Rs uniformity of <5% 3
sigma over the life of the target.  In addition to Monobloc
targets, MRC manufactures targets for its own sputtering systems
tradenamed Eclipse, Primus, and Solarus.  MRC is also an
established supplier of refractory and precious metal targets for
the Endura system.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

World's Largest
System Underway

Implant Sciences Corp. (107 Audubon Rd., Wakefield, MA 01880, Tel:
617/246-0700, Fax: 617/246-1167) introduced the world's largest
system for ion implantation and ion beam-assisted deposition.  The
ISC ion beam processing system will be installed in Spring, 1996,
at the Environmental Technology Facility of the National Defense
Center for Environmental Excellence, operated by Concurrent
Technologies Corp. in Johnstown, PA.

NDCEE is a national demonstration facility dedicated to the
development of clean manufacturing techniques for the Dept. of
Defense (DOD), and transfer of environmentally sound process
technology to DOD contractors and American industry.

The system will be used, among other applications, to develop ion
beam-assisted evaporation of chromium and nitrogen ion implantation
as clean replacement processes for toxic hexavalent chrome
electroplating.

The stainless steel vacuum chamber is 6 ft. in diameter and 12 ft.
long, including extensions and a gantry/trolley system for
accepting large cylindrical parts up to 6 ft. long and one ton in
weight.  A 24 in. diameter rotary substrate table holds smaller
parts for ion beam processing, and may be tilted, heated or
electrically biased.  A planetary rotation fixture is also
included.

Multiple sensors measure substrate temperature, deposition rate,
beam current density, and analyze residual gas.  Two 20 in.
cryopumps, an 8 in. cryopump, a 245 CFM roughing pump, and a 30,000
liter/sec cryopanel comprise the pumping system, which is
supplemented by a UV lamp array to expedite outgassing of water and
organics.  An optional load lock for continuous processing is
available.

Three gas ion sources ranging from 30 eV to 100 keV are included in
the basic system, which has provisions for adding another ion or
deposition source.  Called the ISC-5000, the system has a high
current 100 kV bucket type ion source which provides a very high
nitrogen ion current of over 50 mA.  The system also features a
large low energy ion source and a medium energy ion source with
beam currents of 2.5 A and 1 A respectively.

Two electron beam evaporators allow the deposition of up to five
materials.  PVD evaporation combined with ion bombardment can
improve important coating properties such as adherence, hardness,
lubricity, and resistance to wear and corrosion.

Operation of the pumping system, ion sources and evaporators are
computer controlled.  Processes that are routinely performed
include ion implantation, ion beam precleaning, PVD using electron
beam evaporation, ion beam-assisted deposition, and ion beam mixing
of deposited coatings.  Ion beam polishing and etching can also be
done in the basic system.  A metal ion source can be added.  For
more information, contact A. J. Armini at Implant Sciences.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Applied Materials
Offers New Implanter

Applied Materials (Santa Clara, CA, Tel: 408/727-5555) introduced
its Precision Implant xR80 ion implanter which is targeted to the
low-energy implant market.  The energy range is capped at 80 KeV
but the system performs the delicate task of forming the
transistors on chips with deep submicron design rules.

The new implanter is capable of generating a beam at relatively
high current levels (5 milliamps at 5 KeV).  This boosts throughput
when forming the shallow junctions, as opposed to deep wells, of
DRAM and logic devices built with 0.25- and 0.18-micron line
widths.  The xR80 is tailored to the formation of transistors and
differs from the recently announced Genus implanter which is more
of a general purpose system.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Brewer Offers Unique
Ion-Implanted Polymers

Brewer Science, Inc. (2401 Brewer Dr., Rolla, MO 65401; Tel:
314/364-0300, Fax: 314/368-3318) has developed an ion-implanted
polymer with conductive coating applications.  The product can be
patterned by standard photolithography to form small geometry
features and suspended bridge structures.  Resistivity at 25oC is
variable from 400 ohms/square to 20 megaohms/square and film
thickness ranges from 500-1500 angstroms.

According to Brewer's Joseph J. Schueter, the company is actively
pursuing teaming and/or funding partners in order to take this
product to the commercial market.  He also notes that many of the
product's applications can be demonstrated in house.  Brewer
science is a mid-sized specialty chemical manufacturer located
about 90 miles south of St. Louis.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Focused Ion Beams
Make Smaller Chips

Los Alamos National Lab (New Mexico) researchers are trying to make
smaller computer chips using technology first developed for the
Ballistic Missile Defense Organization's now defunct Neutral
Particle program.  Ion beams used in microlithography are focused
by magnetic optics.  This technology offers narrower linewidths
than now possible which makes more compact and powerful circuits.

According to Dr. Tom Mottershead (Tel: 505/667-9730.) of Los
Alamos, this technology can achieve a 25-to-1 reduction in beam
diameter.  A sharp focus such as this allows the beam to deliver
high current densities for etching the fine lines of microchip
circuitry.  The technology is also useful in probing the surfaces
of high density microcircuits, inspecting the patterns of
photomasks, and checking for defects.  Data storage is another
possible application as focused beams of gallium ions could read
and write data in media more durable than today's CD-ROM.

Dr. Mottershead has proposed experimentation on an in-house basis
at the Lab's Accelerator Operations and Technology Div. using an
existing tandem electrostatic accelerator, and is interested in
possible collaborations with industry.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Metallizing Method
for Medical Polymers

An advanced method of coating polymeric implants was disclosed in
U.S. Patent 5,468,562 issued November 21, 1995.  The inventors are
Mohammad Farivar and Piran Sioshansi and the assignee is Spire
Corp., Bedford, MA.

A dry coating method and apparatus to accomplish it for surface
metallized polymeric implants, such as cannula, needles, catheters,
connectors and the like are disclosed.  The metallization of the
implants is intended to improve their biocompatibility and to
reduce infusion-associated phlebitis and infection.  The method
essentially includes the dry coating of the outside surfaces of the
polymeric implants with a metallic thin film. The apparatus to
effect the dry coating method essentially includes a vacuum
chamber, an evaporator and an ion source mounted in operative
association within the chamber, and means for rotatably mounting a
plurality of polymeric implants for exposure to the evaporator and
the ion source.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Advances in
Quantum Wire

Advances in the production of quantum wires is reported by a
research group at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
(Urbana, IL 61081).  The team, headed by Keh-Yung Cheng (Tel:
217/333-6642, Fax: 217/244-6375, email: kcheng@uxl.cso.uiuc.edu),
have used molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and strain induced lateral
layering ordering (SILO) techniques to build quantum wires,
nanoscale atomic structures believed to dramatically increase the
efficiency and reliability of light emitting devices such as laser
diodes.

Many of the advances in computing, data storage and
telecommunications have come as a result of the evolution of
semiconductor materials.  While silicon has been utilized to
stretch the bounds of computer processing power and speed, other
semiconductors have been applied to create photonic devices.  Such
devices can emit or detect light; for example, semiconductor laser
diodes can be used to read data from compact disks.

Over the past 30 years, the techniques for creating these
semiconductors have been refined.  Using an MBE method, scientists
can grow semiconductors in layers as thin as one atom.  By
selecting the types of semiconductor material, properties such as
the color of its light emissions can be engineered.

An ultrathin layer, or quantum well, has done much to improve the
reliability and efficiency of light emitting devices.  This quantum
well is the center of a semiconductor sandwich that is only a few
dozen atoms thick.  When structures approach this nanoscale,
electrons begin to change their characteristics and exhibit quantum
size effects.  Such changes can affect and improve the overall
performance of optical devices, such as achieving more light
generation for a laser diode.

The next step in quantum devices are structures that utilize
quantum wires.  Similar to quantum wells, quantum wires have atomic
scale thickness in two dimensions instead of one.  With this
additional degree of quantum confinement, it is theorized that even
higher levels of efficiency and reliability can be observed in
practical optical devices.

The color of a standard laser diode's output light can vary with
time and temperature.  Quantum wire lasers, though, are thought to
maintain uniform characteristics over a broader range of
environmental variables.  Until now, very little success has been
achieved in preparing such quantum wire structures.

In the Illinois work, the SILO process used MBE to grow
alternating, ultrathin layers, less than two atoms thick, inside
semiconductor structures.  The number of atoms in each layer is
slightly different, either lesser or greater, than would normally
be required.  The resulting atomic imbalance creates a strain force
inside the growing crystal.  The strain force, in turn, causes
certain atoms to group together along lines on the growing surface.
When the SILO process is combined with quantum well fabrication
techniques in MBE quantum wire regions are formed almost
automatically.

Cheng's group has demonstrated laser devices emitting in the
visible and infrared (IR) spectra range using quantum wires.  The
devices, showed various new and unexpected optical characteristics,
are the subject of further research at the university.  Eventual
end uses may include improved supermarket checkout scanners and
home fiber optic communications.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

AT&T Develops
Stable Facet Films

Silicon oxide (SiOx) films suitable for use as nonhermetic laser
facet coatings have been produced by researchers at AT&T Corp. (600
Mountain Ave., Murray Hill, NJ 07974; Tel: 201/582-3000).  Naresh
Chand relates, in U.S. Patent 5,440,575, that the new films have
low levels of cracks, voids and particulate contamination and that
they are stable in ambient atmospheres.

The surfaces of nearly all semiconductor lasers must be protected
and/or modified.  Although dielectric films suitable for some
devices are widely used, e.g., silicon dioxide (SiO2) on silicon
(Si), there is a need for a dielectric that is mechanically and
chemically stable and free of pinholes, cracks, particulates and
voids.  It should also have good adhesion, be highly resistant to
moisture penetration and be adaptable for use as a semiconductor
laser facet coating regardless of emission wavelength.

A number of materials, including yttrium stabilized zirconia (YSZ),
have been proposed, but end up with shortcomings, including poor
reproducibility with respect to refractive index and/or mechanical
stress and contamination with particulates.  In addition,
conventional facet coatings are not normally stable in the ambient
atmosphere, causing changes in laser properties and premature laser
failure.

Because of the problems associated with conventional facet
coatings, nearly all such devices are packaged in hermetic, gas-
filled enclosures.  These hermetic lasers are widely used in
optical fiber communications, optical interconnects, sensors, and
printing.  Hermetic enclosures add to the complexity of
manufacturing processes, reduces yield, and increases the cost of
the devices.  The AT&T researchers sought a highly reliable laser
facet coating stable in the ambient atmosphere.

The AT&T scientists discovered that under the right processing
conditions, high quality silicon oxide (SiOx) films suitable for
use as laser facet coatings could be produced.  The key to their
work was the use of a deposition by molecular beam technique
instead of conventional thermal evaporation processes.  The surface
layer of the film is nearly always SiO2, but this layer normally
represents only about 10% of the entire film in most cases.  If
particular reflectivities are needed, the SiOx film can be combined
with layers of other dielectric or semiconductor materials
deposited using the same technique.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Single Crystal Films for
High Frequency Uses

Another paper of interest to the thin film business was presented
at the Fall Materials Research Society Meeting.  It was part of the
epitaxial oxide thin films symposium and was given by Y. Suzuki and
colleagues from AT&T Bell Labs in New Jersey (Tel: 908/582-4633).
Others involved in this research include R.B. van Dover, E.M.
Gyorgy, V. Korenivski, Julia M. Phillips, D. Werder, C.H. Chen, and
R.J. Felder.  The basic thrust of this work follows.

High frequency filters that can be incorporated into integrated
circuits would ease design problems where power dissipation is
tightly budgeted.  In mobile communications, integrated filters
could have an impact on increasing performance while reducing size
and cost.  These filters are composed of capacitors and inductors.
While capacitors have been easily incorporated into integrated
circuit technology due to their planar geometry, inductor
components have not.

The solutions have been either to use discrete inductor components
or to simulate an inductor with a capacitor in an active circuit.
The former solution raises size and cost, while the latter possibly
reduces performance and reliability.  Therefore, a high performance
integrated inductor would be an excellent solution.

To fabricate an inductor with a large inductance, a significant
field has to be generated over a large volume.  The researchers can
increase the inductance of a thin film device material by using
high permeability material.  There are other requirements for the
materials to be used in these thin film inductors.  To reduce
dissipative losses due to eddy currents, a magnetic material with
low conductivity has to be used.

Other requirements include high saturation magnetization values at
room temperature and low magnetic losses.  Sinel structure ferrites
are good candidates.  The successful growth of single crystal
ferrites in thin film form is an important step towards their
future incorporation into integrated circuits operating at
microwave frequencies.

The AT&T researchers have successfully grown high quality single
crystalline spinel ferrite thin films of (Mn,Zn)Fe204 and CoFe204
on SrTi03 and MgAl204 substrates at low temperature.  These ferrite
films are buffered with spinel structure layers that are
nonmagnetic at room temperature.  Ferrite films grown on SrTi03 and
MgAl204 buffered with CoCr204 and NiMn204 exhibit excellent
crystallinity and bulk saturation values, thus indicating the
importance of lattice match and structural similarity between the
film and the immediately underlying layer.

X-ray diffraction, Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy, atomic
force microscopy, and transmission electron microscopy analysis
provide a consistent picture of the structural properties of these
ferrite films.  The researchers have also incorporated these single
crystalline ferrite thin films into device structures to take
advantage of their high permeability.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Diffusion Barrier
Method Patented

AT&T, NJ, was issued U.S. Patent 5,468,689 on November 21, 1995,
for a method for preparing a silicon nitride gallium diffusion
barrier for use in molecular beam epitaxial growth of gallium
arsenide (GaAs).  The inventors are John E. Cunningham, Keith W.
Goossen, William Y. Jan, and James A. Walker.

The technique involves reacting nitrogen and silane in a ratio of
less than 300:1 in a plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition
apparatus to form a silicon nitride layer.  This layer is deposited
on a reflowable glass layer previously deposited on a (100) silicon
substrate oriented 3 degrees off axis and bearing a thin film of
silicon dioxide.  Finally, GaAs is deposited by molecular beam
epitaxial growth on the silicon nitride layer.  The technique is
said to be of interest for use in the monolithic integration of
interconnected GaAs/AlGaAs double heterostructures, modulators and
silicon MOSFET structures.






<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Mid-IR Laser
Likes It Warm

A team of scientists from the Naval Research Lab (NRL) and the
University of Houston Space Vacuum Epitaxy Center (SVEC) has
developed a mid-infrared (IR) solid state laser which operates near
room temperature.

According to Shin-Shem Steven Pei, SVEC's associate director for
research (Tel: 713/743-3621; email: spei@uh.edu), lasing was
observed at temperatures up to 285 K (54(F). "This is by far the
highest operating temperature for an interband transition laser at
this wavelength," he explained. "We now have a device which works
with a compact thermoelectric cooler instead of a unwieldy
cryogenic system, and room temperature operation is just around the
corner."

The new laser is an optically-pumped InAs/GaInSb/AlInSb type-II
quantum well structure producing light at a wavelength of 4
microns. The device was fabricated from materials produced by SVEC
and then tested at the NRL. The NRL/SVEC team is now optimizing the
material growth and device design for diode lasers that can produce
sufficient power at 3-5 microns without cooling. Currently, SVEC
scientists are also testing a more advanced quantum- cascade laser
design, which should produce higher-intensity light with less
electric current, while emitting within either of two atmospheric
transmission windows at 3-5 microns and 8-12 microns.

Lasers emitting in these windows have many important industrial,
medical, and military applications, such as IR radar for vehicle
and air traffic control, medical diagnosis, eye-safe covert
illumination for night vision, free space communications, and IR
countermeasures.  Further, since many gases absorb strongly in
these windows, these lasers are ideal for remote chemical sensing.
This large class of applications includes pollution and greenhouse
gas monitoring, drug and explosives detection, chemical process
control, and leak detection.  The projected market for these IR
systems will approach $1.5 billion by 2001 if efficient and compact
IR sources are available.

The semiconductor lasers used in most consumer devices emit at much
shorter wavelengths. Long distance telephone networks use 1.3 and
1.5 micron lasers in their optical-fiber systems, and a 0.8 micron
beam reads music and data from CDs.  (By comparison, visible light
ranges from about 0.4 to 0.7 microns.) However, water vapor readily
absorbs light with wavelengths outside the atmospheric transmission
windows, restricting its range.  Gas lasers operating within the
windows are too bulky and expensive for most commercial
applications.








<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Photodetectors
Set a Record

A record low dark current operation of InGaAs (1.55 micron) p-I-n
Photodetectors on silicon and GaAs has been reported in Applied
Physics Letters.  The authors, led by  F. E. Ejeckan (School of
Electrical Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853;
email: felix@ee.cornell.edu), fabricated the photo conductors by
first bonding the p-I-n epitaxial layers, followed by chemical
removal of the host InP substrate from the p-I-n structure, after
which the photodetector was fabricated on top of the exposed p-I-n
layers.

Bonding of the photodetector to the substrate is done as efforts at
heteroepitaxial growth have not met with success due to the
inherent material defects present in devices grown by this method.
Bonding eliminates these material defects but the films often are
mechanically weak and thermally unstable.  The technique employed
by the authors of bonding by atomic rearrangement (BAR) avoids this
weakness and obtains a covalently bonded interface free of defects
other than crystallographic misfit.

Under 5 volt reverse bias, dark currents down to 57 pA on GaAs and
290 nA on Si were measured.  A external quantum efficiency of 80%
was deduced from the responsivity at 1.55 microns of 1 A/W, and the
series resistance across the bonded interface was 17 ohms for GaAs
and 350 ohms for Si.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Laser Ablation
of Diamond

Thin, electron-transparent layers of diamond for examination in the
transmission electron microscope (TEM) can be fabricated from
thicker diamond substrates by using a laser beam to ablate the
surface of the substrate according to work done at Caltech and the
Research Triangle Institute for NASA's Jet Propulsion Lab
(Pasadena, CA, Tel: 818/354-2240).  Those involved include Thomas
George, Marc C. Foote, Richard P. Vasquez, and Edward P. Fortier of
Caltech, and John B. Posthill of RTI.

An older method of laser ablation involved the use of photon energy
above the gap between the valence and conduction electron-energy
bands of the diamond substrate, but this method involves the use of
photon energy below the band gap.  The growing interest in the use
of diamond as a bulk substrate and as a coating material has
increased the need for TEM for characterization of diamond-based
materials.  The below-band-gap laser ablation method may help to
satisfy this need, and it could also be applied in general to
cutting and etching of diamonds.

The basic idea is that below-band-gap radiation should not be
absorbed in the bulk of the substrate.  As a result, damage to the
bulk of the substrate should be minimized and the major part of
absorption of radiant energy should take place on the surface on
which the laser beam impinges.  In experiments to test the
feasibility of the method, a pulsed, focused beam from a KrF
excimer laser was used to thin substrates of a type 1a natural
diamond at normal and glancing (22() incidence.  The laser
wavelength was 248 nm, whereas the band-gap wavelength of pure
natural diamond is about 226 nm.

The surfaces of the laser-thinned substrates were examined by use
of scanning electron microscopy (SEM).  The diamond substrates
thinned at glancing incidence could be examined in this way without
further treatment.  However, to render the substrate thinned at
normal incidence transparent to electrons, it was necessary to
perform argon-ion milling to remove a layer of graphitic and
amorphous carbon that had formed on the ablated surface.  (This
layer apparently forms early in the laser ablation process and
enhances the absorption of radiation at the surface).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

OnTrak Ships First
CMP Polishing System

OnTrak Systems (1753 S. Main St., Milpitas, CA, Tel: 408/262-5200,
Fax: 408/262-9121) has shipped the first beta unit of its CMP
polishing system tradenamed Aurora, to a major U.S. semiconductor
manufacturer.  According to Jerry Cutini, executive VP of sales and
marketing, OnTrack is pleased with the progress of the polisher
program.  "This shipment marks Aurora's transition from research
and development into the applications development phase.  By using
feedback from this installation and subsequent beta sites, we are
now preparing to move toward product manufacturing," he said.

Aurora will provide OnTrack access to the growing market for CMP
polishing tools, which enable production of devices with multiple
metal layers and smaller device geometries.  According to
Semiconductor Equipment and Materials International (SEMI), the
global market for CMP polishers is projected to reach $290 million
by 1997, a more than threefold increase from $84 million in 1994.

Cutini added that the beta unit recipient is a CMP user with
extensive process knowledge.  "This customer will use the polisher
for pre-production research and development of advanced integrated
circuits,  The customer already has an installed base of OnTrak's
DSS-200 cleaning systems for post-CMP cleaning, which will be used
in conjunction with the Aurora polisher to obtain process and
manufacturing feedback," he noted.

OnTrak is a leading provider of semiconductor capital equipment for
CMP.  In a separate announcement, the company said it has relocated
to a larger facility in San Jose, CA (1010 Rincon Circle, 95131,
Tel: 408/577-1010, Fax: 408/952-5645) to accommodate demand for its
DSS-200 cleaning systems.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Team Dreams of
Future DRAMS

IBM, Siemens, Toshiba and Motorola plan a four way alliance to
develop future generations of highly advanced semiconductor chips,
including a 1 Gb dynamic random access memory (DRAM).  Motorola
researchers are expected to join the development teams from IBM,
Siemens and Toshiba, who have been working on high density memory
chip development for several years at IBM's Advanced Semiconductor
R&D Center in East Fishkill, NY.

Current plans indicate that the alliance will continue development
of existing 64 and 256Mb chips and cooperate on the next generation
1 Gb DRAMS.  This alliance is an outgrowth of separate long term
relationships among the companies.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Ultratech, Photronics
Sign Agreement

Ultratech Stepper (San Jose, CA, Tel: 408/577-3009, Fax: 408/577-
3379) a leading supplier of photolithography systems used to make
semiconductors and thin film heads, and Photronics, Inc. (203/775-
9000) a leading photomask supplier, signed a strategic alliance for
reticle manufacturing.  Under the agreement, the two companies will
investigate technology development opportunities and focus on
customer requirements for increased performance, timeliness and
cost-effectiveness.

Ultratech's president and CEO Arthur Zafiropoulo explained the
reasoning behind the alliance: "As technology becomes more complex
and demanding, it is crucial for companies in our industry to work
closely together to ensure that customers' requirements are met.
Both Ultratech and Photronics are known for forging strong
relationships with their customers.  This formalized agreement will
provide the vision and perspective necessary to pursue a unified
effort to address industry's demands."

Photronic's chairman and CEO Constantine "Deno" Macricostas added,
"Lithography technology has emerged as an important factor in
achieving success at the sub 0.35 micron level.  Now, more than
ever, it is important for equipment and photomask makers to work
together so that we are in a position to support our customers as
they begin to produce products with increasingly tighter design
rules."

In a separate announcement, Ultratech said it has teamed with
government and industry partners to develop a technology that could
produce ultra shallow transistor junctions for use in sub 0.25-
micron technology.  The proposed method is expected to reduce the
number of process steps currently used, potentially providing users
with a lower manufacturing cost.  The new technology is termed P-
GILD, an acronym for Projection-Gas Immersion Layer Doping, and
merges photolithography, doping and annealing technology into a
single tool.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

ART Teams with
European Firm

Advanced Refractory Technologies, Inc. (ART, 699 Hertel Ave.,
Buffalo, NY 14207; Tel: 716/875-4091, Fax: 716/875-0106) and N. V.
Bekaert S. A. Hjave, signed an agreement to develop and market
ART's DYLYN thin film coating technology in Europe.  The agreement
will result in commercialization of the technology in Europe via
customer-specific application development.

Under terms of the agreement, Bekaert acquires from ART the
worldwide exclusive right to design, manufacture, and sell DYLYN
deposition equipment to companies licensed by ART to use the
technology.  The equipment will be constructed by Sinvaco (Deinze,
Belgium) which is majority owned by Bekaert.

DYLYN is a family of diamond-like coatings consisting of two
interpenetrating networks, one based on carbon and the other based
on silicon.  The coatings offer low friction, high adherence, and
corrosion resistance.  According to ART's Mary Spohn, the materials
can also be tailored via the addition of metals and ceramics to
provide desired properties such as electrical conductivity or
resistivity.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Mullins Receives
Top MRS Award

William W. Mullins, university professor emeritus of materials
science and engineering at Carnegie-Mellon University (CMU), was
the 1995 recipient of the Materials Research Society's (MRS) von
Hippel Award.  Mullins was recognized "for pioneering and profound
contributions to the understanding of grain boundary motion,
morphological stability, the structure of surfaces and interfaces,
and flow and diffusion as stochastic phenomena."

This award is the highest honor presented by the MRS and it
acknowledges exceptional distinction in interdisciplinary materials
research.  All nominees must have outstanding scientific
credentials, their work must have had a significant impact on
materials research, and it must have exemplified an
interdisciplinary approach.  The award is named in honor of its
first recipient in 1976, professor Arthur von Hippel of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.


Stock Chart

                                    This      Last
                          Symbol    Month     Month      Change

Applied Materials         AMAT      32.500    41.375     -8.875
Ameron, Inc.              AMN       37.000    38.000     -1.000
Amer. Superconductor      AMSC      13.500    12.750     +0.750
General Electric          GE        70.250    72.125     -1.875
Hercules                  HPC       56.125    57.000     -0.875
Rockwell Int.             ROK       53.125    52.000     +1.125
Superconductor Tech.      SCON      4.750     4.750      0.000
Spire Corp.               SPIR      2.000     2.000      0.000
Tektronix                 TEK       42.750    49.875     -7.125
Varian Associates         VAR       44.125    43.500     +0.625
Watkins-Johnson           WJ        38.625    43.000     -4.375




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Briefly Noted:

    DuPont has joined the Semiconductor Research Corp. (SRC) in a
research partnership focusing on Materials and Bulk Processes
Sciences, which deals with front-end manufacturing processes,
starting materials for mainstream integrated circuit fabrication
and thermal processes and deposition of active film above the
interface.  The partnership will also emphasize research in
Environment, Safety and Health Sciences.

    Lam Research (Fremont, CA) announced that Way Tu, 38, has been
appointed president, effective January 1, 1996.  Reporting to Roger
D. Emerick, chairman and CEO, Tu is chartered with overseeing the
daily operations of the company and ensuring that Emerick's vision
for Lam's future business operation is realized.  Most recently VP
of Lam's oxide etch business unit, Tu has been with the company
since 1983.

    3M Co. (Minneapolis, MN) has joined the Austin-based
SEMI/Sematech consortium of majority U.S.-owned and controlled
equipment, materials, software, and service suppliers to the
semiconductor industry.  And the 3M Electronics Div. has opened the
$43 million expansion of its Columbia, MO plant.

    Silicon Valley Group Inc., (San Jose, CA) has completed a
public offering of 3.5 million shares of common stock at
$32.75/share.  According to the company, the proceeds, estimated at
$109.7 million, will be used to buy capital equipment, expand
manufacturing facilities, and finance working capital requirements
and R&D activities.

    SEMATECH may establish a separate entity for the qualification
and characterization of 300-mm process tools.  Although the yet to
be named group will have more freedom to establish international
ties,  the top 10 Japanese semiconductor makers appear to want
membership instead in a new joint venture, tentatively named the
Semiconductor Equipment Evaluation Center.  While there is
excellent U.S.-Japanese cooperation on wafer standards and other
competitive matters, tool qualification is viewed as too sensitive
a topic to be shared between the two countries.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Tencor & Uniphase
Combine Technology

Tencor Instruments (Mountain View, CA) and Uniphase Corp. (San
Jose, CA), completed a three year agreement under which Tencor will
become the exclusive OEM reseller for the laser imaging defect
review station and automatic defect classification (ADC) software
developed and manufactured by the Ultrapointe subsidiary of
Uniphase.

These products are used to analyze defects on wafers during the
semiconductor manufacturing process.  Tencor designs and makes
wafer defect inspection and thin film measurement and metrology
systems used in the semiconductor and related industries.

The ability to review defects using ADC software is becoming
increasingly important to semiconductor manufacturers as it
facilitates defect classification without direct operator
evaluation at each defect site.  This facility improves reliability
and consistency by eliminating operator-induced variations.  This
kind of automation also helps speed analysis of the vast amounts of
defect data and classifications necessary for yield enhancement
programs.

There are several microscope technologies currently in use within
the semiconductor industry including white light, laser confocal
and scanning electron microscopy (SEM).  The Ultrapointe imaging
system uses a laser confocal microscope and Silicon Graphics
workstation to provide integrated 3-D images of defects on
semiconductor wafers.  These 3-D displays are similar to those
produced by an SEM but can be obtained at a considerable lower
cost.

The new agreement will not effect Tencor's ongoing efforts towards
completion of the ADC joint development project with SEMATECH, the
government/industry consortium semiconductor manufacturing
research, announced in early 1995.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Product Award to
Digital Instruments

Digital Instruments (520 E. Montecito St., Santa Barbara, CA 93103,
Tel: 805/899-3380, Fax: 805/899-3392) received the prestigious
National New Product Award by the National Society of Professional
Engineers (NSPE) for the Scanning Probe Microscope tradenamed the
Dimension 7000.  The award will be presented to DI president,
Virgil Elings.

According to the NSPE, "The award recognizes companies that are
developing innovative products and advancing technology through
outstanding engineering achievements.  They are given to the
creative minds that establish new products in the marketplace that
benefit the general public and the economy of California."

This is DI's first national award, after being honored by the
California Society of Professional Engineers for the best new
product in three of the last four years.  "This award is
particularly meaningful to us since it is voted on by our
engineering peers," said Elings.  DI's previous winners included
their original Atomic Force Microscope and the Large Sample Stage
SPM.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Tylan's Scotland Facility
Gets ISO Certification

Tylan General, Inc., a global supplier of advanced process
management instrumentation, said that its Livingston, Scotland
facility has achieved ISO 9002 certification.  "The Scotland
facility's operations are representative of Tylan General's
corporate mission--to be a provider of world class quality products
and services," said president and CEO David J. Ferran.  "Receiving
ISO certification will enhance our customer's confidence in our
products and provide a continuous means of monitoring the
effectiveness and integrity of our procedures and operations," he
added.

Tylan General's Scotland facility was designed to support the
increase in demand for its pressure and flow products and to
provide value added services to better meet customer requirements
within the region.  Equipped with class 100 calibration stations,
the facility offers customer emergency calibration and repair
service with a four hour turnaround.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Portable Analytical
System Offered

The UTI Division of MKS Instruments (Andover, MA, Tel: 508/975-
2350, Fax: 508/975-0093) introduced a new portable RGA-based system
designed for vacuum system troubleshooting, leak detection,
background analysis and process monitoring.  A clean room
compatible cart-mounted system, it contains a PPT Series Residual
Gas Analyzer, pressure reduction manifold, high vacuum pumping
station and a laptop computer.

This portable system is ideal for use by maintenance and equipment
engineers to get vacuum systems up and running quickly.  For more
info on the new portable, call 800/282-1770.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

New Defect Data
Management System

Tencor Instruments (Mountain View, CA; Tel: 408/654-2926)
introduced a defect data management system tradenamed SwiftAccess
that performs fast, in-line analysis of defect data from a variety
of sources, including the company's new Surfscan inspection system.

Identification of defects and their significance is becoming more
critical to the inspection process.  Although current inspection
systems generate large amounts of defect data, the info is only
valuable if device makers can use it to improve their manufacturing
process.  Therefore, they need a fast, reliable means of viewing,
analyzing and acting on the defect data generated during
inspection.  SwiftAccess is designed to meet this need.

The system collects and analyzes defect data as it is gathered from
inspection systems, scanning electron microscopes (SEMs), review
stations, and probe and test systems, and then uses the information
to monitor the process, identify process excursions and provide
critical process control information.  It can distribute data over
mulitple networked nodes, independent of the hardware platform, and
can collect data from the majority of inspection systems.

Designed for ease of use, SwiftAccess features an X-Windows
architecture and Unix operating system that enable smooth
integration into a fab's existing network.  The system offers high
reliability and robustness, as well as scalability for next
generation applications.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

BOOKS AND REPORTS

Rapid Thermal and
Integrated Processing

The fourth in a continuing series, this volume from the Materials
research Society (MRS) presents recent work in traditional rapid
thermal processing (RTP), such as dielectric growth, annealing and
silicides, as well as developments in integrated processes.
Documenting symposium reports from the 1995 MRS Spring Meeting in
San Francisco, it contains 56 papers, 455 pages.

The primary focus of this volume is the manufacturing aspects of
RTP and the successful integration of this technology into
production semiconductor fabs.  Emphasis is placed on process and
equipment modeling and the critical aspects of RTP, such as
temperature measurement, uniformity and control.  Edited by Steven
R.J. Brueck (University of New Mexico), Jeffrey C. Gelpey (AST
Electronik U.S.), Ahman Kermani (CVC Products Inc.), Jorge L.
Regolini (France Telecom) and James C. Sturm (Princeton
University).

Rapid Thermal and Integrated Processing IV is available in
hardcover or fiche for $57.00 (MRS members), $63.00 (U.S. List) and
$72.00 (Non-U.S. List).  For info, or to order, contact MRS at 9800
McKnight Rd., Pittsburgh, PA 15237; Tel: 412/367-3012, Fax:
412/367-4373.


Every Aspect
of VCSELs

Vertical Cavity Surface Emitting Lasers, by Terence Edward Sale of
the U.K.-based University of Sheffield, covers the principles,
theory, design and operation of vertical cavity surface emitting
lasers (VCSELs).  Semiconductor lasers have advanced a long way
since their first demonstration in the early 1960s and have a large
impact on many devices today.

They act as sources for optical fiber systems and permit the
reading of data from compact discs and barcode labels.  VCSELs have
many advantages over conventional semiconductor lasers.  The most
obvious is the possibility of very large arrays and a narrow
circular output beam, which can be efficiently coupled into the
core of a fiber.  As a result, the author believes that the time
for a book devoted to VCSELs has come.

The first chapter of the volume describes the history and prospects
of VCSELs and the choice of material systems for emission in
different wavelengths.  The second chapter concerns the optical
properties of short vertical cavities, and the quantum mechanical
processes facilitating optical gain and spontaneous emission
processes are the focus of the third chapter.  Concepts are
developed from basic principles, and the effect of strain on the
optical processes in quantum wells is also covered.  Readers are
introduced to techniques for epitaxial crystal growth and the
fabrication of VCSEL devices in Chapter 4, and Chapter 5 explores
the resistance problems that can arise due to the many
heterojunctions in dielectric reflector stacks.

Chapters 6 and 7 are case studies which describe measurements made
on 2 VCSEL structures, one grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE)
and the other by metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD).
In Chapter 8, experimental data from these case studies are
analyzed using models, and the final chapter describes other
aspects of VCSELs such as modulation response, arrays and noise
performance.

The book does a good job of covering the VCSEL field and should be
of value to those experienced in the optics field, as well as to
novices and students.  Vertical Cavity Surface Emitting Lasers is
published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (605 Third Ave., New York, NY
10158; Tel: 212/850-6336). 1995.  Price: $89.95




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

MEETINGS

ICMCTF '96 Offers
Thin Film Courses

The preliminary program for the 23rd International Conference on
Metallurgical Coatings and Thin Films (ICMCTF '96), being held
April 22-26, 1996 in San Diego at the Town & Country Hotel, is now
available.  Co-sponsored by the Thin Film and Vacuum Metallurgy
Divisions of the American Vacuum Society (AVS), the conference will
include over 600 technical papers on a wide range of subjects
relating to metallurgical coatings and thin films.  Over 40 of the
world's leading experts will give invited presentations on topics
in their field of expertise.  The conference will include:

    Eight symposia on a variety of coatings and thin film
characterizations.
    An evening forum featuring a round-table discussion on the
status and trends in industrial applications of diamond coatings.
    Workshops on chemical mechanical polishing, including a
tutorial on the basics of this technique, and ion assisted
technologies.
    A short course on "Surface Preparation for Thin Film
Deposition."  A poster session providing researchers a unique
opportunity to discuss their work interactively with meeting
attendees using detailed poster summary displays.
    An extended exhibition featuring the industry's latest
equipment.

For more info or a copy of the program, contact Mary Gray,
conference secretary, at 1090 G Smallwood Dr., Ste. 502, Waldorf,
MD 20603; Tel: 301/870-8756, Fax: 301/645-1426, or visit the AVS
web site at http://www.vacuum.org.  For information on exhibiting,
contact: Sundarajan Mutialu, Aultimat International, Tel: 714/493-
3468, Fax: 714/496-4002.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "36"></A>Copyright
THIN FILM/DIAMOND TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

CALENDAR

Feb. 6-8, 1996, SID 3rd Annual Display Mfg. Technology Conference,
San Jose Convention Center.  Contact: Mark Goldfarb, Tel: 800/787-
7477.

Feb. 6-9, 1996, ISHM & SMTA First Pan Pacific Microelectronics
Symposium.  Contact: JoAnn Stromberg, Tel: 612/920-7682.

Feb. 12-16, 1996, Semiconductor Technology Seminar.  Tampa, Fl.
Contact: Technology Assoc., Tel: 415/941-8272, Fax: 415/851-8372.

Feb. 22-23, 1996, VMIC Specialty Conference on Chemical Mechanical
Polish Planarization, Santa Clara, CA.  Contact: Thomas Wade,
University of South Florida, Fax: 813/978-3552.

Feb. 26-29, 1996, Failure & Yield Analysis Seminar, Tampa, Fl.
Contact: Technology Assoc., Tel: 415/941-8272, Fax: 415/851-8372.

March 3-7, 1996, IPC Printed Circuits Expo '96, San Jose, CA.
Contact: John Riley, Tel: 708/677-2850.

March 5-7, 1996, Semiconductor Thermal & Temperature Mgmt.
Symposium, Austin, TX.  Contact: C/S Communications, Tel: 602/345-
1118, Fax: 602/345-1119.

March 11-15, 1996, Dynamics of Meas. Sys for Test & Evaluation,
Scottsdale, AZ.  Contact: Peter Stein, Tel: 602/945-4603.

April 6-11, 1996,  Plasmas and Polymers, San Francisco, CA.
American Chemical Society.  Contact: Buddy D. Ratner, Tel: 202/685-
1005.

April 8-12, 1996, Spring Meeting, Materials Research Society, San
Francisco, CA.  Contact: Meetings Dept., Tel: 412/367-3004.

April 14-17, 1996, 98th Annual Meeting & Exposition, Indiana
Convention Center and RCA Dome, Indianapolis, IN.  Contact: ACerS,
Tel: 614/794-5880.

April 17-19, 1996, 5th Int'l Conference & Exhibition on Multichip
Modules, Denver, CO.  Contact: ISHM, Tel: 703/758-1060, Fax
703/758-1066.

April 22-26, 1996, Int'l Conference on Metallurgical Coatings and
Thin Films, San Diego, CA.  Contact: Mary S. Gray, Tel: 301/645-
1426.

May 5-10, 1996, Society of Vacuum Coaters 39th Technical
Conference, Adams Mark Hotel, Philadelphia, PA.  Contact: SVC, 440
Live Oak Loop, Albuquerque, NM 87122; Tel: 505/856-7188.

May 28-31, 1996, 46th Electronic Component & Tech Conference,
Orlando, FL.  Contact: EIA, 2500 Wilson Blvd., Arlington, VA 22201.

Sept. 22-25, 1996, Manufacturers & Suppliers Workshop & Exposition,
Adam's Mark Hotel, Charlotte, NC.  Contact: ACerS, Tel: 614/890-
4700.

Oct. 16-19, 1996, Joint Fall Meeting of the Basic Science, Nuclear
& Environmental Technology & Cements Divisions, San Antonio, TX.
Contact: ACerS, Tel: 614/890-4700.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
