<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B34-1</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B028-125</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec31.html 205.156.212.5 19970114224902 text/html 26061
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:47:13 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:44 GMT
Content-length: 25874
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ec31.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
UNIX UPDATE via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>BEST WESTERN HOTELS SELECTS DIGITAL UNIX&nbsp;FOR NEW GLOBAL RESERVATION SYSTEM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1022 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>TEXAS INSTRUMENTS SOFTWARE SHIPPED FOR DIGITAL UNIX</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(453 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>AlPHASERVER 2100 SYSTEM AND MICROSOFT SQL&nbsp;SERVER SHATTER TPC-C PRICE/PERFORMANCE RECORD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1039 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>DIGITAL AND MACROMEDIA ANNOUNCE&nbsp;PLATFORM FOR DEVELOPMENT&nbsp;OF INTERACTIVE APPLICATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(969 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
UNIX UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

BEST WESTERN HOTELS SELECTS DIGITAL UNIX
FOR NEW GLOBAL RESERVATION SYSTEM

Best Western International, Inc., the world's largest hotel
brand, has selected multiple AlphaServer 8400 "TurboLaser"
systems, the world's most powerful servers, together with
thousands of Digital personal computers, to power Best
Western's new worldwide central reservation system (CRS).
Digital and Best Western announced this agreement, among the
largest AlphaServer 8400 sales to date, at the International
Hotel/Motel & Restaurant trade show here.

When fully implemented, the deal will be worth more than $12
million in Digital revenue. A total of 10 AlphaServer 8400
systems will power Best Western's operations center central
host server, located in Phoenix, Ariz., as well as BWI's
reservation centers located in Phoenix, Wichita, Kan., Dublin,
Ireland, and Milan, Italy. The new servers will run Oracle7
relational database management system with the 64-bit Digital
UNIX operating system, handling in excess of 2,000
transactions per second. AlphaServer systems will replace
outdated and over-extended mainframes.

In addition, Digital will deliver some 3,500 Digital Venturis
535 PCs to every Best Western property worldwide, where they
will provide a full range of inventory and rate management
capabilities. This part of the system will enable hoteliers to
enroll in Best Western marketing programs and create their own
programs and pricing packages.

"Today we unveil the hotel industry's most ambitious, advanced
customer reservation system. We selected the
Digital/Oracle/UNIX solutions because of its superior
performance, flexibility, and growth potential -- at one-tenth
the cost of competing systems," said William S. Watson, Best
Western International's executive vice president.

"We expect the Digital/Oracle solution to dramatically improve
our ability to respond more rapidly to customer needs, to
quickly provide our client agents more and more relevant
information on our customers' travel preferences, to increase
our sales and revenues, and to enhance our company's image,"
Watson added.

The new system is expected to to generate more than $50
million in incremental annual room revenue and will
significantly reduce corporate and property level operating
costs.

Pace-setting Global Reservation System

Best Western's new central reservations systems, scheduled for
a March 15, 1996, start-up, offers unprecedented features and
functions, both at the property level and at the Best Western
central reservations offices. It will be a service
enhancement for the 40 million travelers worldwide who stay at
Best Western hotels each year.


With the new CRS, Best Western will be the only hotel chain to
provide comprehensive geographic, pictorial, and textual
information to its reservation sales agents. These features
will enable guests who call a Best Western central reservation
office from any location, whether at home or on the road, to
find the Best Western hotel that is closest to their desired
destination.

The new system will enable Best Western to provide detailed
guest histories, group booking capabilities, revenue
management service, travel agent commission data, and a wide
range of property-specific and destination information.

Yet the new system is much more than a traditional
transaction- oriented network. It will provide the business
tools to more clearly target and service BWI's existing and
future customers.

"Best Western recognizes that emerging technologies will bring
radical changes to the way products are distributed to its
customers. This vision led Best Western to select Digital and
Oracle as technology partners for the new millennium," said
Pauline Nist, Digital vice president of the AlphaServer
Business Segment. "While Best Western customers may never know
what's 'under the hood' of the new reservation system, Best
Western managers will sleep better knowing our systems are
providing those customers the fastest, most reliable services
in the travel industry."

Digital's AlphaServer 8400 Systems

AlphaServer 8400 systems are based on the world's fastest
microprocessor, the 300 MHz Alpha 21164. They support up to 12
service, travel agent commission data, and a wide range of
property-specific and destination information.

Yet the new system is much more than a traditional
transaction- oriented network. It will provide the business
tools to more clearly target and service BWI's existing and
future customers.

"Best Western recognizes that emerging technologies will bring
radical changes to the way products are distributed to its
customers. This vision led Best Western to select Digital and
Oracle as technology partners for the new millennium," said
Pauline Nist, Digital vice president of the AlphaServer
Business Segment. "While Best Western customers may never know
what's 'under the hood' of the new reservation system, Best
Western managers will sleep better knowing our systems are
providing those customers the fastest, most reliable services
in the travel industry."

Digital's AlphaServer 8400 Systems

AlphaServer 8400 systems are based on the world's fastest
microprocessor, the 300 MHz Alpha 21164. They support up to 12
64-bit processors and 14 Gbytes of memory, and can be
clustered for far greater performance.

Recently, Digital and Oracle together shattered the
transaction processing world performance record in benchmark
testing (tpcC) defined and audited by the independent
Transaction Processing Performance Council. This was
accomplished on an AlphaServer 8400, Digital UNIX operating
system, and Oracle 7 database system. The Digital/Oracle
solution bested the previous record held by Hewlett Packard by
75 percent, and was far better than the best systems from IBM,
Sun, AT&T, and Tandem.

Taken together, the 64-bit Alpha technology, 64-bit Digital
UNIX, and 64-bit databases such as Oracle7 enable the
breakthrough performance and price/performance of VLM64.
Digital is unique in the industry in its ability to deliver
this capability to customers today.

Applications such as data warehousing, financial management,
and online transaction processing take particular advantage
of VLM64 solutions. This is because more than 4 billion times
more data can be stored in memory than even the most powerful
mainframe systems, at a fraction of the cost. This provides
dramatic improvements in processing speed, application
performance, and system affordability.

Digital's Venturis PCs

Digital Venturis is Digital's value-oriented desktop PC family
designed to meet the computing requirements of general
business users in standard office applications, as well as
those of users in a client/server environment. Ideal for the
volume purchaser, Venturis systems are simple to install, easy
to use and easy to maintain, while providing room to expand as
computing needs evolve.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
UNIX UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

TEXAS INSTRUMENTS SOFTWARE SHIPPED FOR DIGITAL UNIX

Texas Instruments (TI) Software will begin shipments of
Composer for Digital Equipment Corporation's Digital UNIX.
Texas Instruments Software's Composer is a market-leading
component-based development tool for client/server application
development.  Standards-compliant, high-performance Digital
UNIX is the industry's leading 64-bit UNIX operating system.

The combination of Composer and Digital UNIX provides the
maximum performance, modularity and scalability available in
the client/server application development market today. With
Composer, users can design, develop and deploy flexible
client/server applications that allow maximum use of computing
resources regardless of the client/server architecture. In
combination with Digital UNIX, Composer gives users the high
performance needed to run client/server applications in a UNIX
environment. Applications developed with Composer can be
deployed on the Digital's Alpha* workstation running Digital
UNIX or OpenVMS*.

"Digital UNIX offers Composer customers an industry standard
high-performance UNIX operating system that lets them move
today to the next generation of open computing," said Susan
Morgan, alliance manager for Texas Instruments Software. "This
TI and Digital solution enables customers to develop and
deploy client/server applications in a reliable, distributed
environment where top transaction processing performance is a
must and customers can be assured of scalability that meets
business growth needs," Morgan added.

"We're pleased that TI has decided to port its market-leading
application development tool to Digital UNIX," said Mark
Silverberg, UNIX product marketing manager at Digital
Equipment Corporation.

"The combination of Composer, Digital UNIX and 64-bit Alpha
platforms provides users with the ideal combination of
flexible tools and robust power to develop mission-critical
client/server applications."

The Implementation Toolset module of Composer will be
available for Digital UNIX. This module, which ensures the
automation of the compilation, linking and installation of
Composer-developed applications, allows migration of the
developed code to the target deployment system.

As part of its strategy to provide customers with many
development and implementation options for software
applications, Texas Instruments Software provides Composer for
a broad range of operating systems. In addition to Digital
UNIX, these operating systems include Digital OpenVMS, IBM
MVS, Tandem NonStop Kernel, Tandem NonStop-UX, Hewlett-Packard
HP-UX, IBM AIX, Sun Solaris, Sequent Dynix/ptx, Pyramid
DC/OSx, Siemens/Nixdorf SINIX, AT&T GIS SVR4, Microsoft
Windows 3.1 and NT, and OS/2.

For information on U.S. pricing and availability call (800)
838-1843.

About Texas Instruments Software

Texas Instruments Software is the market leader in software
application development and assembly tools and services for
department and organization-wide implementation of
client/server technology. Texas Instruments Software is a
division of Texas Instruments Incorporated (NYSE:TXN), a
high-technology company headquartered in Dallas, Texas, with
sales or manufacturing operations in more than 30 countries.

For more information on Texas Instruments Software and its
products, please visit the division's World Wide Web site at
http://www.ti.com/software/software.com.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
UNIX UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

AlPHASERVER 2100 SYSTEM AND MICROSOFT SQL
SERVER SHATTER TPC-C PRICE/PERFORMANCE RECORD

Digital Equipment Corporation and Microsoft Corporation has
unveiled audited transaction benchmark results that establish
new records in the highly competitive market for database,
application and PC LAN servers. The results further
demonstrate the companies' leadership in providing customers
the industry's most powerful, most cost-effective open server
platforms.

Breakthrough results of 3194.4 transactions per minute (tpmC)
at $196/tpmC, based on the TPC-C(2) benchmark Revision 3.0,
were achieved on the AlphaServer 2100 5/300 64-bit SMP system
running Microsoft Windows NT Server operating system V3.51 and
Microsoft SQL Server V6.5 client/server database management
system. No other Microsoft SQL Server platform from any system
vendor delivers such impressive results.

The 3194.4 at $196/tpmC result is the industry's best price/
performance using any system, any database, or any operating
system. In fact, no other system has ever come close to
breaking the less-than-$200/tpmC barrier.

With a total system cost of $626,102, the AlphaServer 2100
5/300 delivers transaction performance and price/performance
superior to any other system priced below $1 million -- 24%
better throughput performance and $46/tpmC less than its
closest competitor, the Intel-based Compaq ProLiant 5/133

Model 2. It also provides better performance and price/
performance than many systems costing much more than $1
million (see charts below).

The Digital/Microsoft combination even outperforms a Tandem
Himalaya K10000-16 system with 16 processors and costing $3.5
million. And compared with competitive systems from IBM, HP,
Sun, Bull, AT&T, and others, these results are far superior.

"These independent benchmark results again demonstrate the
breakthrough performance and affordability of the Alpha
architecture," said Pauline Nist, Digital vice president of
the Alpha Server Business Segment. "For customers, this
represents the industry's best value in high-performance
server capabilities. It also further demonstrates the
engineering achievements of our strategic alliance with
Microsoft."

The TPC-C benchmark is the industry-standard test for
measuring database transaction processing performance and
price/performance. The $/tpmC result reflects the cost of
acquisition and ownership of the system over a five-year
period, including hardware and software maintenance, software
upgrades, and extended warranties.

"Today's news is one more way Digital and Microsoft are
bringing to customers computing solutions that offer
unprecedented value and flexibility," said Rich Tong, general
manager of the Business Systems Division at Microsoft.

"These TPC results demonstrate the power of the Microsoft SQL
Server and Digital Alpha platform for transaction- and
compute-intensive business applications in heterogeneous
environments."

Heterogeneous Computing Environment

The AlphaServer 2100 5/300 benchmark was conducted using three
CPUs and 2 gigabytes of memory. These results were achieved
in a heterogeneous computing environment, using Visigenics
ODBC client software for SCO UNIX running on Digital's
Intel-based Prioris PC systems.

"No longer must customers limit themselves to a single
operating system to get interoperability, performance, and
affordability," said Nist. "With these results, Digital has
proved that one of the best ways to solve business problems
can include a heterogeneous environment. Digital demonstrates
that a customer can leverage the strengths of both Windows NT
and UNIX to provide a cost-effective high-performance
solution." Competitive Comparisons

PRICE PERFORMANCE tpmC $/tpmC total system cost

Digital AlphaServer 2100 5/300 3194.40 $196 $626,101

Compaq ProLiant 4500 5/133-2 2454.97 242 593,216

Digital AlphaServer 8400 5/300 9414.06 316 2,972,726

Compaq ProLiant 4500 5/100-1 1516.77 319 484,108

IBM RS/6000 PowerPC J30 3119.16 349 1,089,831

HP 9000 K410 3809.46 364 1,384,763

TRANSACTION THROUGHPUT tpmC $/tpmC total system cost

HP 9000 K410 3809.46 $364 $1,384,763

Sun SPARCCenter 2000E 3534.20 495 1,751,004

AT&T 3555/4-XP 3312.70 587 1,942,593

Digital AlphaServer 2100 5/300 3194.40 196 626,102

IBM RS/6000 PowerPC J30 3119.16 349 1,089,831

Tandem Himalaya K10000-16 3043.49 1160 3,529,520

Bull ESCALA Deskside D401/8 2660.03 530 1,409,965

Compaq ProLiant 45005/133-2 2454.97 242 593,216

Customers Deploying Enterprise Database Solutions

The Potomac Group, of Nashville, Tenn., provides doctors and
hospitals in 20 states instant on-line access to Medicaid
subscriber data. According to Bill McClary, executive vice
president of operations, "Our AlphaServer 2100 / Microsoft SQL
Server solution enables us to compete and win in a market
dominated by giant companies with multi-million dollar legacy
systems."

At Ruben H. Donnelley Corporation, the world's oldest
publisher of Yellow Pages, AlphaServer 2100 systems and
Microsoft SQL Server are greatly expanding the company's
Interactive Yellow Pages, with new features such as
FAX-on-demand and sophisticated database manipulation.

And at the Los Angeles Times, the third largest newspaper in
the country, AlphaServer 2100 systems and Microsoft SQL
Server, together with Autologic for Windows NT, are powering a
rastor image processing (RIP) systems that enables the Times
to product more pages faster, with more graphics and higher
resolution, at lower cost.

300MHz Processor Upgrade, Special Pricing

In announcing the benchmark results, Digital also unveiled a
processor upgrade program for the AlphaServer 2100 and 2000
systems, raising the performance of the Alpha 21164 CPU used
in this system to a blazing 300MHz. The Alpha 21164
microprocessor is still the industry's fastest and only BIPS
(billion instructions per second) chip.

Through December, this upgrade is specially priced at only
$4,000. Complete 300MHz AlphaServer 2100 systems will be
generally available in Q1 of CY1996.

60-Day Payment-Free Leasing Offer

Digital also announced a limited-time leasing offer on all
Alpha servers and workstations. Through June 1996, Digital
Financial Services, a division of GE Capital, is offering
customers who migrate to Digital from competitors' systems a
60-day payment holiday on all 36-month leases. The program is
available to all direct and partner channels worldwide.

The Digital/Microsoft Alliance

Digital's AlphaServer systems provide a highly scalable
enterprise platform for the Microsoft BackOffice suite, which
includes Microsoft Windows NT operating system, Microsoft SQL
Server, Microsoft Systems Management Server, Microsoft SNA
Server, and Microsoft Mail Server. In June, Digital announced
an OEM agreement with Microsoft to bundle the Microsoft
BackOffice server suite with Digital AlphaServers and
Intel-based Prioris servers.

In August, Digital and Microsoft announced a major alliance,
the Microsoft-Digital Alliance for Enterprise Computing,
which will help customers implement and support Windows-based
computing in the enterprise. The enterprise level performance
numbers announced today demonstrate the results of the joint
efforts of Digital and Microsoft to deliver Windows NT-based
solutions to the enterprise.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
UNIX UPDATE via NewsNet
January 1996

DIGITAL AND MACROMEDIA ANNOUNCE
PLATFORM FOR DEVELOPMENT
OF INTERACTIVE APPLICATIONS

Mediaplex Application Development System Offers Best Of Class
Cross-Platform Authoring Environment

Digital Equipment Corporation and Macromedia Inc. (San
Francisco) have forged an agreement to create a development
solution for applications that can be deployed on desktop PCs,
the World Wide Web, and interactive broadband networks.
Digital's Mediaplex Application Development System will be
bundled with Macromedia Director, Macromedia Extreme 3D, and
Macromedia xRes. This enables developers to create multimedia
applications deliverable on multiple platforms for maximum
revenue potential at the lowest possible cost. As part of
their agreement, Digital and Macromedia will engage in joint
technical development and marketing, and provide technical
support to developers.

"We've already achieved critical mass with the number of
telecom and cable companies using Mediaplex servers in their
trials and deployments," stated Peter Ryus, director of
worldwide marketing, Digital's Video and Interactive
Information Services. "By combining Macromedia's authoring
technology with Digital's Mediaplex Application Development
System, we can offer both the platform and middleware strength
of Digital and the industry-leading cross-platform authoring
capabilities of Macromedia to provide developers a turnkey
content creation solution."

"Because we already have the Director Player running on a
variety of delivery platforms, we are in a unique position to
bring multimedia to the end user, regardless of the device
they have attached to the network," added Travis Huch,
Macromedia's manager of technology partners. "With their
cost-effective architecture and strong understanding of what
broadband interactive networks will look like, Digital is an
ideal partner."

Commenting on Digital's and Macromedia's agreement, Sasha
Magee, director of multimedia for Infrared Communications,
said, "This is really nice for us. Because we're already using
Director, Digital and Macromedia can now provide us with a
smooth and continuous path to move our business to the
broadband marketplace, particularly because both companies are
committed to delivery on multiple computing and set-top box
platforms."

Complete Authoring Resources

The Mediaplex Application Development System will incorporate
several Macromedia authoring solutions, including: Macromedia
Director 4.0, a complete authoring resource for creating
multimedia productions; xRes, a tool for high-resolution image
editing and compositing; Extreme 3D, a modeling, rendering and
animation tool; and a digital sound editor, Sound Forge by
Sonic Foundry. For developers seeking to create content for
the World Wide Web, Shockwave for Director -- an application
for compressing and playing Director files on the World Wide
Web -- is included.

These products will enable developers to create client
applications that run on set-top boxes or PCs that are fully
integrated with the streaming capabilities of the media
server. For custom client/server applications such as
interactive home shopping, distance learning, and home
banking, Digital provides an optional software developer's kit
(SDK) that enables content creators to develop new classes of
application services on the server.

Robust Content Design and Testing Platform

The Mediaplex Application Development System also includes
complete hardware resources for creating applications,
including an Alpha-based Mediaplex Development Server and a
Pentium) - based Digital multimedia PC. Using this
configuration, developers can design content on the PC and
test their applications on the Mediaplex Development Server.
Using standards-based Digital and Macromedia network
extensions, these applications can be run on Windows PCs, the
World Wide Web, as well as set-top box environments from
Apple, Online Media, and Microware (DAVID).

The Mediaplex Application Development System comes equipped
with a 166 Mhz Alpha processor, 64 MB of RAM, 4.7 GB of hard
disk capacity, 8 GB DAT drive, internal modem, 17" monitor,
and keyboard, all enclosed in a convenient deskside cabinet. A
dual-boot option allows the server to run either Digital UNIX
for testing interactive broadband applications, or Microsoft
Windows NT for harnessing Alpha's 64-bit floating point
processor capabilities for graphics rendering and video
editing. The Mediaplex Application Development System comes
with Ethernet connectivity, and supports RAID as an option.

The Digital multimedia authoring PC includes a 100 Mhz Pentium
processor with a 256 KB burst cache, 16 MB of RAM, 1 GB of
hard disk capacity, quad-speed CD-ROM drive, MPEG video card,
16-bit audio card and speakers, 17" monitor, keyboard, and
Ethernet connectivity.

Pricing and Availability

The Mediaplex Application Development System, with this full
complement of hardware and software resources, is priced
starting at $33,900, with significant discounts available for
qualified developers, and will be available from Digital in
the first quarter of 1996. This price includes a one year
membership in the Macromedia Developer's Program, access to
support forums, and general support from Macromedia. Digital's
SDK and World Wide Web testing environment are priced as
separate options.

About Macromedia

Macromedia, the leader in multimedia and digital arts software
tools, offers a full range of products for the Windows and
Macintosh platforms. The company's flagship products include:
Macromedia FreeHand, the most powerful tool for design and
illustration; Macromedia Director, the industry-standard
animation and authoring tool for multimedia production;
Authorware, the most powerful multiplatform authoring
environment for interactive information; Extreme 3D, the most
powerful solution for 3D graphics and animation; SoundEdit 16,
the easy-to-use digital sound recording and editing solution;
Fontographer, the industry-standard for type design and
editing; and Action!, the most popular multimedia presentation
application.

About Digital

Digital is currently the market leader in interactive
information technology, supplying media server solutions for
more trials and deployments than any other vendor. Cable
television companies using Digital's Mediaplex server
architecture include Svenska Kabel-TV in Sweden, and
Westminster Cable in London. Trials by telecommunications
companies using Digital technology include US West's trial in
Nebraska, Belgacom in Belgium, and NYNEX and Ameritech in the
Northeast and Midwest of the United States. Digital's servers
are also being used in production environments to insert
advertising on more than 1,000 channels across 57 cable TV
headends served by Adlink in California, and to deliver
pay-TV and near video-on-demand services by TMN Networks in
Canada.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B34-2</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B028-200</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec08.html 205.156.212.5 19970114225105 text/html 278704
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:47:44 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:28 GMT
Content-length: 278516
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ec08.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>EDITOR'S LETTER</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Sit Back and Enjoy Your Upgrade</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(430 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MAILBOX</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>Web Wherabouts</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(136 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Proper Netiquette</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(157 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>More On ISO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(123 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>CORRECTIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(105 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>@VARBUSINESS -- A ROUNDUP OF ONLINE NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Heard On VIX</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(336 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Cool VAR Home Page</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(145 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Training Tips</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(76 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>Hot Online Products -- Authoring tools to write home about</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(281 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>VARBusiness Online -- Join us on TechWeb and VIX</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(128 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PRODUCTS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>What Price Technology? -- It's tough to measure the cost of&nbsp;a satisfied customer</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(155 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>Product Report: Hub Verdict: Cost is King -- Standard Microsystems Corp. wins&nbsp;first place, but 3Com sells best</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1040 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>Beta Test: Is Sybase Back on Track? -- With SQL Server 11, our VAR beta&nbsp;testers say yes</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1149 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>Editor's Choice: HP Scans the LAN -- New ScanJet brings more power to &nbsp;the network</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(357 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><LI>Editor's Choice: Doubleplay Delivers -- Dual drive is twice as nice, in &nbsp;function and in price</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(420 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>Editor's Choice: A Changing Worldgroup -- Galacticomm's groupware-BBS hybrid&nbsp;is VAR-friendly</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(435 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>TECHNOLOGY</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><LI>One World, Many Systems -- Make your resolution to bring pieces&nbsp;together</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(154 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><LI>Networking: `Productizing' Service -- New England VAR paves way into new&nbsp;net management trend</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1448 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>Networking: Your True Voice</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(348 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>Networking -- What VARs Are Saying: Know Who's In Charge</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(250 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><A HREF = "#21"><LI>Software: Building a Warehouse -- More data and more disparate systems&nbsp;make it a great VAR market</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1425 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>Software: PEN COMPUTING -- PENTt Up Demand?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(293 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>Software: Software VAR -- Direct Marketing 101</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(379 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><A HREF = "#24"><LI>Computer Telephony: Ringing Up Small Business -- Low-cost telephony &nbsp;products offer fast payback for VARs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1018 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>Computer Telephony: Wireless Telecom -- How One VAR Makes the MOST of Telecom</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(296 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FEATURE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#26"><A HREF = "#26"><LI>You Can Break Through Desktop Barriers -- Connect with high&nbsp;margin remote computing markets</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2631 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>Ultimate Solution -- Connecting the Road Warrior</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(423 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>Availability Concerns -- Why Are Compaq Servers So Hard To Get?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(221 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><A HREF = "#29"><A HREF = "#29"><LI>Business Interview: Compaq Pushes Beyond the PC -- On top for now, &nbsp;Ross Cooley aims to keep Compaq there by moving agressively into the &nbsp;enterprise</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2695 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><A HREF = "#30"><A HREF = "#30"><LI>Are you Ready for Some Teamwork? -- Everyone talks teams, but&nbsp;it takes more than an ad hoc group of people to make up a winning&nbsp;one</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2808 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MASS STORAGE QUARTERLY</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#31"><A HREF = "#31"><LI>Your Mission In Storage -- RAID, flash and RAM are critical&nbsp;to your customers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(188 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><A HREF = "#32"><A HREF = "#32"><LI>Know Your Raid? You've Got It Made -- The explosion in network&nbsp;storage needs is driving business to VARs who understand RAID&nbsp;technology</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2792 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><A HREF = "#33"><A HREF = "#33"><LI>Roundtable: Get it Done In a Flash -- Flash memory is rugged,&nbsp;compact, and needs little power-benefits that are making it&nbsp;pop up in new applications every day</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2894 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#34"><A HREF = "#34"><A HREF = "#34"><A HREF = "#34"><LI>Memory: RAM Realities For Resellers -- Rising prices, tight&nbsp;supplies and shortages promise to make the memory market unstable&nbsp;for the next several years, but there are ways to protect yourself&nbsp;and your customers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1775 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#35"><LI>Chip Storage: Supply-Side `Dis'Economies</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(393 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#36"><A HREF = "#36"><LI>Net Gain from Networked CD-ROMs -- The growing need to access&nbsp;corporaate data on CD-ROMs opens doors for network-savvy VARs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1627 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#37"><A HREF = "#37"><LI>Case Study: Driving CD-ROM Sales -- VAR's slick system helps oil companies&nbsp;access information online</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(287 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#38"><LI>Tomorrow's CD-ROM -- High-density formats will open up new uses</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(325 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>BUSINESS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#39"><A HREF = "#39"><LI>Real-World Challenges -- From dealing with substance abuse to&nbsp;paying taxes, it's all part of the manager's job</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(181 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#40"><A HREF = "#40"><LI>Executive Challenge: The Hidden Problem -- Develop a policy to fight &nbsp;substance abuse</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1140 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#41"><LI>VAR Deals: Trio's In the Army</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(93 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#42"><LI>VAR Deals: COLD Cola Coming</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(76 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#43"><LI>Customer Speak: What I Want In a VAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(342 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#44"><LI>Program Profiles: CA's Varsity Program Gives Each Player a Fair Turn</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(263 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#45"><LI>Program Profiles: Attachmate Ramps Up Business</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(254 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#46"><LI>Program Profiles: Maxoptix Pops the Question To Optical Storage VARs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(161 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#47"><LI>Distribution: Financial Planning -- Taxing duties and coping with mergers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(507 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#48"><LI>Heads Up: Sales Cycle Is As Sales Cycle Does</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(86 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#49"><A HREF = "#49"><LI>Industry Watch: Revenge of the Nerds -- Despite bad press, CTOs have become&nbsp;the darlings of our industry</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(830 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#50"><A HREF = "#50"><LI>Taking Care Of Business: Apart From the Crowd -- To stand out you need a &nbsp;unique selling proposition</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(360 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>VAR SHOPPER</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#51"><LI>Monitor Mining</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(189 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#52"><LI>Doc Management With the Greatest of Ease</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(171 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#53"><LI>It's Time For An Update</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(175 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#54"><LI>PentiumPower From A to Z-Note</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(243 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#55"><LI>End Accounting Nightmares</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(206 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#56"><LI>Dedicated to Network Faxing</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(184 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#57"><LI>A WebScan a Day Keeps Viruses Away</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(174 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#58"><LI>Fargo's Colorful New Persona</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(176 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#59"><LI>Comtrol Launches RocketPort</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(198 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#60"><LI>ATM Access Gets a Boost</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(153 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#61"><LI>Look, No Driver</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(103 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CLOSERS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#62"><LI>Up & Comer: Sky to Earth: You're Covered</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(152 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#63"><LI>VARNews: Now, Let's Talk Profits</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(82 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#64"><LI>Hot Stuff: The 'Universal Client'</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(121 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>COMPUTER TELEPHONY SUPPLEMENT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#65"><A HREF = "#65"><LI>Riding the CTI Technology Explosion -- Maturing, standards-driven&nbsp;technology sets off a computer telephony boom</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1336 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#66"><A HREF = "#66"><LI>The Customer for Computer Telephony - The profile is broad,&nbsp;since telephon productivity is mission-control for most businesses</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(781 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#67"><LI>The High-Tech Way to "Hold the Anchovie</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(500 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#68"><A HREF = "#68"><A HREF = "#68"><LI>How to Make The Computer Telephony Sale -- VARs who have been&nbsp;there suggest finding a champion and layering solutions from&nbsp;the desktop</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1496 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#69"><LI>Personalized Marketing for Every Customer</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(465 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Sit Back and Enjoy Your Upgrade

By:
Richard March

It's a new year and a new look for VARBusiness. Whether you
flipped through the pages or consulted the table of contents
to get here, you've probably noticed something's different.
It's our design. The typeface, the format of the charts, and
the layout of print and graphics are new. Those changes are
part of what we're calling an upgrade. We haven't changed our
primary mission of providing you with technology, product and
business information. What we've changed is the way you get
that information. Foremost, the pages are easier to read. They're
less cluttered. In some cases the subheads or decks are longer
to give you a better idea of what the story is about. The smaller
stories-known as sidebars-that accompany larger stories are
"aired out" and not text-heavy. The charts and information
boxes are cleaner and more direct, allowing you to scan and
absorb the information faster.

Another way to maximize your time with VARBusiness is to know
where your favorite departments are. Therefore, we've streamlined
the magazine's format by grouping similar departments together
into supersections. In the Products supersection you'll find
Product Report, Beta Test and Editor's Choice (formerly Tech
Alert). The Technology supersection covers Networking, Software
and Computer Telephony.

Our expanded Business supersection includes familiar departments
such as Program Profiles and Distribution from our former Business
Sense section. But there are also new departments such as Executive
Challenge, which tackles difficult management topics. CustomerSpeak
gives insight into what your clients want from you. VAR Deals
provides details and analysis of noteworthy contracts and installations.
Heads Up is a collection of research and statistics that shape
the market. The VAR Biz Quiz will keep you on your toes-and
to keep your vendors on their toes, we've restructured the
Annual Report Card In Depth, highlighting exclusive findings
from our yearly survey.

Between the supersections you'll find our familiar cover and
feature stories and quarterly sections. Our in-depth content
will continue to point out ways to adopt and sell new technologies
that will increase your profits. But the new look of those
stories will reflect the reader-friendly approach you see elsewhere
in the magazine. Last but far from least, there's a new section
up front called @VARBusiness. You'll find bite-sized bits and
tips on the Internet and online markets. Our State of the VAR
Market research found that four out of 10 VARs will be selling
Internet solutions this year. We'll be paying close attention
to this burgeoning market and delivering you targeted information.

So kick back and enjoy your upgrade.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Web Wherabouts



I've noticed with some chagrin that when you list companies
and their contact information, you fail to list their Internet
and/or Web addresses. Clearly this must be an oversight on
your part. Given the degree of commitment CMP has to the Internet,
one could only come to this conclusion.

Today, any computer company that does not have at least an e
mail address cannot truly call itself a computer company. Any
manufacturer who does not have a Web page is doing a disservice
not only to its clients, but also to itself.

Wayne Spivak

President

SBA.NET.WEB

Internet & WWWConsulting

Bellmore, N.Y.

waynes@netcom.com

Editor's Reply: Wayne, we couldn't agree more. As of our Dec.
1, 1995 issue, we started listing Web addresses in our Quick
Scans.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Proper Netiquette



Somewhere I remember seeing a list of Internet/Online Etiquette
and acronyms. Do you have this or know where I could get a
copy? I have a new client who actually wants to read a little
before he ventures into the great unknown of cyberspace. (Reading
before trying? What a concept! <G>)

Thanks to all of you at VIX [the VARBusiness Interactive Exchange
on CompuServe]. My time on VIX is probably the most gainful
hours of the week as far as knowledge goes. It's really nice
to share ideas, information and resolutions with others.

Keith Camp

President

Camp Data Systems

Spartanburg, S.C.

73243,2201

Editor's Reply: There are quite a few books with chapters devoted
to this topic. One is The Online Marketing Handbook by Daniel
S. Janal (published by Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York), which
explains "netiquette" in simple terms. Also, check out www.organic.com
1800collect/Netiquette/index.html on the Internet.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

More On ISO



The article "Everything About ISO 9000 (Sept. 1, 1995, page
39) was missing information regarding the application of ISO
9000 to software (computer programs and data). While ISO 9001
could be related to the software as a product, organizations
interested in being certified to ISO 9000 standards should
follow the guidelines stipulated in ISO 9000-3. These guidelines
apply to the application of ISO 9001 for the development, supply
and maintenance of software. The article was correct as is,
but I think your readers would benefit to know of ISO 9000
3 as well.

My organization, the Software Certification Institute, offers
consulting and seminars in ISO 9000-3.

L.G. Egan

Director

Software Certification Institute

Santa Maria, Calif.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

CORRECTIONS



The conclusion of "Taking a Stand on Disk Interface Standards"
(Nov. 15, 1995, page 149) was omitted due to a printer's error.
The complete article is now available on the VARBusiness Interactive
Exchange on CompuServe (Go VIX) and on our Internet home page,
techweb.cmp.com/vb.

In Distribution Briefs (Oct. 1, page 48), PC Service Source's
phone number was incorrect. The correct number is (800) 727
2787.

Interactive Solutions Group should have been identified as a
multimedia VAR established by former members of Intel's Technology
Solutions Specialist digital video VAR team (see "Multimedia
VARs Make the Video Connection," Nov. 1, page 3A)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Heard On VIX



Despite industry efforts, home PC sales are below expectations,
and margins are lower than for traditional consumer electronics.
One solution has been proposed by Oracle CEO Larry Ellison:
an easy-to-use $500 box that provides Internet connectivity
and basic computing power. In this thread from VIX, the VARBusiness
Interactive Exchange on CompuServe, VARs and editors kick around
the merits of such a box.

T.C. Doyle, industry editor, VARBusiness: Ellison is right about
one thing. PCs are too difficult to use. They should cut down
on the optional functionality and make it more appliance-like.
Then it will sell by the gazillions, just like VCRs.

Gary McClellan, president, Gary D. McClellan and Associates
Ltd.: We'll see the ultimate consumer box show up as a big
PDA.

Hillary Rettig, technology editor, VARBusiness: You're really
onto something here. Maybe a little PDA with a robust docking
station. Then I can have my PDA call your PDA <g>.

McClellan: Combine a PDA with a robust docking station and have
the cable industry finally get around to making TCP/IP available.
Price it around $500 and include the services in my cable bill
and I'll buy it!

Ian G. Jacobs, software editor, VARBusiness: Why do you need
limited performance? You can put together a clone system for
less than $1,000.

Rettig: Right, then you spend $3,000 fixing and maintaining
that clone over the next few years. Does anyone think that
any of the big consumer electronics companies, or even one
of the toy companies, couldn't produce this box?

Jim Ziron, owner, JR Consulting: It's been tried. Is the market
more ready for it now than in the past? How does your ideal
$500 unit keep up with changing technology?

Rettig: I can think of three possible solutions: Make it modular;
make it "thin"; or make it disposable. After all, replacing
a $500 unit once every three years is still a lot cheaper than
what most home users spend on PC hardware right now.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Cool VAR Home Page

By:
Krista Ostertag

Networking VAR BTG Inc.'s Web site offers real value to its
customers, including an online catalog with current prices.
"With pricing changing as rapidly as it does, it's easier to
update prices online than on paper," says Chip Bumgardner,
vice president and chief technical officer. Online ordering
will be available soon. BTG's site lists news releases, links
to other Web sites, employment opportunities, investor info
and a "how to contact" page. Even with graphically rich pages,
download time is fast. More than 25 people contribute to BTG's
Web site. Webmasters add HTML coding to the pages without using
an authoring tool, but BTG will use Netscape Gold once it's
released. Advice for the rest of us? Bumgardner suggests VARs
structure their sites so updating the information is easy.
Contact BTG Inc., Vienna, Va., (703) 556-6518, www.btg.com

-Krista Ostertag, kosterta@cmp.com




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Training Tips

By:
Ian Jacobs

Looking for a way to expand your training business? Microsoft's
online service, the Microsoft Network, has a section devoted
solely to computer training. The Microsoft Online Institute
(MOLI) lets VARs create online classes and solicit customers.
You can also create an internal training center for one customer.
MOLI includes a bookstore and a library accessible to any MSN
customer. For more info, contact Microsoft at www.microsoft.com.

-Ian G. Jacobs, ijacobs@cmp.com




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Hot Online Products -- Authoring tools to write home about

By:
Krista Ostertag

Internet publishing tools can help VARs create Web sites and
intranetworks for customers. With so many tools on the market,
though, it's hard to decide which to use. Some products are
making waves in the Internet community:

HoTMetaL Pro. SoftQuad Inc.'s HoTMetaL Pro 2.0 Web authoring
tool doesn't require prior knowledge of HTML. Users can point
and-click from the toolbar to insert the tags and hypertext
links. HoTMetaL Pro imports and converts files created on Windows
and Unix platforms and has word processing capabilities such
as spell check, search and replace, macro support and style
controls. HoTMetaL Pro also lets users create customized templates.
Contact SoftQuad, Toronto, (800) 387-2777, www.sq.com.

Blackbird. This is the code name for Microsoft's Internet publishing
system that creates and manages full multimedia titles. Blackbird
originally was designed for use with MSN, but it now can be
used for the Internet and CD-ROM titles, too. Based on the
OLE environment, Blackbird lets VARs integrate applications
for customized online design. It also has drag-and-drop capabilities
and does not require HTML coding know-how. The Blackbird system
comes with the Blackbird Designer, Server, Client and templates
for use with Windows 95. Contact Microsoft, (206) 882-8080,
www.microsoft.com.

Emissary. You can point-and-click or drag-and-drop to create
Internet or intranet files with Emissary from The Wollongong
Group Inc. Emissary provides automatic interpretation of all
Internet protocols and supports full multimedia capabilities.
Emissary lets users surf the Web from a single interface and
window, manage news, e-mail, access FTP sites and run telnet
sessions. Emissary uses the Client Object Linking Technology
architecture, which lets VARs add custom features. Contact
Wollongong, Palo Alto, Calif., (800) 872-8649, www.twg.com.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

VARBusiness Online -- Join us on TechWeb and VIX



VIX, the VARBusiness Interactive Exchange on CompuServe, is
our online forum where you can meet VARs and the editors, and
join in special events. From Jan. 15-19, jump into a discussion
on document imaging led by Bell & Howell. "NOSs for the 1990s:
A Network Vendor Shootout" runs from Jan. 22-26. To reach
us, type "VIX" or "VARBusiness" at the CompuServe GO prompt.
To get connected, call CompuServe at (800) 621-1258.

For our latest articles, research and calendar items, check
out our home page, techweb.cmp.com/vb. A special feature on
this month's page is the 1996 VAR 500 entry form. If you're
among the top 500 VARs and weren't in our VAR 500 issue (Nov.
15, 1995), fill out the form online and click "send."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

What Price Technology? -- It's tough to measure the cost of
a satisfied customer


When was the last time you heard anyone say-and mean-"Money
is no object?" Most times price is a very important object.

Our Product Report survey on hubs (page 31) indicates that price
is very important to VARs, all things being equal. Beta Test
(page 37) offers VARs' first impressions of Sybase's new System
11, a relational database management system upgrade that is
crucially important to Sybase. One pecuniary factor in its
favor: Better performance can give fresh life to legacy systems.

Editor's Choice (page 43) features HP's new network scanner,
which combines swift scanning with built-in LAN connectivity.
"At $2,995 for the Ethernet version," writes Hillary Rettig,
"the unit should sell like hotcakes to larger businesses, but
could be too expensive for smaller ones."

True, unless you can convince small-business customers of its
value as part of a document imaging solution. The question
then becomes how much money they'll save.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Product Report: Hub Verdict: Cost is King -- Standard Microsystems Corp. wins
first place, but 3Com sells best

By:
Julie Bort

Once a relatively simple device, today's hub is changing. Not
just repeaters anymore, hub vendors are loading their products
with intelligence, network management, integrated routing functions,
support for switching devices, and on and on. In exchange for
all this, top-tier vendors are charging top dollars. But instead
of reveling in increased functionality, some VARs are frustrated
with the "more features for more money" direction the market
is taking. Many VARs say that unmanaged hubs, at more affordable
prices, are enough to do the trick.

Those are among the findings of this month's Product Report,
a VARBusiness research project that surveyed 218 hub resellers
on the product features and performance of the hub vendors
that sell to VARs.

The survey turned up a number of surprises. First, Standard
Microsystems Corp. won the Product Report, followed by Bay
Networks and Hewlett-Packard. But 3Com was named VARs' best
selling hub vendor by far, despite finishing fifth overall.

VARs also made it clear they want vendors to support a wide
range of technologies, but not at the expense of the bottom
line. The range of technologies a vendor's hubs support and
the price per port were judged equally important criteria when
sourcing a hub. Clearly, resellers don't want to pay high prices
when a simple unmanaged hub will do the job.

Moreover, VARs want hubs that are hubs, not hybrid routers:
Integrated routing was one of the two least important product
criteria. Instead, VARs look for hubs that are scalable and
have network management features. Another surprise is that
such scalability and management shouldn't necessarily be in
the form of a stackable hub, an option vendors are promoting
heavily. VARs graded the stackable chassis options as second
to last in importance. Rather, VARs prefer support for switching
and WAN technologies.

SMC On Top

Standard Microsystems finished first thanks to its top scores
in range of technologies and price per port.

"We wanted to deliver a managed, stackable hub at the same price
per port as an unmanaged one," explains Hugh Kelly, marketing
program manager for SMC. Specifically, its entry-level member
of the TigerHub 100-Mbit family, the TigerHub 100, is an 8
port Fast Ethernet repeater listed at about $200 per port-or
$1,595. SMC's entry-level Ethernet TigerHub family is priced
as low as $225 for a 6-port, 10Base-T, 1 AUI port version.

This is comparable with Bay Network's stackable solution-the
BayStack family-which carries a price per port of about $200
for a 10-Mbit/s Ethernet hub, and offers interconnection with
switching and routing products. The list price is $2,375 for
a 12-port, 10Base-T Ethernet stackable hub, according to the
company. VARs rated Bay Networks in the middle of the pack
on price per port, giving it a 6.2 rating compared with winner
SMC's 8.3 score. The last-place score in this criterion was
a 5.6, given to IBM.

"SMC lets you break a network into more segments but still manage
it," says David Gloria, vice president of technology for DBA
Computer Integrators, a Richardson, Texas-based Unix system
integrator that resells hubs from 3Com, HP, SMC and others.
"HP has better name recognition and a lot of bigger shops out
there. So does IBM, but they're not the highest-performing
machines."

The situation points to one of the biggest battles raging among
VARs in the hub market: managed top-tier products vs. unmanaged
clones. Tellingly, scores were all over the map on price per
port.

"Users are looking at the hub to take on more of the network
architecture and to be part of a bigger solution," says Brian
Lees, CEO of Concepts 2000, a NetWare VAR in Davenport, Iowa,
that resells hubs from more than half a dozen vendors. "As
part of an overall solution, many hubs are too expensive. A
hub is a hub."

"Name brand hubs are too expensive," according to Gloria. "I
don't need management if I'm just doing a media conversion
from 10Base-T to AUI. Of course, as with any clone product,
it's cheaper. The technology is just not there, so there'll
be a performance difference and they won't have as long a life
cycle."

Price-And a Whole Lot More

Such trade-offs mean that price alone is not the biggest reason
to recommend a product. The best-selling hubs turned out to
be 3Com's, with almost a third of the resellers selling or
recommending that company's products most often. That was almost
double the number recommending or selling the next biggest
seller, HP.

3Com was also named as having most improved during the past
year; HP closely followed. VARs claim that better support of
the hub channel is why they like working with 3Com.

"3Com is easier to get, it's easier to install, and easier for
a regional VAR to do an implementation for a national company,"
says Howard Podgurski, executive vice president of DocuTech,
a client-server systems integrator in Warminster, Pa. "If you
are installing a WAN and the customer has locations in New
York, Philadelphia and San Francisco, as a regional VAR you
could do New York and Philadelphia yourself, while 3Com would
do the San Francisco installation. This kind of support of
their VARs gives them a competitive advantage."

Making the Choice

Beyond price, exactly what technologies a particular installation
requires will determine which hub to source, since each vendor
has varying strengths and weaknesses.

For example, while all vendors achieved fairly good scores for
their support of a range of technologies, how a vendor implemented
a specific technology ranged widely. Only one vendor, HP, had
a particularly high rating for its scalability.

Network management rankings were fairly close, with the highest
score awarded to SMC (7.9) and the lowest to Proteon (6.9).
No vendor scored particularly high for its support of switching
technology-with scores ranging from 7.5, awarded to Bay Networks,
to 6.7, achieved by HP and Digital. Finally, VARs found integrated
routing capabilities to be the most poorly implemented feature,
with the lowest rating in the survey, a 5.8, earned by Proteon.

The message is clear: VARs need hubs to be hubs, but must carefully
weigh how well a vendor supports specific technologies before
choosing.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Beta Test: Is Sybase Back on Track? -- With SQL Server 11, our VAR beta
testers say yes

By:
Hillary Rettig

Some upgrades are evolutionary, some are revolutionary, and
some save the company. Database supplier Sybase Inc.'s System
11 upgrade may belong in the last category. It is the successor
to System 10, a product even the manufacturer considered flawed.
System 10 suffered from poor performance, poor scalability
and bugs. During its three-year release period, Sybase's earnings
plunged, and its market share declined.

Most analysts believe the System 11 upgrade has to be a home
run to salvage Sybase's reputation as a top-ranked RDBMS vendor.
VAR reviewers and VARBusiness Advisory Board members George
Anderson, vice president of Enterprise Engineering Inc., and
Peter Storer, vice president of client-server consulting at
Atre Associates Inc., tested SQL Server 11 and are enthusiastic
about what they've seen.

They see quality as fundamental-especially since both were burned
by System 10. Anderson has been trying to find bugs in System
11, but says he has not been successful.

Still, SQL Server 11 isn't without flaws. Its lack of record
level locking and omission of parallel data query features
are two widely discussed drawbacks. Moreover, Anderson says
the product could benefit from better dynamic reconfiguration
abilities.

It's the Quality, Stupid!

The core of Sybase System 11 is Sybase's RDBMS, Sybase SQL Server
11. Improvements to the database can be summed up in three
words: quality, performance and scalability, says Daniel Lahl,
director of Sybase's Server Products Management Group.

Quality is reflected in the company's decision to pursue ISO
9001 certification, a rigorous procedure that involves quality
control processes and documentation. It is also reflected,
Lahl says, in a $10 million investment in testing and revised
quality control procedures.

As for performance and scalability, it's all in the numbers.
The mood was jubilant when Sybase announced at a press conference
that SQL Server 11 had achieved 5,621.07 transactions per minute
type C (tpmC) on a 12-processor HP9000 Model T500, and a record
4,544.60 tpmC on a 16-processor Sun SPARCcenter 2000E. Equally
important, says Lahl, is Sybase's hardware cost per tpmC. At
$380 on the HP and $396 on the Sun, it's significantly less
than rivals Oracle and Informix.

Our reviewers say those improvements are on target. They also
are impressed with the decision to pursue ISO 9001 certification,
and they note dramatic improvements in the performance and
scalability of SQL Server 11. Anderson in particular applauds
its price/performance ratio. He ran comparative bulk data loads
of Version 10 on a fast SPARCstation 1000 and Version 11 on
a slower SPARCstation 10. Version 11 beat Version 10 hands
down.

"If I can get equal or better performance on worse hardware,"
he says, "that means this software is really performing."

Unresolved Questions

If SQL Server 11's achievements have been well-publicized, so
have its flaws-in particular, its use of page-level, rather
than record-level, locking.

The most obvious problem with page-level locking is that SAP
America's popular R/2 and R/3 applications won't work with
it. According to Ellen Brezniak, director of product management
at rival database vendor Progress Software Corp., however,
the issue is broader. "It's about portability," she says. "We
have many resellers who want to write applications against
a variety of back ends. They're fine with Progress and Oracle,
but they have to rearchitect to work with Sybase."

Page-level locking also limits the types of applications a VAR
can develop. "It's best for applications with short transaction
times, such as finance, but less appropriate for manufacturing
or customer service," says Brezniak.

Our VARs-many of whose customers are in finance-are ambivalent.
"I wish Sybase would do it [record-level locking], so I wouldn't
have to hear people talk about it," says Anderson. "At the
same time, I don't think it's a big deal to my customers."
Sybase's Lahl sees it as a concern only for SAP shops. "If
it were that crucial, we would have put it into 11." Sybase
will add the feature by late 1996, he says.

Our reviewers were more concerned about SQL Server 11's other
significant omission, parallel data query, which allows a database
to break down complex queries into subroutines and assign each
to a separate processor. "The omission is a little disappointing,"
bemoans Anderson. Says Storer, "We really need it for the big,
decision-support type queries." Lahl promises the feature by
mid-1996.

SQL Server 11 represents just one part of Sybase's enterprise
computing strategy, according to Lahl. The company's goal is
to provide best-of-breed products not only for online transaction
processing, but also for data warehousing and mass deployment.
Sybase defines mass deployment as running an application across
a wide range of hardware platforms, including desktops, laptops,
PDAs and information kiosks. Some of those products include
Sybase MPP, a data warehousing tool; Sybase IQ, an ad-hoc querying
tool; and SQL Anywhere, a repackaged version of Watcom SQL
from Watcom International Corp., a Sybase company.

Our beta reviewers didn't get the chance to review those products,
although in some cases they were familiar with earlier versions.
Storer is particularly enthusiastic about Sybase's data warehousing
strategy. "It's the right way for them to be going, particularly
given their great interconnectivity. We are really ramping
up our data warehousing business, and this is going to be one
of the leading platforms for us."

He's less enthusiastic, though, about mass deployment. "We worked
with one client who could have used this," he says, "but that
was only one." He also wants to wait and see how interoperable
SQL Anywhere is with SQL Server.

Anderson is enthusiastic about mass deployment. "I see a lot
of potential for mobile users and others," he says, noting
that while his company and some clients could use it, other
vendors have tried it and haven't done too well.

The bottom line for our reviewers is that Sybase System 11's
benefits far outweigh its deficiencies. "They've chosen exactly
the right things to focus on," says Storer, citing the quality,
performance and scalability. As an independent consultant,
he never stopped recommending Sybase to clients even during
the heyday of System 10's troubles. Now he says because of
the lack of bugs he can recommend System 11 more confidently.

As a Sybase business partner, Anderson's fortunes are more directly
linked to System 11. He has plans to deploy it for at least
one customer as soon as it's released. His only wish, aside
from the record-level locking and parallelism issues mentioned
earlier, is for more dynamic reconfiguration abilities. "We
run in a lot of 24/7 environments," he says. "If I need to
reconfigure the server, I have to pull it down. That's hard
to do sometimes, particularly if you have a worldwide application."

VARs interested in client-server development should get on board
now, Lahl says. "The message is that we're back," he says,
"and we're going to be very, very strong."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Editor's Choice: HP Scans the LAN -- New ScanJet brings more power to 
the network

By:
Hillary Rettig

Movie buffs may recall the scene in 9 To 5 in which Jane Fonda,
playing a stressed secretary, does battle with a recalcitrant
copier. That character may be about to have her revenge. Hewlett
Packard has just upgraded its popular ScanJet scanner family
with several new products, and one of the new offerings-the
ScanJet 4Si-may take a big bite out of the $27 billion worldwide
xerographic copier market. It also may help VARs in the document
image processing market, where 43 percent of all VARs now sell,
according to VARBusiness research.

The 4Si, like its predecessors, is a flatbed unit offering 300
dot-per-inch resolution. Scanning speed, however, has been
increased to 15 pages per minute. That's considerably faster
than comparably priced scanners, although still slower than
most copiers. HP says the 4Si can scan, process and view a
15-page document in 2.5 minutes. The 4Si comes with a 50-page
automatic document feeder and the "light" version of OmniPage,
optical character recognition software from Caere Corp., Los
Gatos, Calif.

Two of the 4Si's features stand out. Its built-in network connectivity
a first for any scanner-lets you plug the scanner directly
into any Ethernet (10Base-T) or token ring NetWare 3.x or 4.x
network. HP bundles an SNMP-compliant utility to make net management
easy.

The other plus is a bundled 20-user version of PaperPort from
Visioneer Inc., Palo Alto, Calif. PaperPort is a document management
system that lets users easily view, sort, group, route and
otherwise manipulate documents. It has been around for years
with overall good reviews, but sales were never brisk. HP's
bundling may indicate that the market has caught up with it.

The combination of network connectivity and document management
is powerful and may herald a new era for the concept of the
paperless office. If any company has the power to promote the
concept, it's HP. My only concern about the 4Si is its price.
At $2,995 for the Ethernet version and $3,199 list for the
token ring, the unit should sell like hotcakes to larger businesses
but could be too expensive for smaller ones.

hrettig@cmp.com




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Editor's Choice: Doubleplay Delivers -- Dual drive is twice as nice, in 
function and in price

By:
Karen Balch

A new version of ComByte Inc.'s dual-drive combo is getting
double takes from VARs with cost- and space-conscious customers.
At 1994's Fall Comdex, ComByte made a big splash with Doubleplay,
its combination QIC-80 tape drive and floppy drive in a single
3.5-inch, half-height internal package. ComByte, then a relatively
unknown company, introduced the product, which benefited VARs
with storage-hungry customers whose budgets and drive bays
couldn't satisfy their needs.

Besides the obvious ergonomic advantages of putting two drives
in one bay, there are also hidden performance gains. For example,
the higher performance motor required to drive the tape engine
works to double the spin rate of the floppy drive, making the
drive capable of reading and writing at 1 Mbit/s.

Doubleplay's dual drives don't just share space, though; they
share electronic components as well. It's not a "two-drives
in-one" package as much as it's a "two-in-one" solution that
appears as a single logical device to the host. But two things
were missing from Doubleplay's initial release: portability
of the drive and backup software that took full advantage of
the drive's unique design.

You might wonder why users would need to move the drive if they
could take out the media. If your customers want to avoid duplicating
drive purchases and plan to move data between home and office
or between multiple office locations, they'll still have to
read the tape or floppy they're toting. So now, ComByte is
offering an external version of the Doubleplay. This version
connects to the computer through the printer port, yet allows
the user to print. The ability to plug in the drive so easily
may entice users to take it with them, resulting in savings
on other storage media.

With either the internal or external version, users can download
large files off the Internet or save multimedia or graphics
files to tape, and avoid loading their hard drives with those
projects in the process. As for the backup software, NovaStor,
Simi Valley, Calif., developed a package specifically for ComByte
that's bundled with the internal and external versions of the
drive.

Finally, even though the current version of Doubleplay can handle
QIC-80, extended-length and QIC-Wide tapes as well as floppy
disks, ComByte plans to make a TR-3 Travan-ready drive available
during the first quarter of this year. Travan minicartridges
have expanded, adding more tape and increasing their capacities
into the gigabyte range.

With all these enhancements, Doubleplay's definitely worth a
double take.

kbalch@cmp.com




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Editor's Choice: A Changing Worldgroup -- Galacticomm's groupware-BBS hybrid
is VAR-friendly

By:
Ian G. Jacobs

Most VARs who deal in groupware don't think much about bulletin
board systems (BBSs). Galacticomm Inc.'s new Worldgroup product
may change that. Worldgroup combines the electronic mail, discussion
forums, file exchange and other communications tools of the
standard BBS with multiple methods of access-such as LAN and
modem-common to groupware packages.

Worldgroup includes a Windows-based client application. The
client installs with the same ease as most Windows applications.

When customers dial into a Worldgroup server with a communications
package, they'll see a standard bulletin board system with
an ANSI, ASCII or RIP interface. But if they use the Worldgroup
client to access the Worldgroup server, they'll encounter what
amounts to a Windows-based online service. The basic look falls
much closer to the WinCIM interface for CompuServe than it
does to a standard BBS.

This Worldgroup interface can be completely customized. If your
customers have a standard desktop look, you can modify Worldgroup
to meet those standards. A municipal system could be built
to resemble a map of the city with icons for the library and
city hall leading to applications for checking on overdue fines
and city taxes. With a Worldgroup Developer's Kit, Galacticomm
gives you the Visual Basic and C source code to Worldgroup
so you can create completely new client applications.

The Worldgroup server runs under DOS on your host computer,
but most of the data that would slow communications is stored
on the client. This speeds the information transfer between
client and server and allows you to use a less than state-of
the-art PC as host.

Galacticomm's Internet Connectivity Option for Worldgroup can
turn your Worldgroup server into a World Wide Web server and
support up to 60 simultaneous connections. Users will be able
to Telnet out from your system to anywhere on the Net.

Galacticomm has an impressive list of ISVs who have created
add-on products to work with Worldgroup. This can make customization
much easier, especially if you've got ambitious projects in
mind-such as electronic commerce-that require a great deal
of programming skill. Some of the more intriguing applications
 a system to process credit cards online; a classified advertising
module; an application that can integrate pagers into the Worldgroup
system; and a faxing module.

Those possibilities should excite resellers looking to broaden
the scope of their groupware offerings. One caveat: To accommodate
all of the communications and specialized graphics, Galacticomm
has allowed the client to bloat, sometimes to more than 10
Mbytes. Users will need a good deal of free space to reap its
benefits.

ijacobs@cmp.com




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

One World, Many Systems -- Make your resolution to bring pieces
together


The new year brings about thoughts of peace and prosperity.
We hope for a world in which everyone works together in peace.
But in your world, you can rejoice that all kinds of different,
complex systems don't work well together.

It shows in our Software story (page 57) on data warehousing.
Those projects involve a bevy of systems from vendors that
reside all over the enterprise. Networking (page 51) illustrates
similar problems in network management: "Vendors have succeeded
in confusing customers with an avalanche of products that do
not interoperate" writes Cassimir Medford, "and at best they
produce reams of data that bewilder even trained engineers."
Computer Telephony (page 65) has six strategies to bring joy
to small business.

In this new year, think of your role as a peacekeeper: You bring
peace to the systems world. Prosperity is your reward, and
that's a good thing any time of year.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Networking: `Productizing' Service -- New England VAR paves way into new
net management trend

By:
Cassimir Medford

It hardly seemed like a historic event. In fact, it looked like
any other analyst-vendor meeting. The suits at one end of the
table were attempting to doctor the spin on their new product.
The analysts at the other end regarded them with little more
than the usual polite reserve.

But this meeting was different. At the vendor end of the table
sat Peter Cowie and Michael Reagan of New England Systems (NES),
a Boston VAR. Cowie and Reagan had taken on a challenging task
 They had to figure out a way to explain InfraMax, NES' remote
network management product that is not really a product. It's
a service made possible by the cobbling together of a number
of commercially available products. It's not based on a specific
platform. It includes some consulting but is not a consulting
product. As with many things in the VAR channel, NES' product
does not fit neatly into any mold.

In essence, NES' mission that day was to define a new market
 the "productized" service.

Realizing his was not an easy message to impart, Cowie searched
the analysts' eyes for signs of glazing. He needn't have worried.
By the time the tour was over, an unlikely star was born. NES,
an 85-person VAR, wowed the normally tough-to-impress Boston
analyst community.

"At first I did not know what to expect. I was used to a product
orientation toward network management," says Sylvia Clark,
senior research analyst with the Aberdeen Group Inc., Boston.
"Here was this service company with a customercentric message.
And it wasn't about outsourcing. It met customers' needs whether
those needs are narrow or broad. I was impressed."

NES' approach is a timely one. After a decade of trying, vendors
are still unable to solve the enterprise management puzzle.
They have succeeded in confusing customers with an avalanche
of products that do not interoperate. And at best they produce
reams of data that bewilder even trained engineers.

Cowie's tour of Boston's market makers was an attempt to explore
the possibilities of looking at network management in a new
light. To his way of thinking, VARs are structurally and culturally
suited to the task of network management.

"I thought the 'productized' service was a trend that analysts
needed to understand. They've been too focused on the latest
product releases," says Cowie, CEO of NES. "We created a service
that corporate America needs to know about, and analysts are
well-positioned to carry that message."

Survey after survey indicates that corporate America is willing
to outsource the responsibility for network management to service
companies such as systems integrators and VARs. Integrators
such as EDS and Andersen Consulting continue to win lucrative
management contracts from the Fortune 500, but VARs have not
shared in this multibillion-dollar windfall.

Some question whether smaller resellers such as NES are credible
enough or financially stable enough to win the respect and
the projects of the Fortune 500, but James Greene, an analyst
at Summit Strategies Inc. in Boston, votes yea. "VARs are at
the point where they can be presented to the Fortune 500 as
a service option," he says. "Of course, the case can be made
that they have certain geographic and technical limitations
that may prove unattractive to the Fortune 500. But their strengths
are in their vendor-independence and wide-ranging distributed
systems expertise."

Cowie and his NES brain trust know the limitations of a small
VAR, but they are hoping that their InfraMax service gets them
some recognition among larger companies. They see an opening
and are trying to push their influence up the corporate ladder.
This is a fairly bold move that analysts believe was almost
unthinkable even a year ago.

The New Wave

"There is a change in attitude in the analyst community. They
have come to realize that VARs represent a force in the network
management market," says Tom Nolle, president of Cimi Corp.,
a Voorhees, N.J., technology assessment firm. "They know that
integrated management has failed as a product, so they are
willing to entertain companies like NES that are able to provide
it as a service."

So far, NES has been able to snag four customers with another
10 in the wings. The latest is a Boston-area network of seven
hospitals that tracks psychiatric patients who seek care at
area hospitals. The network, the Boston Emergency Services
Team (BEST) Crisis Management System, was built by NES. It's
a network through which the hospitals can share information
about psychiatric patients, particularly homeless patients
who walk into any number of those hospitals for treatment.
The network prevents "cocktail mixing" by patients-a potentially
life-threatening situation caused by the mixing of drugs prescribed
by multiple hospitals. The network helps not only with keeping
track of the patients but also with research about the homeless.

NES uses InfraMax, its remote management product, to monitor
and manage the BEST wide area network. InfraMax is a mix of
agent technology that monitors and reports network information.
Performance alerts are transmitted periodically from the InfraMax
agents at the customer site to a notification server at NES'
Waltham, Mass., facility. The notification server applies customized
filters that trap some predefined alerts and pass others up
to the NES command center, where 65 engineers monitor and respond
to the alerts.

For Ed Budelmann, director of BEST, InfraMax frees his organization
to concentrate on providing medical information rather than
dealing with system bugs or thresholds. "NES provided the interface
with the vendors that we needed, and that saved us a great
deal of time," he says.

For NES, BEST represents what the channel can achieve. The company
hopes it's the start of a new chapter in its network management
saga.

Service Companies Emerge

Along with large organizations, the departmental/workgroup market
in small to midsize companies is a ripe arena for companies
such as NES to target. This traditional VAR market has made
a huge investment in technology and is facing many of the same
management problems of the Fortune 500, albeit on a smaller
scale. Forrester Research Inc., Cambridge, Mass., estimates
the market for LAN outsourcing at $782 million and growing.
Dataquest Inc. in San Jose estimates the market's growth at
100 percent annually.

Attracting larger clients usually means adhering to stricter
cost-justifications. In exploring the market possibilities
for a network management service company, NES went on a hunt
for a product that could assist the VAR in making coherent
cost-justifications for its clients.

The true cost of network management has become one of the more
perplexing X factors in corporate planning. Consultants have
estimated the average cost of network management at up to four
times the cost of the network per year. Strategic Research
Inc., Santa Barbara, Calif., recently estimated the cost of
storage management at more than $7 per Mbyte per year. This
is at a time when the cost to purchase and install 1 Mbyte
of storage capacity stands at $1.

Assessing the Cost

Unsurprisingly, a number of products have appeared on the scene
designed to assess the true cost of managing the distributed
network. Most have been too complex, too anemic or both.

NES found its answer in software from Interpose Inc. The product
C/S Solution Advisor-is a marriage of network discovery technology
and the expertise of consultancies such as Gartner Group. The
C/S Solution Advisor, which costs $495, locates the hardware
and software on a client's network through discovery. VARs
can then apply unit costs (supplied by the end user) to the
data to assess the cost of the network. To come up with the
real-life-or close to real-life-projected cost of ownership,
cost of management and return on investment calculations, market
metrics from organizations such as Gartner Group, Strategic
Research and Infonetics Research are applied.

"Oftentimes our customers cannot answer all the questions we
have about their networks. For instance, they may not know
what downtime costs them," says Reagan, NES' marketing director.
"So we assign a couple of different figures and we can then
do a couple of different ROI analyses based on those figures."

For many end users, that could be the first comprehensive assessment
done on their networks. NES employs the product as a sales
tool, offering the customer cost-justifications for its services.
"It's not that easy for companies to keep track of what they
own, so they can't be expected to always know what they are
spending on management," says Reagan. "The Interpose product
gets them to focus on costs. We use it early in the sales cycle,
and it has been very effective."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Networking: Your True Voice

By:
Cassimir Medford

The opportunity for VARs to offer clients spectacular new technology
that could slash network costs by as much as 40 percent and
pay for itself in less than a year is here. It's voice over
Frame Relay.

Customers who use Frame Relay service for data communications
can now add voice communications at almost no extra cost. It's
like buying a gadget that allows your television set to reliably
heat your home.

Motorola's VoiceRelay uses a voice compression algorithm that
lets voice share bandwidth with data and fax on a Frame Relay
connection. It supports analog and digital interfaces and is
sold with the company's 6520 MPRouter.

Voice packets are less tolerant of delays, so they get priority
over data packets. Delay negatively affects voice intelligibility.
An on-board canceller filters out echo, and an adaptive algorithm
stabilizes delays and recovers packets. Per-port pricing for
VoiceRelay starts at $750. (For a free demonstration of VoiceRelay,
call [508] 261-5543 between 2 p.m. and 4 p.m.)

In addition, Micom has integrated voice capabilities into its
NetRunner and Marathon products. Like VoiceRelay, Micom's Frame
Relay software gives priority to voice packets. Voice is carried
at or below the committed information rate with other traffic
on top. If a voice packet is dropped, the software will compensate
by replaying the previous packet.

Also, Micom introduced FrameRunner, a T-1 concentrator that
supports up to eight T-1 links. It supports up to 250 nodes
with integrated voice, fax, data and LAN traffic. The eight
port device is $8,500 and the four-port is $6,500.

Voice over Frame Relay has potential gotchas. The first is voice
quality. Delay compensation techniques have some impact on
voice quality. If the customer is used to 64-Kbit/s long-haul
quality voice, then voice over Frame Relay will require some
adjustment. If the customer is used to compressed voice communication,
then voice over Frame Relay will be suitable. Voice over Frame
Relay can put customers at the mercy of telephone service providers,
however-pricing policies can be changed with the stroke of
a pen.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Networking -- What VARs Are Saying: Know Who's In Charge

By:
Cassimir Medford

Corporate politics exist in every organization. Do you try to
stay aware of the political boundaries that prevail at your
client sites? Do corporate politics work to your advantage
or disadvantage?

We absolutely stay abreast of the politics at our client sites.
It is important that we know who is in charge of the company's
strategic direction, who has purchasing power and who doesn't.
You've got to know whether or not you're dealing with the right
people inside a company.

You have to have a certain degree of sensitivity to the personalities
that make up a company. There are people within these organizations
who have their life's capital invested in the mainframe and
the glass house, and if you're not cognizant of that person's
needs and basic insecurities, you're not going to be successful
in your effort to promote your favorite technology throughout
that organization.

It's a very delicate thing we do. You don't win the game if
every time you go out you make one friend and one enemy. It's
a zero-sum game that way.

It's imperative that you stay aware of the politics at a client
site. I don't mean that we get involved in it. You've got to
know who the decision-makers are. That can make your job much
easier. There is a lot of change happening in the business
world. Companies are going through mergers, buyouts and partnerships,
so you've got to know who is in charge.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Software: Building a Warehouse -- More data and more disparate systems
make it a great VAR market

By:
Ian Jacobs

When IBM began pushing the idea of data warehouses in the late
'80s, customers were justifiably wary. Many saw the new technology,
which was touted as a way to move their decision support needs
away from their operational databases, as little more than
a way for IBM to move more big iron and more copies of DB2.

Times certainly have changed. Within the last year, there has
been an explosion in the number of data warehousing projects.
Most of those have been undertaken by Fortune 500 companies.
But not only the big guys are jumping into the fray. Changing
market pressures and price/performance ratios make data warehousing
more affordable for smaller companies. All of those changes
spell opportunity for VARs, as long as they don't rush blindly
into the new field. Since the business is so young, pitfalls
await the unwary. But for those who learn the ropes, the profit
potential is huge.

The list of vendors hawking wares for the data warehousing market
grows almost daily. SAS Institute, Oracle, Sybase, Informix,
Intersolv, IBM, AT&T and Red Brick Systems are among those
selling data warehousing tools. That level of interest is no
surprise. According to Gartner Group in Stamford, Conn., the
market for data warehousing totaled $1.5 billion last year.
By 1999, Gartner predicts the market will be just shy of $7
billion.

Data warehouses add up to more than the sum of their many parts.
The goal of data warehouses is to ensure that companies get
the most information possible out of all their accumulated
data without interfering with the day-to-day operations of
their businesses. To achieve that, VARs combine their database
integration expertise with front-end tools such as specialized
query tools; analytical engines built around multidimensional
databases; storage spaces in relational databases; transformation
tools that extract the desired data from operational systems;
and numerous other tools that tailor projects to customers'
needs, such as security and backup software. The average size
of one of those projects, according to the Meta Group in Westport,
Conn., hovers near $3 million.

Clearly, data warehousing has the potential to bring tidy profits
and high margins, especially if you can get in early. But not
every VAR has the skill set needed for those projects. Data
warehousing projects last an average of three years, according
to the Meta Group. In addition, they use every ounce of energy
you can muster.

Smaller data warehousing projects-commonly called data marts
require at least two special skill sets, while full-sized projects
require at least three. For any data warehousing projects,
VARs need to have outstanding database administration skills
because data warehouses are essentially enormous databases.
The second crucial requirement is industry-specific knowledge,
which gives you an enormous boost in your sales pitch. You
need not only to be able to put the data together, but also
to tell the customer which data to select in the first place.

For the more traditional monstrous undertakings, a third skill
is required. "You also need tremendous connectivity skills,"
says Neal Hill, vice president of marketing at Cognos Inc.,
which sells front-end query tools for data warehouses. "What
you're likely to be building is a platform that integrates
data from lots of different sources."

Target Your Market

If you lack the resources to organize and implement large projects,
focus on the growing number of companies looking for data marts.
Small companies often need the same access to information that
their larger competitors enjoy, so they make prime candidates
for smaller data warehousing projects. Another set of targets
you can hone in on are departments within large organizations
that want their own data marts separate from the larger corporate
databases.

The theory behind data marts is relatively simple. Hill says
data warehouses are on too large a scale for the average business
computer user. "I don't get things from a warehouse in the
real world; I get them from the neighborhood convenience store,"
Hill explains. "I don't want to deal with forklift loads; I
want to deal with armloads at a time."

One of the reasons data marts and data warehouses in general
are becoming more attractive to customers is the lowering costs
of all of the pieces involved in data warehousing solutions
and the increasing returns they generate.

"The price points in the marketplace with some of the Intel
hardware, Windows NT and the workgroup servers are very, very
attractive," says Steve Miller, senior director of the open
client-server practice at the Braun Technology Group. Braun,
a Chicago-based integrator, creates data warehouses using databases
from Oracle and query and reporting tools from Business Objects
Inc. "It is a very inexpensive way to get some incredible information."

Miller points to competitive advantage as the main driving force
behind the boom in data warehouses. If you can get that advantage
at a lower cost, so much the better for your profit/loss statement.

"Customers believe the market is saying, 'You need to do it
because your competitors are doing it,' " Miller says. "They
have this wealth of legacy information and they're using it
to get information about the market that they're going to use
against you. If you don't do it, you're going to be left out
in the cold."

Partner For Profit

So far, the data warehouse market has been dominated by a few
of the super integrators and the consulting businesses of the
vendors that sell the tools. Making your way into this market
may require cooperation with one of those more established
players.

"I don't know of many integrators who can pull these things
together out of the box," says Robert Scheier, senior analyst
at the Hurwitz Consulting Group, Newton, Mass. "You have to
partner with people who have been successful and protect yourself
from going it on your own."

Jeffrey Coombs, director of channels at query tool vendor Business
Objects, agrees. He warns VARs that they aren't likely to get
the big deals right away. "It's the Ernst & Youngs and the
Andersens that are going to do the million-dollar projects."

A better way for VARs to approach the market is to join forces
with vendors and even big integrators. "The Big Six aren't
in the business of doing the coding themselves, so if a VAR
has the expertise in doing that, he'll be able to build a business,"
advises Coombs. "Develop the expertise in implementing tools
like ours and provide a service to the customer and to the
large integrator who doesn't want to deal with that part of
the project."

Another factor you need to consider before rushing headlong
into data warehousing can be summed up in one word: Politics.
Since the projects are multiyear deals with costs frequently
running into seven figures, organizational politics become
a key factor in the success of these endeavors.

You need a sponsor high up in the company who will support you
through the entire development process. This can be one of
the thorniest political issues you'll have to deal with. Bill
Gannon Jr., vice president at Westboro, Mass.-based Sentry
Market Research, sees two groups at cross-purposes in each
customer who commits to a data warehouse: the centralized IS
group and the decentralized departmental users.

When the political problems are really bad, nothing gets done.
Sid Banerjee, MicroStrategy's director of western operations,
tells of a customer that makes all of its technology decisions
through a corporate standards board. "They're so concerned
that they pick the best set of tools that they've been stuck
in this analysis paralysis for nine months. They're looking
at every tool under the sun," Banerjee says. "They're not moving
forward because they don't have a key user sponsor saying,
'I want a solution to this specific problem right now'."

Banerjee says that to ease such political hassles, you should
seek out strong corporate sponsorship at the user level while
also getting strong implementation sponsorship at the IS level.

The notion that data warehouses are an ongoing process can also
trip up some VARs. Don't expect to go in, set up the warehouse
and get out. Once the warehouse is up and running, then the
real work begins.

"You shouldn't go in with the idea that you're going to get
it 99.9 percent right, because that's not possible," says Miller.
"Take your best shot, build in the expectation that it's going
to change and build in the flexibility to allow that change
to happen."-o




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Software: PEN COMPUTING -- PENTt Up Demand?

By:
Ian G. Jacobs

To paraphrase Mark Twain, the reports of the death of pen computing
are greatly exaggerated. True, you no longer hear pundits predicting
a Newton in every home. But VARs are making a tidy income creating
vertical applications.

Bob Gressler, president of Computers At Work, a Parsippany,
N.J., mobile computing VAR, predicted that millions of pen
based computers would rush out of computer superstores. Still,
he says the new realities don't bother him.

"Our real goal was to find markets where there wasn't lots of
competition," Gressler recalls. His company now sells mobile
solutions to public utilities, the compressed gas industry
and law enforcement agencies.

Although the public doesn't hear about pen-based applications
anymore, that doesn't mean the market has dried up. Seth Rosenberg,
consulting manager at Cone Software Inc. in Boothwyn, Pa.,
says that although pen computing has a bad reputation for horizontal,
consumer applications, "it doesn't have a nothing reputation
for the vertical markets."

Portable devices haven't died either. Fremont, Calif.-based
PenRight! Corp. recently released PenRight! for Windows, a
new Windows development environment.

Gressler is unconvinced of the need for the Windows product.
He says DOS applications are easier to use. "You can't give
a truck driver Windows," he says.

"Our competition isn't other VARs. [It] comes from in-house
groups who want to write the systems themselves," he adds.
"We're integrators, and we're one-stop shopping. We sell the
hardware, we stage it and we install it. The real key is integration."

So, while pen-based applications have lost much of their glitzy
appeal, don't count them out. Resellers willing to plumb the
depths of the wireless world may find an uncrowded niche with
high demand and savvy customers-a VAR's dream.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Software: Software VAR -- Direct Marketing 101

By:
Ian G. Jacobs

If you're like most software VARs, direct marketing probably
isn't the first method you use to garner new business. But
direct mail pieces can help you increase sales.

It isn't enough to just slap together a quick brochure in PageMaker
and mail it out randomly. Targeted mailing lists, special language
and effective page design will all combine to give you a potent
direct marketing campaign.

Start with the mailing list. If your software works with a vendor's
product, you probably already enjoy good relations with that
vendor, so exploit it.

"What software VARs should first do is call up their buddies
at the mothership and say, 'I want the list in my neighborhood,'"
says Bill Mirbach, chairman of Mirbach & Co. Inc., a Westport,
Conn., direct marketing agency. "Goal number one is to get
those names. Goal two is to mail to them on a regular basis."

To make creating convincing easier, Mirbach & Co. offers a pamphlet
called 99 Tips for Software Direct Marketing that you can get
by calling (203) 221-5200.

Some of the tips in the pamphlet seem obvious, but others are
less apparent. Mirbach says that whenever you mail anything
even if it's not sales pitch material-always include an offer.
"If you're paying for the stamp, try and get some money back."

Mirbach stresses that your pitch should read like a conversational
letter. To test your prose, read it to someone.

If you need additional help, Mirbach counsels VARs to ensure
that mailings don't end up in the trash. His staff will write
your copy, merge/purge your mailing list and even go to the
printer to make sure they are printing your job properly.

The tip that business people often find the hardest to swallow,
Mirbach says, is: "Direct marketing is a 'How' business, not
a 'Why' business. Track results, then repeat your successes.
Worry about why it worked later."

"You have a choice. You either get over it or you just go into
an endless Do loop," Mirbach says. "It is a basic agreement
that you absolutely have to have about the nature of reality.
If you don't have that, you're not going to do well with direct
marketing."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Computer Telephony: Ringing Up Small Business -- Low-cost telephony 
products offer fast payback for VARs

By:
Hillary Rettig

If one of your New Year's resolutions is to start selling computer
telephone integration solutions to your small business customers,
congratulations. You're getting in ahead of the pack, and you
stand to profit handsomely.

Of course, you've got to do it right. CTI, like any new technology,
can be tricky to sell to small business. It's unfamiliar, and
it can also be expensive. And even those customers who are
ready and waiting for it may wonder why they should buy it
from a VAR instead of their telephone company.

Below, you'll find four CTI strategies that answer those arguments.
They're familiar, nonthreatening and inexpensive, and they
offer a relatively quick return-on-investment.

Add a Screen Pop

Screen pop applications, in which software automatically displays
information about incoming calls, are one of the easier things
in CTI to demo, says Dennis Dintelmann, CTI sales manager at
Edwardsville, Ill.-based Scheffel & Co. Computer Services Inc.
Most popular PIMs and contact managers are already telephony
enabled. If your customer is using one, add a telephony middleware
program to gain access to screen pops, call screening and a
PC-based telephone.

Aurora Systems Inc.'s FastCall stands out among the middleware
packages in that it requires no programming. Once FastCall
is installed, for example, you can configure it to ring your
telephone when a customer calls, but route all other calls
to voicemail. FastCall costs $300 to $600 per desktop, depending
on the functionality required.

There are dozens of products that offer a PC-based telephone
and other telephony applications. Some offer prewritten program
modules, while others offer programming libraries and application
generators. For a user-friendly dip into telephony, you probably
want one that requires as little programming as possible.

Few of the canned telephony applications are as simple-and,
at $79, as economical-as PhoneKits by AlgoRhythms Inc. The
program contains five modules: PC Phone, Call Log, Answering
Machine, Address Book and Fax Machine. PC Phone is the heart
of the package. You can create custom telephones by dragging
and-dropping telephone buttons, keypads and other elements
onto a design grid. You can also change the appearance of buttons
and incorporate bitmapped images into the telephone's background.

Integrate Communications

While true unified messaging remains a pie-in-the-sky kind of
solution, you can easily set up your small business customers
with semiunified fax, electronic mail and voicemail. Thomas
King, president of PC Serv, a New York-based VAR, says that
just about every small business he's dealt with could use this
solution. The productivity gains are apparent, especially in
understaffed offices. It's also easy to implement in stages,
so you can do it in cases where the budget is tight, says King.

Delrina Corp.'s CommSuite may be the most comprehensive of the
many software products that combine fax, e-mail and voicemail
under an integrated front end. Other features include pager
support, MAPI support and, via the $15 TalkView add-on, voice
support. The single-user version is $99; the two-user starter
network pack is $549.95.

Build On Top of NetWare

If you're a NetWare shop, check out CallWare Technologies Inc.'s
CallWare NLM, the only CTI NLM on the market. CallWare sports
a character-based interface that is similar to NetWare's own.
"I can't tell you how many people see our screens and say,
'Hey, that looks familiar!' " says Joseph Staples, CallWare's
vice president of marketing. "It's very reassuring to them."

CallWare provides auto-attendant, voice messaging and audiotext
features. The package also includes a five-user version of
CallWare ViewPoint, a product that allows users to graphically
access messages from their desktop PCs. (Additional five-packs
cost $45.) The product is priced at $2,995 for a 25-user version.

Create Demand For Fax-On-Demand

FOD is a natural for retail businesses, customer service organizations
and others with a high call volume. It's also an easy sell,
since most customers have used an FOD system and can easily
see the benefit. Best of all, if implemented properly, FOD
requires almost no maintenance. "I get, 'how do I do it?',
not 'it's broke' calls," says one VAR.

Ibex Technologies Inc.'s FactsLine 2.0 for Windows combines
robust fax capability with a document management system optimized
for TIFF and other fax file formats. Many major vendors use
in-house FactsLine, and a client is bundled with Windows 95.

FactsLine retails for $4,790 plus $670 per inbound or outline
telephone line. You need at least two lines, one inbound and
one outbound. You'll also need a server and an industrial-strength
fax board such as the VFX-40 from Dialogic.

Once you start working with CTI, it's to your advantage to bone
up on the broader field of telecommunications. For one thing,
some of the products mentioned above work best when combined
with specific telecommunications services such as Caller ID.
For example, without Caller ID, screen pop software won't know
which information to display. At the same time, it's important
to understand the limits of the technologies-Caller ID, for
example, does not work with incoming calls from most PBXs.

Most of the products mentioned require that you hook up the
PC to a TAPI-compliant telephone or voice-enabled modem. For
new installations, purchase a new TAPI-compliant telephone,
such as the AT&T Computer Telephone 8130. For preexisting ones,
purchase an inexpensive TAPI interface box or card from the
manufacturer.

Comdial Corp. has an appealing solution for linking PCs to ordinary
analog telephones. The $99 PC and Telephone Interface (PATI)
3000 is a box that plugs into your computer's parallel port
on one end and telephone line on the other. It includes a second
parallel port so you don't lose access to your printer or other
parallel-port peripheral. PATI ships with a suite of "light"
CTI applications, including an on-screen telephone, minidialer,
address book and call log.

Most of the major modem manufacturers have released voice-enabled
modems. Connectware Inc. offers a card it says is optimized
for voice applications. PhoneWorks 28.8 ($299) uses the Rockwell
chipset, which offers the full duplex circuit necessary for
quality sound reproduction, as well as Caller ID support.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Computer Telephony: Wireless Telecom -- How One VAR Makes the MOST of Telecom

By:
Hillary Rettig

If you're a small VAR who is starting to work with new technologies,
it helps if you can approach them from a fresh perspective.
Ask Andy Sjamsu, president of Ronkonkoma, N.Y.-based Mobile
Office Solutions Technology (MOST) Inc. He started out in 1991
as a reseller specializing in contact management solutions
using Elan Software's GoldMine for Windows and has evolved
into a supplier of wireless telecommunications products and
services.

Sjamsu's new business line evolved out of his own company's
needs and those of his customers. Like many resellers, he used
the solution he sold in-house. It worked well, he says, except
for one problem: He and his colleagues, who spend more than
half of their time on the road, had trouble keeping their databases
synchronized. "It's tough getting to a telephone jack when
you're in a car."

To Sjamsu, the solution was obvious: wireless synchronization.
"We use wireless for e-mail, so it made sense that we should
be able to use it for this as well." Sjamsu developed GoldMine
Wireless Solution (GWS), an add-on that lets GoldMine users
synchronize their databases over the RAM Mobile Data two-way
wireless network.

Sjamsu has shifted his business focus from traditional reselling
to selling GWS, both direct and through the channel. "We're
getting in on the ground floor of something big," he says.
"When you see an opportunity like this, you can't let it pass
you by." He is excited not only at the prospect of selling
GWS, but also of collecting royalties from RAM Mobile based
on airtime usage related to his product.

That's the real reason VARs should pay attention to telephony
and telecom, Sjamsu says. "Everything is evolving very fast,
and there are always new and different profit opportunities."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

You Can Break Through Desktop Barriers -- Connect with high
margin remote computing markets

By:
T.C. Doyle

Space may indeed be the final frontier, but not just because
vast amounts of it remain to be explored. Rather, it is the
lack of space that has computer scientists working late into
the night.

Inventors including George Gerpheide, founder and president
of Cirque Corp. in Salt Lake City, have produced a flurry of
space-saving and feature-enhancing innovations that have transformed
the world of portable computing into the world of dream computing.
When users leave their offices equipped with a notebook computer
that includes one of Gerpheide's GlidePoint pointing devices,
more often than not they are taking with them a personal computer
that offers nearly as many features-and as fast a microprocessor
as those found in the systems used by their deskbound colleagues.

VARs looking for opportunities need look no further than the
burgeoning $8 billion market for portable computers, which
is expected to expand to $10 billion by 1997, according to
Dataquest Inc., San Jose. This season alone boasts a bumper
crop of "no-compromise" notebook computers featuring space
saving enhancements that have allowed vendors to cram their
wares with clear 12.1-inch, active-matrix thin-film transistor
(TFT) screens, 1-Gbyte hard disk drives, fast 120-MHz microprocessors,
reliable 28.8-baud PCMCIA modems and long-lasting lithium-ion
batteries-features that a short while ago were available only
in exotic systems.

Dataquest analyst Mark McGuire believes advanced features that
have become the norm in top-of-the-line notebooks from NEC
Technologies, Texas Instruments, Toshiba America Information
Systems, AST Research and others will soon find their way into
product lines as early as mid-1996. And that's just the beginning.
The near future will include notebook computers that feature
150- and 180-MHz microprocessors, plus bigger screens that
boast a 1,024-x-1,280 resolution, says Ken Dulaney, vice president
of mobile computing at market research firm Gartner Group,
Stamford, Conn. More units will have removable CD-ROM drives
and wireless infrared docking capabilities.

"As mundane as it sounds, the biggest advances may come from
work to improve bus speeds," Dulaney says. "In 1996, you will
see more PCI notebooks and machines that make the most of improvements
to individual components. Once that is accomplished, videoconferencing
and other advances once considered exotic will become commonplace
on notebook computers, which have become true desktop replacements.
They are not a specialty machine anymore."

Gerpheide agrees. He convinced Apple that his space-saving GlidePoint
pointing device would not only free up real estate taken up
by a mouse, but also offer better reliability. After all, his
solid-state device has no moving parts to wear out and takes
up less than half the space of a standard mouse. Better yet,
Gerpheide says his GlidePoint, found in Apple PowerBooks and
other portable systems, will usher handwriting recognition
technology into standard portable systems. He and leading hardware
developers are working on a next-generation GlidePoint, which
resembles a flat LCD panel and can read simple annotations
and even Kanji characters.

Beyond that lie even greater advances. NEC, for example, is
working on prototype machines that have interchangeable screens
and even projection display capabilities for delivering multimedia
presentations. Canon USA, meanwhile, is working on smaller
and lighter printers that a variety of third parties will integrate
with their notebook units. Other vendors are experimenting
with collapsible screens, wireless communications solutions
and expanding keyboards that resemble IBM's now-famous TrackWrite
"butterfly" design found in ThinkPad 701 C/CS units.

One In Three PCs

So big has the notebook computer market become that 25 percent
of the PCs sold nationwide today are portable devices, according
to various industry reports. Gartner Group's Dulaney believes
that portable systems could account for more than one in three
systems sold if corporate IT executives stopped viewing notebook
computers as specialty machines. A notebook carries a 50 percent
to 100 percent price premium over a desktop computer. Last
year, Gartner Group completed a study that showed the incremental
cost of a notebook can be paid back in 100 weeks if a mobile
user works one hour per week more than a deskbound user. Considering
how feature-rich and convenient portables are today, experts
agree that's almost bound to happen.

VARs, of course, would be wise to take note of this selling
point as well as other market dynamics. Notebook computers
offer VARs such as New York-based MFJ International, a Lotus
Premier Business partner and Notes developer, the perfect vehicle
for delivering custom sales automation solutions and other
mobile applications. MFJ sells a custom-developed sales automation
package called OverQuota to notebook customers nationwide.
Other VARs, meanwhile, find notebooks to be the ideal replacement
for desktop computers at many of their customer sites. Central
Telecom, a Toshiba VAR in Overland Park, Kan., is upgrading
a national hospital sales automation company's entire base
of desktop computers with portable systems so its workers can
be more productive.

"It's clients like those that convinced us to get out of the
desktop computer market altogether and concentrate on the portable
marketplace," says Rick Pack, Central Telecom sales manager.
The gambit proved to be a smart one. Central Telecom's revenue
was expected to jump to $12 million in 1995, although the company
employs only nine people. In addition, the company is expanding
its operations to Denver at the prompting of Toshiba, which
wants a support center there on par with Central Telecom's
operations in Kansas.

Given the number of VARs promoting notebook technology, the
improved usefulness of the machines and their falling price
points, it is no wonder that sales have picked up steadily.
In 1994, the market-measured in the number of units sold-jumped
by 29.9 percent, according to BIS Strategic Decisions of Boston.
The market will grow an estimated 21.8 percent to 4.7 million
units by the time final 1995 results are tallied, BIS estimates.
By the end of the decade, sales could reach 8.1 million units.

Within the portable market, there are significant shifts under
way. For example, color notebooks now account for the bulk
of portable systems sold, outselling monochrome systems by
nearly 4 to1 in 1995. In addition, notebook and subnotebook
units account for the majority of systems sold. Though growing
at a healthy rate, subnotebooks are not expected to overtake
notebook sales this decade, according to BIS. If anything,
the desire for bigger screens and full-size keyboards are keeping
alive the market for bigger notebooks. "By adopting bigger
screens, vendors have gone international in scope, dumping
the 8.5-inch-x-11.5-inch form factor in favor of the bigger
A4 size," says Gartner Group's Dulaney. "Where units are getting
smaller, however, is in thickness, thanks to GlidePoint and
things like 12-mm disk drives."

It Keeps Growing And Growing...

Technology aside, the market is also expanding as vendors approach
it for the first time or with renewed vigor. For example, at
the Fall Comdex trade show, notebook newcomer Hitachi PC Corp.
showed off its new line of Pentium-powered systems, while others
vowed to mount a comeback. That group included Unisys, Epson
America, Everex Systems and Samsung Electronics America. Though
behind technically, Samsung hopes to catch up in July with
a new 120-MHz-powered SENS 810 notebook. The unit will feature
removable hard drives plus Samsung's own 11.3-inch TFT screen.

Back in early 1994, Toshiba climbed to the top of the market
and has remained the No. 1 supplier ever since, according to
Dataquest. Though year-end figures for 1995 are not yet available,
the market has not shifted appreciably from year-end 1994 when
Toshiba finished with a 19 percent share. IBM, thanks to its
popular ThinkPad family of products, ranked second with a 12
percent market share. Compaq, Apple Computer and NEC round
out the rest of the top-tier vendors, which collectively accounted
for half the volume shipments in portable systems in 1994 and
1995.

The stranglehold the top-tier vendors have on the market may
be broken in 1996 as second-tier vendors rally. According to
a recent Gartner Group report, tier-two vendors including AST,
Hewlett-Packard, AT&T, Digital Equipment and others are "on
par with tier one in financial stability and are beginning
to rival or in some cases exceed tier-one vendors in quality
assurance, technology innovation and breadth of product line."
Not surprisingly, a price war among top players broke out last
fall. IBM, for example, initiated a price promotion that saved
customers as much as $650 when they purchased a ThinkPad 755
model. Among other things, IBM offered buyers a copy of Lotus
SmartSuite CD, a $399 value.

Regardless of the savings, VARs considering adding another product
line would do well to consider tier-two vendors, Gartner Group
concludes. Central Telecom, for one, is adding Texas Instruments'
TravelMate line to its product portfolio. Sales manager Pack
says the company needs a second line because Toshiba systems
are often on allocation. "You have to drop the name of a big
customer to get Toshiba products," he says, "so we are hoping
that a full-featured line like the TI will fit the bill."

Texas Instruments was one of several vendors that redefined
the high end of portable computing this fall with the introduction
of a 120-MHz, Pentium-based model. TI's $5,199 TravelMate 5200
has 8 Mbytes of memory, a 1.2-Gbyte hard disk, a 10.4-inch
active-matrix super VGA screen and two lithium-ion battery
packs. A similarly equipped Versa unit from NEC sells for roughly
$5,499, as does AST's new Ascentia 950N product, which starts
at $5,249. So competitive has the high-end performance segment
become that Toshiba chose for the first time not to release
pricing when it unveiled its new Tecra 700 series in October
until it shipped the new products in late November.

Toshiba wants the new high-end Tecra series to stand out because
of its features, not necessarily its aggressive price, according
to the company's senior product manager Steve Brehaut. "IBM
gets a lot of attention for its butterfly-design ThinkPad,
but we like to remind the competition that we are No. 1 for
our technology," says Brehaut. "We were the first to market
with a Pentium-based notebook, lithium-ion batteries and units
that use PCI in docking stations and other innovations. We
provide flexibility and cutting-edge technology first. That's
what keeps us on top." That and a loyal following among many
VARs in the channel.

When Toshiba decided to authorize roughly 20 different companies
to perform service repairs, VARs including Computer Systems
& Solutions of Bala Cynwyd, Pa., jumped into high gear. "When
Toshiba opened the door for us to do service, we changed our
business model," says company chief executive Kimberly Crew.

NEC is trying to cultivate deeper ties to VARs, too. Dale Fuller,
vice president of portable systems at NEC in Mountain View,
Calif., says the company is working with a number of VARs on
various projects including trying to develop a custom joy stick
that will serve as a portable gaming device. Another is working
on adapting an 8-mm DAT drive to fit inside a Versa notebook
computer.

"We have VARs that are making our products very 'verticalized,'"
says Fuller. "Some are working with different operating systems,
helping us take our 2000 and 4000 product lines into new customer
segments."

NEC introduced the 4000 series in July and added the 4080H to
the lineup in late October. It boasts "on-demand" modularity
similar to that in Toshiba's Tecra line. The Versa 4080H has
a slot for a second battery or CD-ROM drive or additional hard
disk. Like other top-of-the-line units, it features two stereo
speakers, two infrared ports for cable-free file exchange and
docking, plus two stacked PC card slots for Type II or Type
III adapters. That feature set is turning up in more than just
TravelMates, ThinkPads, Ascentias and Tecras. Compaq's latest
LTE 5000 family, which ranges in price from $3,999 to $6,699,
also boasts a modular design and can accommodate a CD-ROM drive,
a 1.35-Gbyte hard disk, a 3.5-inch diskette drive plus a Pentium
120-MHz microprocessor. In addition, the Compaq LTEs feature
stereo speakers, integrated Ethernet support and an infrared
port for wireless printing, file transfer and drive synchronization.
One selling point: Compaq LTE 5000s were selected by Microsoft's
field sales force for demonstrating Windows 95 and Office 95
to large customers.

Not to be outdone, IBM is bouncing back with its new ThinkPad
760 series. The units feature a 12.1-inch TFT screen, a 120
MHz Pentium chip and a unique tilt-up keyboard and MPEG-2 video
playback capabilities. With IBM's UltraBay design, users can
swap-in and swap-out a variety of modules such as a CD-ROM
drive.

"Those new 12.1-inch units will be sold primarily as desktop
replacements, less as systems for sales force automation,"
maintains Per Larsen, director of worldwide brand management
of mobile computing at IBM in Research Triangle Park, N.C.

Larsen suggests that early adopters including mobile workers
who buy the first couple of hundred thousand full-featured
760 units are not the target audience for the 760. "The mobile
workforce is very large, but desktop replacement is a much
bigger market," he concedes. "That's why we have paid so much
attention to multimedia and docking capabilities. For example,
all ThinkPads have infrared technology, and 30 percent of our
systems sell with a docking station. When you buy an IBM, you
don't have to update the docking system every time you buy
a new machine. Not too many others can say that."

Future ThinkPads, he says, may include chips other than Intel
microprocessors because "the Pentium doesn't fit well into
certain market sweet-spots" such as the $2,200 to $2,400 market
segment.

IBM's new ThinkPad has the increasingly popular lithium-ion
batteries that have plagued at least one major vendor. When
Apple first introduced its PowerBook 5300 model, several units
caught fire. Apple has resumed shipping the 5300 with nickel
metal-hydride batteries and promises customers that the product
is safe. More than that, Apple is banking on its VAR partners
to embrace its new PowerPC-powered systems. To help spur sales,
Apple reduced by $100 the price of the 5300, which is a whole
pound lighter than Apple's previous top-of-line PowerBook 500
series. The systems include 8 Mbytes of RAM and can accommodate
a 10.4-inch color active-matrix screen and two slots that can
accommodate industry standard add-in cards. The removable floppy
drive can be replaced with an additional hard drive or AC power
adapter among other devices.

"You read a lot about vendors that are known for their technology
leadership. But the real tale of the tape is how many they
ship," says Charlie Tritschler, PowerBook product line manager.
"We have jumped into the top five, according to the most recently
available data, because we are shipping innovations customers
want, not features that people think are just 'cool.'

Another vendor trying to make a leap into the top five is Sharp
Electronics Corp. Though its products are competitive, Sharp
admits its ties to VARs are weak. Among other things, Sharp
brings to the market award-winning screen technology, and the
company is one of the world's largest suppliers of TFT screens.
Dataquest says Sharp could double or even triple its 12.1-inch
active-matrix screen output in 1996. The company is rolling
out several Pentium-based systems, including the high-end Sharp
9070 system that includes 16 Mbytes of RAM, a 28.8-baud voice
data/fax modem, a PCI motherboard, a lithium-ion battery and
a removable quad-speed CD-ROM drive.

The package resembles that of AST, which is trying to break
from the middle of the pack. Its recently unveiled Ascentia
950N weighs only 6 pounds, but may be just the right amount
to tip the scales back in AST's favor after a long malaise.

Gartner Group's report on the notebook market sums it up: "There
is now a significantly broader set of vendors to choose from."
Just the thing for a channel that wants more options.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Ultimate Solution -- Connecting the Road Warrior

By:
T.C. Doyle

As advanced as the technology inside one of today's top-of-the
line notebook computers is, more often than not it is the technology
outside the box that makes a solution complete. Per Larsen,
director of worldwide brand management of mobile computing
solutions at IBM's PC Co. in Research Triangle Park, N.C.,
says wireless infrared technology is the hidden jewel in ThinkPad
technology. "Every one of our ThinkPads supports infrared,
allowing them to take advantage of innovations such as Extended
Systems wireless LAN adapters," he says. "They allow a user
to connect to a network by simply lining up his computer with
an outlet in a wall. That's great stuff."

VARs familiar with the Extended Systems' JetEye products agree.
Early last year, the company joined IBM's ThinkPad Proven Program
when its JetEye family became one of the first infrared adapters
to let IBM ThinkPad owners use their notebook's built-in infrared
communications port. In November, the company unveiled a $399
option for connecting users to NetWare, TCP/IP and NetBIOS
networks and printers by simply placing their infrared-equipped
portable near the JetEye Net Plus access node.

Wireless communications have made big leaps in reliability and
usability. Last month Megahertz was slated to ship its new
AllPoints Wireless PC Card ($499). Among other things, users
can receive electronic mail, transmit faxes, and access databases
and various online services.

If wireless is too exotic for your customer, then consider a
PCMCIA-based modem. Companies providing full-feature modems
include Microcom Inc., Ositech Communications Inc., Hayes Microcomputer
Products Inc., Practical Peripherals, Motorola and Megahertz
Corp. Remote software is also becoming a bigger part of mobile
computing. MobileWare Corp. has an architecture for managing
wireless communications. Its products include the MobileWare
Command Center for systems administration and management, plus
the MobileWare Transaction Management System that can guarantee
data integrity through authentication and encryption.

Other solutions include applications for connecting mobile workers
to wireless services. Motorola's AirApparent software connects
Windows NT users to their Motorola Tango pager-toting colleagues
in the field. Socket Communications Inc.'s PageCard Wireless
Messaging Systems lets users plug pager cards directly into
PCMCIA slots on notebooks, allowing messages to be received
in the field. Socket's new GPS Card lets users communicate
with orbiting Global Position System satellites that provide
instant geographic data.

Proxima Corp.'s Projector 2810 accommodates both computer and
video output, is Mac- and VGA-compatible and delivers 640-x
480 resolution at 300 lumens. At $7,495, it could be just the
ticket for closing that deal for you and your client.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Availability Concerns -- Why Are Compaq Servers So Hard To Get?

By:
Tom Farre

Why Are Compaq Servers So Hard To Get?

According to VARBusiness' Annual Report Card survey, Compaq
had availability problems in 1994-1995.

Cooley: [In 3Q], there were more opportunities than we captured,
which gets back to the availability issue, as voiced appropriately
by VARs in your Annual Report Card issue.

In servers, we grossly underestimated 2Q and 3Q demand. We've
been scrambling to recoup; we've radically increased our forecast,
so we now have more components. We shipped a significant number
of servers, but our fourth quarter plans call for double the
supply vs. the second quarter.

VB: Was availability a problem for VARs only?

Cooley: No. Because VARs source these days from the likes of
Tech Data, Merisel and Ingram and, frankly, from aggregators
such as MicroAge, that is not an issue.

VB: Those are high-priority customers?

Cooley: Sure. Because our server line's breadth is so wide,
you get the channel having 75-MHz Pentium servers in stock
waiting for demand. The VAR is saying, "I want 100 MHz," and
now he'll say, "I want 133 MHz." That's how you get the wrong
balance to meet the demand. Then the VAR says, "I can't get
Compaq servers," but there are lots of Compaq servers to sell,
just the wrong damn ones.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Business Interview: Compaq Pushes Beyond the PC -- On top for now, 
Ross Cooley aims to keep Compaq there by moving agressively into the 
enterprise

By:
Tom Farre

Compaq and Ross A. Cooley have come a long way together. As
senior vice president and general manager of North America
at the biggest PC maker, Cooley oversees sales, service, support,
pricing, distribution and customer satisfaction for the United
States and Canada. That accounts for many customers and sales
roughly half of Compaq's projected $14 billion revenue for
1995.

Sales is where Cooley got his start 29 years ago at IBM. In
1984, Compaq's second year, he joined Compaq to manage the
territory east of the Mississippi, which had a team of four
salespeople. But with the June 1984 introduction of the Deskpro,
he moved to headquarters in Houston and has been in executive
management ever since.

Through the years, Cooley has ridden the wave of Compaq's technology
leadership, when it introduced the first 386 desktop PC in
1986 and the first superserver, the Systempro, in 1989. As
Compaq's most visible channel executive, he also helped craft
and promote Compaq's successful reseller-only distribution
strategy. That was until 1991, when-responding to its first
quarterly loss-Compaq broadened its distribution and started
working directly with users.

Known as a tough but fair competitor, Cooley is no stranger
to controversy. He was instrumental in Compaq's famous deauthorization
of BusinessLand, and more recently in the disagreement with
Intel regarding the "Intel Inside" campaign, which Cooley believes
devalues the Compaq brand.

Today Cooley has his hands full as Compaq tries to stay on top
by expanding on all fronts, from consumer electronics to the
enterprise. Of special interest to VARs is Compaq's push into
global client-server computing. In addition to introducing
an aggressive lineup of high-end Pentium systems, Compaq is
partnering with Digital Equipment as its worldwide service
provider. The company also has announced plans to acquire internetworking
vendors Thomas-Conrad and NetWorth. VARBusiness executive editor
Tom Farre caught up with Cooley in Houston during Compaq's
Innovate 95 convention.

VARBusiness: When Compaq had reseller-only distribution, you
were known as an advocate for the channel. Is that still true
today?

Cooley: I've been beat up pretty good [laughs]. You bet. The
Compaq strategy encompasses strong relationships and partnerships
with those who represent us. Whatever they're called this week
the retail channel, VAR, independent software vendor-we're
still very dependent on a highly motivated group of partners
to carry our message to the market and make our customers satisfied.

Now, we've done a lot since 1991 to convince the customer that
our partners and our strategy are capable of meeting their
needs, and at times the message gets confused, because it's
changed.

I'll never forget this example, when we put in an 800 number
for customers to call us for service...

VB: Instead of their resellers.

Cooley: You bet. So everybody said, "Cooley's gone native. Cooley's
lost his marbles. What the hell is he doing? That's a profit
center for us." Well, lo and behold, more customers became
convinced that we were serious about them being satisfied.
There are still reseller and service-provider hotlines and
help desks in place, and they're making money at it. So we
figured out a way to complement one another that makes the
overall result a better solution, if you will, as it relates
to the Compaq brand.

VB: In our Annual Report Card issue, Compaq received a relatively
low score in managing channel conflict.

Cooley: It's a hell of a challenge for anybody that's got more
than one pipe into the market. And the more channels you have,
the bigger the challenge is to try to keep them all separate.
Although there's incremental opportunity associated with reaching
specific customer segments, there's clearly a frustration on
behalf of all of your partners when any overlapping occurs.
And I can't-nobody can-keep it clean.

Frequently, though, those surveys reveal a perception, not a
reality. As an example, a VAR answering that survey in June
perceives that the guy who stole his customer with a 4500 Prolinea
rack mount has better access to our servers than he or she
does, and, therefore, if we hadn't authorized that [reseller]
and so on. So during times of great demand and limited supply,
we hear more frequently about channel conflict than when we're
all in stock and can all compete on a level playing field.

VB: Looking out into 1996, are you working on any initiatives
to help your resellers sell Compaq?

Cooley: I've been asked what worries me at night; one thing
is our ability to reengineer Compaq for the size it is today
and will be tomorrow. And the reengineering effort is a long
effort. It requires changing our business process first and
then our information systems to support the new business process.
A lot of frustrations that your readers have are affiliated
with old business processes, old information management (IM)
systems built for a far smaller business than we are today.

We're converting Compaq from a build-to-forecast company to
a build-to-order one. The ramifications of that, as it relates
to reducing the frustrations of the VAR community, are significant,
because when we really have build-to-order in 1996, VARs won't
have to worry about where to source Compaq solutions. And,
frankly, the entire pipeline can remove a lot of dead investment
in inventory waiting for demand. It will sit with Compaq. We're
not going to build it until they signal (see "Availability
Concerns")

VB: You can move that quickly?

Cooley: You bet. So the goal in 1996 will be, starting with
servers, converting from a build-to-forecast company to a build
to-order one, and have the ability within 48 hours to configure
and ship a product as the VAR wants it. Now, I'll grant you
there are still a number of third-party products that need
to be configured with ours to meet the total needs of the customer,
the total solution. The VAR's value, clearly, is in marrying
up the Compaq pieces with complementary products, and then
successfully installing it all at the customer site.

VB: Build-to-order should be good for margins.

Cooley: That would be great for margins. The points associated
with us parking our stuff in these warehouses all over the
United States and Canada waiting on demand is mind-boggling.
We tried to address it with programs like flooring the systems,
but if you wring that out of there, we can use the savings
to generate more demand, we can take it to the shareholders,
we can hire more systems engineers to support the VARs.

VB: You mentioned the extra products beyond the PC that make
up the total solutions VARs are putting together. What's Compaq's
role in enterprisewide solutions?

Cooley: When you walk into a glass house today and see all the
brand names required to meet the needs of the enterprise customer,
you start to see, obviously, routers and hubs and much more.
Compaq is being asked by our customers to have more accountability
for a greater number of the products needed to make this client
server world work. So whether it's alliances or a Compaq brand,
you'll see us reach out into the world of datacom to address
the requirements of that kind of a customer.

The traditional IM customer who used to buy from that vertically
integrated model [such as IBM] is looking for as much of that
as he can find in this new world. It's never going to be like
it was, but the more of it we can do, the more likely it is
that the customer will accept the VAR's recommendation that
Compaq can do this piece, this piece and this piece.

We don't intend ever to have a Compaq hardware platform, a Compaq
operating system, a Compaq application sitting on top of it.
But we will take best-in-class companies who provide that and
try to expedite and, if you will, improve the security and
reliability when they're configured with Compaq by the VAR.
We're going to try to find all those opportunities we can.

VB: Such as your CD-ROM that helps install an Oracle database?

Cooley: Exactly.

VB: You run ads saying, "With Compaq you can start up Oracle
easier," aimed at the MIS person. Should VARs be concerned
that this devalues them?

Cooley: If that were the only thing the VAR was doing, boy,
I'd be concerned. But that is not the only thing the VAR does.
When you count the number of hours and the amount of manpower
VARs dedicate to installing something like Oracle, just getting
it on there and fixed, it's absolute dead time. We want to
increase the productivity of those systems engineers employed
by the VARs to where they can get on the front end of this
thing and design new systems or plan the capacities of future
upgrades. Such activities have a higher ROI than the grunt
work of sitting there watching all these damn diskettes chugging.

VB: So it's a utility for the VAR as well?

Cooley: Yeah, it increases everybody's productivity. And the
customer's confidence level increases because of the cooperation
between the VAR and, in this case, Compaq.

VB: You just announced that you're buying Thomas-Conrad, a networking
manufacturer. What's the reasoning there?

Cooley: Today's products aren't nearly as interesting as what's
getting ready for the market. In the world of switches, they've
got some differentiated technology. So you'll see us now do
both partnering as well as, selectively, some acquisitions.

VB: Are you concerned that you're moving into a highly competitive
field that could dilute the focus of the company?

Cooley: You bet. But it's a risk, and it goes with change. As
an example, there was a concern that we would not do well in
the consumer market. And we didn't have a core competency there.
With growth, though, you can attract the talent necessary to
add a core competency along the way. So now Doug Pushard [vice
president in the Internetworking Products Group] has the skill
set necessary to manage the networking business. What Doug
will do, obviously, is add a group of people who currently
work at Thomas-Conrad. So Compaq's core competency expands.

VB: Could you envision authorizing Compaq internetworking-only
VARs?

Cooley: We are again on the verge of needing to really understand
whether or not hard product segmentation is required in order
to meet the needs of this technology. For example, [working
with Tandem Computer] we are now looking at clustered solutions.
And frankly, Tom, you and I both know that everybody authorized
to represent Compaq is not going to have an ability to begin
to spell it, let alone sell it.

So, yes, that level of solution will clearly motivate us in
1996 to once again rethink whether a subset of authorized partners
should represent us for those products. As difficult as that
is to administer, the capability and expertise required by
the customer with this level of product motivates you to want
to head down that path. I'm not there yet, or Compaq's not
there yet. But we probably have a couple of quarters to work
through it. It is a high priority for us.

VB: One stormy partnership that got a lot of press this past
year was yours with Intel. I sense the relationship has warmed
of late.

Cooley: I guess the best way to say it is that we understand
one another. And clearly we're their largest customer again.
Therefore, it's-what did Noorda call it? The world of coopetition.
They're doing some things we'd prefer they didn't, but we understand
their strategy. And I'm sure that in the future we will again
do some things they'd wish we didn't. But they will understand
our strategy.

All of us still believe that if it's closed, it's bad; if it's
open, it's good. If there are two, it's better than one from
a choice standpoint. Inevitably, we find that technology evolves
quicker; prices are better; the value, if you will, is better
if there's competition. You bet we've got a strong relationship
with AMD, Cyrix and NexGen, and you're darned right we're going
to test Alpha until it's blue in the face.

VB: You recently announced Digital Equipment as your global
service provider. How will this affect VARs?

Cooley: This change, like so many others, is driven by customer
request and requirement. The service capability of the VAR
community, as well as many other Compaq-authorized partners
in the U.S. and Canada, has continued to improve, increase
and evolve, and to a great degree they have met all the needs
of the customer. Where it continues to be a challenge is with
customers considering multinational or global implementation.
The more client-server they do, the more mission-critical they
do, then the larger this requirement becomes.

We've provided an answer for VARs that have the chance to extend
their Compaq solutions beyond the local area where they have
no service coverage. Frankly, we have lost large opportunities
to the legacy companies because they have a worldwide infrastructure,
and we've had white spots on the map where our authorized partner
had no answer. Now, with Digital's multivendor service capability,
they have a global presence. The VAR now has a product to recommend
to that multinational customer that will satisfy the customer's
requirement, as opposed to just letting the sale go to a competitor
with the infrastructure.

Now, it is on servers only, which is where the complexity is.
We didn't hear this requirement when it was portables, desktops
or personal productivity tools. But when we started to get
into this mission-critical, client-server business enterprisewide,
it became a big issue. This is a resolution to it.

VB: Digital competes for the same customers, though. You're
comfortable with that?

Cooley: Yes. It is obvious that was one of the larger issues
we considered. As [Digital CEO] John Palmer said three years
ago, they had to go find incremental revenue and profit opportunities,
because their core business wasn't doing well. Digital has
convinced us that they have built a firewall between the sales
organization and the multivendor service organization. And
we tested this 40 times if we tested it once, with customers
as well as with the channel.

You'll find every now and then people make mistakes. But they
are very quick to rectify them, because they know that if they
lose our trust and confidence, then they lose our business.
This agreement has one-year renewal options. And if it becomes
a huge conflict because the firewall has holes in it, then
there's a lot to lose, and they know it. They are already providing
service for some of our competitors and they're already, frankly,
providing service and support for some of the VARs who don't
have the capabilities. So we had a lot of good places to check
as to whether they can really separate church and state, and
they seem to be quite successful at it.

I'm never one to feed the enemy, so to speak. But we buy Toshiba
screens, we buy memory from Samsung, we buy drives from HP
and IBM. I mean, this industry is worldwide; this is truly
one of a variety of different relationships that are necessary
to have the best-of-breed products.

VB: What's your personal challenge for the year?

Cooley: Regaining portable leadership is very important in 1996.
The biggest challenge is recapturing the confidence and respect
from the customer community with our portable lineup. We made
a good step with the new LTE5000, because that thing is a home
run; it's in good shape. But the volume of the portable business
is done below that.

The opportunity is to have a wireless, mobile client that truly
meets the requirements of the user-not a personal assistant
device, but truly a full-function, wireless portable at the
right price point, with the right feature set. I think we can
get there before the rest of them, but we're not there yet,
so it is the kind of thing I worry about.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Are you Ready for Some Teamwork? -- Everyone talks teams, but
it takes more than an ad hoc group of people to make up a winning
one

By:
Jeremy Schlosberg

VARs are generally too busy running their businesses to stop
and ponder how to run them. They're also notoriously disinclined
to engage in long-term planning. Since long-term planning is
generally considered a good thing, not doing it is pretty much
a bad thing. A seat-of-the-pants operating style also keeps
a VAR insulated from the business self-help crowd. In a day
and age when management theories tend to come and go like the
latest diets, remaining unaware of them may not always be so
terrible. Every now and then, however, a fad appears with the
earmarks of a PIC: that is, a Potentially Important Concept.
The use of teams in business is just such a fad/trend/PIC.
The idea is that a business can function more effectively and
efficiently when some or all of the organization is arranged
into collaborative groups of interdependent employees rather
than given a rigid, hierarchical structure. Employees in teams,
say the experts, feel a greater sense of control over their
jobs and a bigger stake in the company itself. Everybody wins.

In truth, running a business with teams may sound like less
than news for smaller businesses in general, and readers of
this magazine in particular. "The teaming approach is much
closer to what is normal in a smaller company than it is in
a Fortune 500 company," says Gene Bledsoe, principal with The
Casal Group, a Dallas-based consulting firm. In large companies,
employees can be widely scattered, and there can be power enclaves
"fiefdoms," as Bledsoe calls them-that can make genuine teamwork
nearly impossible to come by.

VARs and integrators often employ teams all but unconsciously
for instance, the way a systems integrator will create a project
team to tackle a new client's solution needs, gathering ad
hoc the talent required for the job. Still, there's a difference
between the informal teamwork that arises of necessity in a
small company and a conscious effort to foster a workplace
that relies on teamwork.

Today's technology can assist the teaming process-and many VARs
implement such technology for their customers (i.e., groupware,
or other workgroup-oriented, client-server applications). So
the time seems especially ripe for VARs to stop and think about
how they run their businesses long enough to wonder whether
management by teams might offer genuine potential for increased
productivity and long-term growth.

The team approach to business organization has a leg up on most
business fads since it's based on an intuitive concept rather
than contrived jargon. We already more or less know what a
team is.

"We're not trying to snow anyone here," says Thomas Koulopoulos,
president and founder of the Delphi Consulting Group in Boston.
"Teams are not new. People work naturally as teams." Not only
do organizational charts often have little to do with how people
in a business actually work, but the best workers in a company
are typically those who work outside the formal chart, he says.

"It's not a question of, 'Should we have teams or shouldn't
we?' You should, and, at least informally, you already do,"
says Koulopoulos. "The question to ask is, 'How do I put in
place systems, cultures and technologies to support the natural
collaboration that exists within a company?' "

Natural Collaboration

A perfect illustration of how this sort of natural collaboration
with thoughtful support can enhance corporate performance can
be found in the case of Trellis Network Services Inc., a Princeton,
N.J.-based systems integrator.

Trellis officials have long been conscious of the importance
of teamwork in the context of day-to-day operations. "We've
got dynamic teams springing up and falling down daily," says
Bruce Bancroft, vice president of sales and marketing.

Expertise requirements on any given project can be varied, given
the complex nature of large networks. Not only might Trellis
require four or five different experts on a given project,
but those experts might also be located in four or five different
Trellis offices around the country. What's more, any single
Trellis systems engineer might be a member of as many as four
different project teams simultaneously.

After the success of an internal, Lotus Notes-based sales automation
system implemented approximately four years ago, the Trellis
brain trust recognized a need for a complementary system that
would support the project management process. The company developed
a second Notes-based application for itself in response to
this need, which it called Project Tracker. It's been up and
running for two years.

Project Tracker, replicated in each of Trellis' five offices,
automatically kicks in once a sale is complete, helping project
managers find the appropriate expertise, formulate their teams
and track progress every step of the way. Team members keep
one another apprised of their actions and ideas via Notes.
"From a management standpoint, it's brought a lot of efficiency
to the organization," says Bancroft.

Trellis will even set a Notes station up on the customer's site
if desired, allowing customers a first-hand view of a project's
status. While this can give a customer an unusually uncensored
view-"They see how we're progressing, warts and all," says
Bancroft-Trellis has reaped the benefits of improved relationships
and greater trust as a result. In this case, the technology
has even brought the customer onto the team.

Trellis was using teams before Project Tracker, but the teams
are much more efficient now, according to Bancroft. What's
more, management has been positively affected. Before Project
Tracker, managers fretted over project status and kept themselves
"too intimately involved with managing specific projects."
Now, he asserts, "We have our management people involved in
growing our business, which is really where we want them to
be."

Teams Are People

The Trellis example is instructive, to a point. The type of
team building the experts recommend goes beyond project-oriented
work and ideally extends into the core of a company's hierarchy.
In the Trellis project, technology is valuable but is not the
first step for a team-oriented organization.

"No technology makes people into teams," says Mike Lynch, managing
partner at Learning Resources Group, a Maplewood, N.J., consulting
firm. "People make people into teams." Lynch has developed
and taught classes for the American Management Association
on team development specifically for technical professionals;
he continually encounters people in his classes who come up
to him and say, "Yeah, we have all this technology in place
but it's not working," or "We have these troublemakers who
aren't signing onto the system." Technologically savvy companies
can too easily fall into the trap of applying technology to
a problem before the problem is completely understood.

"You have to determine what you're trying to accomplish first,"
says Lynch. "And you've got to have the willingness to work
together." Only then, he says, should you worry about the technology
that may or may not be needed.

Approached this way, you may be surprised which technologies
if any-apply. Rocky Gunderson, vice president of marketing
for Baan Americas, an ISV that sells enterprise resource planning
software to Fortune 500 manufacturing companies, heads a seven
person team spread throughout the United States and Canada
charged with spearheading a multifaceted marketing program
for a sophisticated software system. About half of Gunderson's
team uses Lotus Notes for communicating and sharing information.
It's especially handy for dealing with European associates
(Baan Americas is a division of the Baan Co., based in Menlo
Park, Calif., and the Netherlands)

Notes is important to the team, says Gunderson, but the technology
he stops to praise is the conference call. Gunderson has a
weekly conference call Mondays at 9 a.m. with his boss; he
then has his own team's conference call Mondays at 1 p.m. Facilitated
by AT&T, the call couldn't be simpler, and it's so effective
that Gunderson cannot remember the last time his team was together
face-to-face.

"I know it's low-tech," he says, almost apologetically. "But
you can really get a lot accomplished with a conference call."

Much less, of course, would be accomplished if Gunderson's team
hadn't worked so well together in the first place and hadn't
established a personal rapport before they became disembodied
voices on the telephone.

It's a simple point that's sometimes lost on technology company
managers. "The biggest problem I've had people bring up in
class is the problem of having remote people on teams," says
consultant Lynch. Teams comprising a far-ranging cast of characters
often don't seem to work so well. Perhaps the ready availability
of WANs and videoconferencing leads too many companies to forget
the basic rules of human interaction. "People have to spend
time with other members of the team; they have to get to know
them, get comfortable with them," says Lynch.

And this must be done face-to-face, at least at first.

Mutually Interdependent

Another basic point that is often overlooked is that not every
group of employees who appear to be working together can be
accurately considered a team. There is, in particular, a striking
difference between a team and that most traditional grouping
of employees within an organization: a department.

"In a department, everybody does the same thing," explains Lynch.
You put a bunch of programmers together and there's your programming
department.

They are not, however, a team. The key is interdependence. "A
department doesn't necessarily equal a team because department
members are not always interdependent upon each other to get
the work done," notes Lynch. Often, they're running parallel.
A team is a group of people who cannot do the job that needs
doing without each other.

Clearly this depends upon the ability of that group of people
not only to get along but, if possible, to enjoy each other's
company. What may be less obvious but of critical importance
are issues of communications style preference. This becomes
an especially noticeable factor when cross-functional teams
are put together.

"The technical person may say, 'Fine, let's e-mail info back
and forth.' The salesperson will say, 'You do that, but I'll
call you once a week so you can tell me how it's going,' "
says Lynch. "The technical person wants to show you data; the
salesperson doesn't care about equipment and numbers-he wants
to know if you feel confident you'll meet the deadline. He's
looking for the personal side."

Another hallmark differentiating a team from other types of
workplace groups is how differently a successful team meeting
is run from a traditional staff meeting. Traditional managers
hold meetings; team managers facilitate them.

"You have to structure meetings so that everybody can provide
input without feeling intimidated," says Al Schornberg, chairman
and CEO of Anatec, a Bingham Farms, Mich., systems integrator.
For instance, if he's with a team that needs to determine next
year's strategic goals, he will have each member write down
10 ideas. The ideas are collected and each one is discussed;
the list is consolidated to reach consensus. "You get a lot
more input that way than if you just asked the question out
loud," Schornberg says.

Good meetings don't happen by accident, and neither do good
teams. Of all the training that may be necessary within companies
serious about team orientation, experts agree that the most
important is communication training. People may seek naturally
to collaborate with each other at work, but that's an ad hoc
reality; a systematic conversion to teamwork is, on the other
hand, a most unnatural progression for many office environments.
Standard U.S. office politics are too entrenched for companies
to go marching too easily down the road of collaboration.

Escaping the Territorial Trap

"In a lot of organizations, there are territorial issues," acknowledges
Lynch. An 'us vs. them' mentality keeps different groups of
people in competition with each other and among themselves.
"The idea that 'We've got to protect our turf or else we won't
have any' still exists in a lot of organizations," he says.

Gunderson has seen this while working for other companies-including
14 years at Hewlett-Packard-sometimes finding himself in charge
of groups that have competed with other groups within the same
company. At Baan last year, he had the opportunity to build
a team-oriented organization from the ground up. He specifically
designed his team to comprise functional managers with complementary
and mutually dependent skills and responsibilities, including
product marketing, program management, strategic partner management
and sales development. Those are all areas that directly contribute
to a company's marketing effort, but are not functions often
located in any traditional sort of marketing department.

Today, Gunderson can say with pride, "You could take me out
of the equation and my group would still work as a team because
they need each other to get the job done."

This is the essence of teamwork: a practically leaderless group
of motivated, well-informed employees doing their thing. Understand
this and you'll soon understand why the model remains less
common than it should be in companies that might otherwise
be fomenting teams right and left: smallish technology solution
providers such as VARs and systems integrators.

Stay Away From the Hub

Think about the typical successful VAR business-founded by a
person of some technological vision and often grown in a blur
of entrepreneurial bluster and resourcefulness. A wonderful
environment, perhaps, for a fledgling company, but CEOs/founders
with too much Bill Gates on the mind do not reflexively cultivate
an organization of sharing, caring equals. They instead tend
to create what Lynch calls a hub structure: The founding chief
is in the middle, fingers in all the pies, entrenched as the
conduit through which all expert information flows.

"What tends to happen over time is they become the roadblock
rather than the conduit," says Lynch. Not only does such a
company run into the common problem of an entrepreneur needing
to learn to delegate responsibility, but as the hub, the founder
can prevent necessary interaction among the minions. "When
communication between various experts has to go through the
boss," says Lynch, "a lot just doesn't get communicated."

Of course, not all companies grow this way; not all CEOs are
hub-lovers. Anatec's Schornberg, for one, considers team building
to be his "primary role."

"What I bring to the table is the ability to put together and
build teams that turn corporate vision into reality," he says.
"That's what my skill sets are. I've tried very hard and diligently
to create a culture here that is team-oriented." Except for
routine functions such as finance and payroll, teams handle
everything Anatec does-from strategic planning to compensation
plan design to social event coordination.

Who, then, decides when a team is needed for a given job? "Actually,"
Schornberg says, "that's a team decision." It's a little more
complex to run day-to-day operations this way as opposed to
where one person makes decisions and that's that, he admits.
But the trade-offs are worth it. "With one person making a
decision, if you don't have buy-in, you get resistance," he
says.

With resistance comes lack of commitment in implementation of
the decision and the potential for morale difficulties and
decreased productivity. Say there's a new compensation plan
in the works. Which is likely to be better received: a decision
emerging from behind a manager's door and announced as a done
deal, or a decision arrived at through group discussion and
consensus?

With teams, says Schornberg, "all the hard work gets worked
out in advance. The implementation is usually the easy part."

The Perpetual Organization

In the best of all possible worlds, team orientation will convert
a company into what Delphi Consulting's Koulopoulos calls the
"perpetual organization"-an ever-shifting organization, ever
responsive to its market, in which all individuals understand
what their roles are in each process and who they are working
with, even as the processes continually modulate and fluctuate.

At least that's the theory, the trend, the Potentially Important
Concept. Then again, such a goal might be a tad unrealistic
for seat-of-the-pants VAR, who will probably still see significant
business process improvement and even productivity gains with
a far more limited, but highly strategic, use of the teaming
approach.

If VARs are rarely prepared to undertake sweeping philosophical
overhauls, Bledsoe lets the cat out of the bag on a dirty little
secret: Very few companies are ever prepared for such things.

"Eighteen months ago, we didn't have e-mail," he says. "Finally,
we put in a network e-mail system, and it has physically changed
the way we do work." Communication within his small firm has
improved dramatically.

"It's those kinds of things that will change business," Bledsoe
says. "They're simple. You don't have to make drastic changes
to your company philosophy or business direction. Those are
the things that affect us as businesses far more than the latest
philosophical theory."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Your Mission In Storage -- RAID, flash and RAM are critical
to your customers

By:
Karen Balch

For clients whose data truly is mission-critical, implementing
a RAID solution may be the key to solidifying your relationship.
What's important is to know when to sell RAID. Find out in
"Know Your RAID? You've Got It Made" (page 105)

Flash technology isn't new, but as with RAID, there are many
new applications for it cropping up. Particularly so with CompactFlash,
a matchbook-sized flash card from SanDisk. In this roundtable,
VARBusiness talked with SanDisk, AP Research and a VAR to flesh
out the opportunities. For the scoop, see "Get It Done In a
Flash" (page 115)

Semiconductor memory of all kinds is in short supply these days.
You need to know how long the shortages are expected to last,
if prices will continue to drop and if a drought is on the
horizon. "RAM Realities" (page 131) will give you some answers.

Savvy VARs are starting to network CD-ROMs for LAN users. Providing
network access to databases, manuals, software or images is
becoming big business for VARs. In "Net Gain From Networked
CD-ROMs," (page 139) see how to do it.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Know Your Raid? You've Got It Made -- The explosion in network
storage needs is driving business to VARs who understand RAID
technology

By:
Ron Levine

The dilemma for users running memory "killer" applications like
imaging, multimedia and online database searches has long been
one of storage space and safety. As networks continue to grow,
so too do their appetites for larger, safer storage systems.
RAID (redundant arrays of independent disks) addresses those
concerns and provides VARs with sales opportunities in client
server, memory-intensive application sites at the same time.
While optical and tape drives offer backup and archiving capacity,
RAID sales add data protection, 100 percent availability and
hard disk speed.

RAID is not a new concept. In fact, RAID has already crossed
the chasm between early adopters and general market acceptance.
Farid Neema, president of Peripheral Concepts Inc., a Santa
Barbara, Calif., research company, says that two years ago,
20 percent of administrators in the PC environment understood
the significant role a RAID subsystem can play. Today he says
that ratio is closer to two thirds in the PC world and 85 percent
in the Unix/midrange environment.

One reason for RAID's popularity is the trend toward larger
networks with more mission-critical data to store and access.
Network storage needs are almost doubling every year, says
Bob Katzive, vice president of DiskTrend Inc., a researcher
in Mountain View, Calif. He notes that already more than 400,000
RAID subsystems are operating in the field, including 375,000
plus network-class server disk arrays. Other technologies popularizing
RAID today include the Internet and video servers. Many companies
downsizing from a mainframe to a client-server environment
are also turning to RAID. For all of those reasons, RAID sales
and support offer opportunities for VARs.

The Name of the Game Is Meeting Users' Needs

"Meeting users' needs for high-speed access to gigabytes of
data, data protection equal to that afforded mainframe files,
and fault-tolerant hardware operation with RAID storage implementations
can be a very profitable business," notes Tony Prigmore, general
manager at Berkshire Computer Products Inc., a Hopkinton, Mass.,
VAR that resells Digital Equipment's StorageWorks products.

Berkshire sold a StorageWorks 410 array to a Fortune 500 company
engaged in commercial transaction processing. The array contains
12 Gbytes of storage capacity plus a write-back cache that
speeds write operations and can accommodate up to 2,600 I/O
transfers per second. The customer is so pleased with the RAID
solution that the 410 array has become the company's standard
storage device across all platforms.

For Prigmore, RAID sales margins have been good both at the
component level and when purchasing complete subsystems for
resale, but he believes the more integration work you do, the
more you can charge: "Profit margins will be in direct proportion
to the amount of system integration performed at the customer's
site. This is the value-added component."

To sell and implement a RAID subsystem is not a slam dunk; you've
got to know what you're doing. You better not promise fault
tolerance and not be able to deliver. But because the profit
potential is there, RAID is worth learning about.

RAID is a large-scale storage technology that replaces one expensive,
high-capacity magnetic disk drive with smaller, less expensive
magnetic drives. RAID provides data protection by either duplicating
(mirroring) or striping data across multiple drives within
the array. If data is lost or corrupted, the array automatically
rebuilds the affected data portions and continues with uninterrupted
operation.

RAID also provides high-data availability through fault-tolerant
hardware performance. By eliminating single points of failure
within the subsystem through duplication of components, near
100 percent uptime for the storage subsystem can be achieved.

Some RAID implementations extend this fault tolerance to protect
against failures in the host I/O access path. By adding dual
controllers, I/O buses and host support for these features,
host system access to the data is protected. A good RAID implementation
can provide data availability and reliability protection equal
to that of a mainframe.

The Six Levels

There are six RAID levels officially recognized by the industry's
RAID Advisory Board: Levels 0 through 5. Levels 1, 3 and 5,
however, are most commonly implemented. Each employs a different
method for recording data. The levels do not denote performance
per se, but do indicate how the data is stored within the array.

RAID Level 1 mirrors all data onto a second disk. It features
excellent data protection and sound overall performance. However,
it is more costly than other RAID levels to employ. Because
of the duplication, only half of the storage space is actually
usable. This makes mirroring the most expensive of the RAID
implementations.

RAID Level 3 stripes data across multiple drives, which enables
the storage subsystem to recreate any lost data on one drive
from the information recorded on the remaining drives. Storage
costs are less than with mirroring, and it is superb in environments
that require the transfer of large blocks of data.

RAID Level 5 stripes the data and the parity across all the
drives. This offers customer sites the highest combination
of data availability and fault-tolerant operation, but results
in a lower write operation performance level. It's best when
processing read requests for file transfers or transaction
type I/Os.

RAID Levels 1 and 3 can perform only a single access (either
read or write) at a time per array; Level 5 RAID can handle
multiple read/write operations. One RAID level is not necessarily
faster than another although the specific implementation of
the RAID level determines performance. The actual array speed
will be determined by the type of interface used, the system
and/or network acting as the host, and the application tasks
being performed.

Some RAID implementations automatically and dynamically adjust
between Levels 3 and 5 as the load changes. With RAID storage
devices, users have faster access to gigabytes of data at a
lower cost than is possible with optical or tape peripherals.
RAID is not a backup device, though, and it is not meant to
replace tape or optical in the backup process. However, it
can be used to replace these devices where online, faster access
to large amounts of data is the key application for the peripheral.

Knowing the advantages RAID can bring to a customer isn't enough
in itself. You also have to know when RAID is the right choice.
"We've been selling RAID solutions for more than four years
and find RAID implementations work best when we need 8 to 10
Gbytes or better of online, fault-tolerant data storage on
the server," says Gentry Ganote, president of Gain Systems
Inc., a Norcross, Ga.-based VAR specializing in high-end file
and application servers and workstations.

Gain Systems sells RAID subsystems from a variety of vendors
and integrates them into existing networks. Gain has successfully
implemented RAID subsystems in SQL servers running under Windows
NT, for NetWare servers and in DOS/Windows environments.

A RAID On Bottlenecks

Many storage-related bottlenecks, particularly in imaging, multimedia,
video or other memory-intensive networking environments, can
be solved by adding a RAID subsystem to the mix. Often, without
RAID, these types of memory-hungry tasks are off-loaded to
optical storage devices or tape subsystems to improve network
performance, which often takes data offline.

No one knows this better than Jim Mendelbaum, president of LAN
Specialist Inc., an integrator in Torrance, Calif., that specializes
in large LAN storage solutions. Having sold Micropolis' RAIDION
Level 5 RAID subsystem, Mendelbaum says, "RAIDION delivers
the high, sustained data transfer rates that imaging and multimedia
tasks require to quickly write and read large-sized files.
And RAIDION can grow with the user; it's scalable between 6
and 282 Gbytes."

Foundation Imaging in Valencia, Calif., which produces graphical
visual effects for broadcast television, is also using the
RAIDION Level 5 array with 110 Gbytes of storage for its imaging
applications. "Our computers all write images to and pull images
off the array. It is a true use of file server capability,"
says Paul Brian, director of operations at Foundation. The
RAID device is on a NetWare 3.12 LAN connected to 20 Pentium
and Alpha nodes running Windows NT and seven Macintosh stations
communicating via Ethertalk. "We went with RAID both for its
redundancy and high sustained data transfer rate. Since all
of our nodes are top of the line with a minimum of 64 Mbytes
of RAM, we needed something that could keep up with their image
transfers," Brian says.

RAID is almost always the right choice when your customer's
LAN handles truly mission-critical data. "The primary reason
for having a RAID system is to provide data protection and
data availability," says Joel Reich, director of marketing
for Conner Storage Systems, Lake Mary, Fla. "Increased storage
capacity and data access speed [achieved by striping] are only
secondary reasons customers purchase RAID."

Still, capacity can be a primary selling point when a company
is downsizing from a mainframe. The goal of switching from
a mainframe to an enterprisewide network sometimes begins to
falter due to the lack of storage on the network. In this case,
RAID's capacity can be a plus. Communication Technical Systems
Inc. (CTS) is a VAR in Roswell, Ga., specializing in migrations
from mainframe to midrange environments. CTS provides client
server solutions based on the HP9000 Series server and Raidtec
Corp.'s FlexArray RAID subsystems. CTS is one-third of the
way through a five-year mainframe conversion project for the
General Board of Pension and Health Benefits of the United
Methodist Church in Evanston, Ill.

Throughout the transition period, the servers process an increasing
percentage of the Board's data. It is essential that the servers
are equipped with the storage capacity and performance to efficiently
handle the $6 billion worth of benefits the company manages
annually for more than 70,000 ministers and employees nationwide.
As a result, the storage system had to be suitable for applications
such as database management, network management and accounting.
"A RAID solution is the storage option of choice for this project
due to its capacity and speed," says Michael Malone, vice president
of sales and marketing at CTS. The VAR chose Raidtec's FlexArray
IX RAID subsystem because of its user-selectable RAID levels.

Raising the Bar

"Everybody wants a storage system that's easy to implement into
their existing structure," says Gain's Ganote. "The MegaRAID
three-channel RAID controller [from American Megatrends Inc.]
used in our RAID implementations is compatible with most networks
and operating systems. This enables us to handle all of our
corporate clients' needs across a variety of platforms." As
Ganote found, when you're choosing a RAID system, compatibility
with a variety of computing environments can be a big issue
with the customer and a big selling point for you.

RAID systems generally integrate well across most hardware platforms.
RAID devices in general work with most major operating system
software as well, including NetWare, Unix, OS/2, Windows NT,
Macintosh and Solaris. As a result, VARs have a key technology
with which to close a storage sale and to gain an account foothold.

Resellers can address user access and backup issues at the same
time by installing a combination of RAID and tape within a
single enclosure. This type of implementation provides reliable
online access to data as well as reliable data backup for high
capacity applications. It also offers the benefit of hot-pluggable
RAID protection and the capacity of DLT tape. For example,
Business Systems Solutions Inc. (BSSI), Buffalo Grove, Ill.,
is one VAR that has implemented such a solution. "It's an ideal
storage product for applications using large databases or extensive
graphics/imaging files," says Scott Bernstein, executive vice
president at BSSI.

BSSI has installed a single-enclosure combination RAID/tape
storage subsystem for a client that develops graphic images
and has an exceptionally large data storage need as a result.
The MegaFlex unit from Storage Dimensions includes 27 Gbytes
of RAID capacity and 20 or 40 Gbytes of DLT capacity (depending
on the media chosen). It was the best solution due to the large
amount of data it could put online and the client's ongoing
need to back up 27 Gbytes of data in a limited time.

Redundant arrays of independent tape drives (RAIT) provide an
alternate large-scale storage option. Like disk arrays, tape
arrays offer data and availability protection, plus they offer
data backup and removable storage. According to GigaTrend Inc.,
a Carlsbad, Calif., reseller specializing in storage backup
systems, RAIT can provide better margins than RAID sales. In
fact, GigaTrend no longer sells hard disk RAID.

"Tape arrays offer the VAR a chance to make better margins than
do disk arrays," says GigaTrend vice president Thomas Culver.
"There is less competition because most of the large hard disk
players are not heavily marketing RAIT solutions; the knowledge
to sell this product is not as easy to master."

GigaTrend offers a line of RAIT products that can be configured
with DAT, 8-mm or DLT tapes to meet needs for large-capacity,
fail-safe data storage. Notes Culver, "When users want storage
to be removable, RAIT is the best solution. If a site is dealing
with large capacities that must be backed up within tight windows,
multiple tape drives in a RAIT configuration yield the speed
required."

The Wait State

But Rik Mussman, vice president of operations for Lighthouse
Technology, a VAR specializing in high-end storage solutions
for Unix and the client-server market, is not a big believer
in RAIT. Mussman says most backup and archival applications
cannot drive a tape array fast enough to make it work. That's
because the RAIT device swallows a block of data (usually 32
Kbytes) quickly, then waits for the backup or archival application
to complete its processing before the device is sent another
block of data. The end result can be a storage device that
spends most of its time in a "wait state." Says Mussman, "Some
promote RAIT as a quick backup method for medium to large data
sets, but we don't see any real advantage to using RAIT."

Even RAIT's proponents will tell you that there is a catch:
Culver says it's on the restore side. Since the data is written
to multiple tapes, risk of data loss increases with the number
of tapes used for the restore operation. In the restore cycle,
the tapes must be readily available and in the correct sequence;
otherwise, the restore will not be able to be completed.

Of course, you have another option: software RAID. Whether a
software or hardware array is best is determined by whether
the user is adding to an existing system or installing a new
one; the customer's I/O performance and data availability requirements
will dictate the answer.

Software RAID is less expensive because it uses existing storage
components, says Paul Massiglia, a member of the industry's
RAID Advisory Board and marketing manager at Digital's Colorado
Springs, Colo., facility. It also provides exceptional data
availability because the hardware array's member disks can
be spread across multiple storage devices or across multiple
host computers while the software array executes on a single
host computer and is very economical.

Still, a hardware RAID system's software management function
is contained within the firmware of the storage subsystem.
This means that it will have little or no impact on host computing
performance. Therefore, hardware implementations generally
offer better I/O performance than software versions.

UNOCAL Accounting Information Systems in Sugarland, Texas, selected
Andataco Corp.'s GigaRAID/FT storage system over its system
vendor's array. UNOCAL systems administration team leader Steven
Clark says the company believed that a hardware RAID implementation
with its faster I/O speed would provide better performance
than software RAID. The 400-Gbyte array, which includes Data
General's CLARiiON hardware and Andataco's array management
software, is running on two 2000E SPARC platforms. The array
is shared between a production system using 240 Gbytes of its
capacity and a test system using the remaining 160 Gbytes.

Your customers' specific needs will determine the form of RAID
that is right for their companies. And your ability to master
the technical intricacies of the different storage systems
will determine which RAID is right for your company to sell
and support. Each one presents its own rewards. All can help
remove your customer's risk and increase your profit margin.

Quick Scan

American Megatrends Inc. Norcross, Ga. (800) 828-9264, www.megatrends.com

Andataco Corp. San Diego, Calif. (800) 334-9191, www.

andataco.com

Conner Storage Systems Group Lake Mary, Fla. (407) 263-3500,
www.conner.com

Data General Corp. CLARiiON Business Unit, Westboro, Mass. (508)
898-7600, www.dg.com

Micropolis Corp. Chatsworth, Calif. (818) 709-3300, www.micropolis.com

Raidtec Corp. Roswell, Ga. (404) 664-6066

Storage Dimensions Inc. Milpitas, Calif. (408) 954-0710

StorageWorks an independent business unit of Digital Equipment
Corp., Shrewsbury, Mass. (800) STORWORK, www.digital.com




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Roundtable: Get it Done In a Flash -- Flash memory is rugged,
compact, and needs little power-benefits that are making it
pop up in new applications every day

By:
Karen Balch

Cameras, cellular phones, pagers, audio recorders, handheld
computers, palmtops, PDAs. Not your typical list of high-margin
hardware for VARs. But the products all have one thing in common
that makes them potential VAR moneymakers: They all have a
growing need for rugged, compact, digital data storage as you
integrate them into vertical solutions.

Flash is solid state, rewritable, nonvolatile memory. It doesn't
require a power source to maintain data, unlike RAM. Better
yet, it's fast. Flash memory isn't new, but some of the uses
for it are. Whether you're talking about embedded flash for
ruggedizing portable PCs or removable flash for gathering,
transporting and sharing data in a mobile environment, applications
for flash technology are expanding. New versions of common
electronic devices-i.e., the pager, audio recorder, palmtop
and so on-are ready to put flash technology to the test.

SanDisk Corp., Santa Clara, Calif., sells 1.8- and 1.3-inch
embedded flash drives as replacements for disk drives where
capacity needs are low

and requirements for ruggedness are high. It offers a Flash
Chipset for small form factor, low-capacity applications such
as PDAs and cellular phones. And it sells flash cards with
a Type II or Type III PCMCIA interface, hitting capacity highs
of 85 Mbytes and 175 Mbytes, respectively. But perhaps the
company's most interesting flash product is CompactFlash, which
is about the size of a matchbook. An intended storage complement
to electronic devices such as the digital camera, CompactFlash
allows data sharing via a PCMCIA Type II adapter. Today, CompactFlash
capacities range from 2 Mbytes to 15 Mbytes, but by 1997, SanDisk
aims to offer 100 Mbytes on the device.

In the following roundtable discussion, VARBusiness talked with
Nelson Chan, vice president of marketing for SanDisk, about
his company's plans for flash technology. Lending her expertise
to the discussion is Katherine Litchfield, vice president of
sales and marketing for Hampton-Royce, a VAR/ISV in Orange,
Calif. Litchfield says that implementing flash technology in
a bundled solution gives her 30 percent margins on the hardware
alone. Last but not least, Andy Prophet, president of market
research and consultancy AP Research in Cupertino, Calif.,
brings his PCMCIA knowledge to the table.

VARBusiness: How does flash technology differ from disk drives?

Chan: You use flash technology in an environment where you need
ruggedness and reliability. CompactFlash cards can withstand
an operating shock of more than 2,000 Gs; that's equivalent
to about a 10-foot drop. Flash also offers extended temperature
ranges and consumes less than 5 percent of the power of a disk
drive. As with a lot of consumer products that run on two AA
batteries, you can't even spin up a disk drive. But you can
use a flash card.

Flash also offers a much higher performance-up to 30 percent
higher than a typical disk drive in a typical read-write application.
Yet it's a smaller form factor than disk drives so we will
be able to go into applications where disk drives are just
too big, such as pagers, audio recorders, cell phones or medical
devices.

Litchfield: All of those reasons are exactly what lets us be
a VAR in this arena. Flash lets us come into a market with
a piece of software that's vertical and sort of niche and be
very successful. Some of the biggest roadblocks to mobile computing
were the weight, the cost, the batteries and the lack of ruggedness.
A lot of that goes back to spinning drives, and when you move
away from that, a lot of obstacles to the marketplace go away.
[Flash technology] is a real lifesaver.

VB: Even though flash and hard drives have different markets,
people tend to compare them. Hard drive proponents say there's
not enough capacity in a flash card to make it worthwhile,
particularly at flash technology's higher cost.

Litchfield: Because we're selling this handheld product bundled
with a card, a case and software, all our users want to know
is that they can load onto here whatever they need, gather
their data and bring it back to the office. There's no real
concern that it's not 120 Mbytes or 250 Mbytes because we're
doing a very vertical approach.

Chan: Today 2 Mbytes allows you to store 20 to 24 images for
digital cameras. It allows you to store 1,200 to 1,400 pages
of double-spaced text. That amount also allows you to store
30 to 60 minutes of voice for audio devices. It's a lot of
capacity.

Clearly if you're in an environment where you need gigabytes,
or even hundreds of megabytes, you're going to use a disk drive.
Take a look at a typical computer on a desktop. There users
don't care about ruggedness and reliability because the computers
are stationary. They don't care about power because they're
hooked up to an A/C outlet. They need lots of capacity because
they're running Windows and they've got all of these applications,
so in that environment, you will always use disk drives.

Disk drives also have a very low per-megabyte cost. They are
inexpensive because they can absorb that cost over so much
storage. Flash technology's disadvantage is cost-per-megabyte.
But we look at it from a unit cost standpoint. In any of these
applications, if all you need is 2 Mbytes, guess what? We're
cheaper than any disk drive and we give you all the benefits.
[For handheld applications], there isn't another solution.
We're cheaper than disk drives because the capacity isn't required.
If you look at [cell phones, pagers, audio recorders, PDAs
and so on], disk drives are not going to be used in any of
those other devices, but flash will be. And if you want to
open it up to other storage technologies such as CD-ROMs, floppies
or magneto-optical, they're not going to be used in all these
devices either. We think only flash will.

VB: Because the other storage devices are too big?

Chan: They're too big and they can be too expensive depending
on the capacity you need. Plus, flash will allow you to move
information between all those different devices, whether that
information is data, voice, audio or images. An ideal application
is a digital camera where you go out and take pictures. When
you come back, you take the CompactFlash card out-it's your
digital film of the future. You plug it into an adapter and
now you can plug it into any notebook or desktop and enhance
the photos, cut and paste them, do whatever you want. So moving
information between different devices is also a very important
consideration.

Prophet: The real potential for flash memory, particularly under
its current pricing structure, is for value-added applications
vertical markets where the margins are higher or wider and
you have more latitude.

VB: What are VARs going to do with flash drives?

Chan: Let's say you want to ruggedize a computer. Take J.B.
Hunt Transport, one of the largest trucking companies in the
United States. IBM has designed a ruggedized computer [for
the cabs of Hunt's trucks] with our solid state solution instead
of a disk drive, because when a truck goes over a speed bump
or hits a pothole you don't want the system to come down. In
that computer is also a global positioning system. For a VAR
to be able to go to a company and say that you've got a complete
solution-all the software, all the infrastructure, everything
put in-that's a unique solution.

VB: What's the capacity on the flash drive?

Chan: It depends on the form factor. In terms of the 1.8-inch
form factor, we go up to 80 Mbytes. In terms of the 1.3-inch,
we go up to 60 Mbytes, and these are uncompressed numbers.
We can effectively double those capacities with compression.
The nice thing about this is that VARs can take out the disk
drives and plug this in and away they go; there's no software
changes required or anything else.

VB: There are a lot of VARs who are going to see flash and CompactFlash
cards as off-the-shelf products. What's the VAR application
there?

Litchfield: We bundle the handheld computer, software and CompactFlash
all together. For example, the software that we have on this
handheld unit is inspection software, and what better to go
along with an inspection than a picture? We're integrating
a digital camera into this application so when someone says
that there was a crack in their wall, the inspector can take
a picture of it. Then, they not only have a picture they can
include in a report, but they have a picture that they can
store on a PC someplace and keep for six months or a year.
So it's an absolutely perfect adjunct to the sale, and the
CompactFlash allows us to do exactly what Nelson's talking
about-moving and sharing data.

VB: And this adds enough profit to your sale to be worth bundling
it?

Litchfield: Sure. Customers want a low-cost solution, but low
cost doesn't always mean buying at absolutely the lowest dollar.
They will pay slightly more for every one of these items [digital
camera, cellular phone, pager, PDA, etc.] if they are all married
together in a nice little box that's brought out and dropped
off on the doorstep.

VB: What is the percentage of margin you can add to a sale involving
those types of products?

Litchfield: We are probably running at 30 percent at least on
the [bundled] hardware items [i.e., the handheld computers,
PDAs, cameras, CompactFlash disks, etc.] alone, which is high
in hardware. Of course, when we add the software, the margins
go up. Users get a single product and they have a single person
to go back to if something doesn't work. And it's worth the
extra amount that they pay for that.

VB: Then flash cards and CompactFlash aren't really retail products
just yet, are they?

Chan: The demand isn't out there yet. To put it into a store,
you've got to have people coming in and asking for it and it
isn't there yet. This is still primarily an OEM and VAR type
of business.

VB: Clearly, there are a number of emerging uses for flash cards.
But how does a VAR know which brand to buy? Your primary competitors
are Intel and AMD. How do your cards differ from theirs?

Chan: Mostly, it has to do with intelligence. We offer an ATA
card and they offer a non-ATA card. But the ATA card is the
industry standard. The key advantage to having an ATA solution
is that it's plug-and-playable with any devices that conform
to ATA. And ATA is supported in every major operating system
today. So you really have true plug-and-play instead of plug
and-pray.

The second big advantage has to do with the guarantee of forward
and backward compatibility. I guarantee that, if you buy this
camera and you buy [CompactFlash as film], it'll work. Two
years from now, let's say you need to buy additional film,
but it's based on different generations of memory because two
years from now we'll have advanced from where we are today.
I guarantee you, when you buy that, you can plug it in and
it will work.

The Intel solution cannot guarantee that, nor can it guarantee
that they have true plug-and-play because they require a flash
file system. The problem with flash file systems today is that
there are so many different versions.

VB: Why would they make that choice then?

Chan: They'll say that they're lower in cost because they don't
have to have an intelligent controller. We disagree with that
because, as you get to higher flash capacities-probably 2 Mbytes
and above-that controller cost is amortized over the memory
so the controller cost becomes insignificant, yet you get all
those advantages. At very, very low capacities, they may have
a cost advantage. But look at all the problems you have when
you have an incompatibility and when you don't have guaranteed
backward compatibility.

VB: With such disparate ideas, why did SanDisk sign a cross
licensing agreement with Intel?

Chan: Intel has a large flash patent portfolio, we have a large
flash patent portfolio, so we've licensed each other. This
allows each of us complete freedom in terms of developing products
without worrying about infringing on each other's patents.

Prophet: The issue the industry is wrestling with now is more
in respect to CompactFlash. SanDisk has formed an association
to establish CompactFlash as a standard. Of course, some of
the other suppliers in the industry-Intel and AMD-are doing
their own standards. So we're going to have a proliferation
of standards here for awhile. But within a few years' time,
that will all be resolved because it's just too large a market
to have disparate standards.

Chan: Just because we sign a cross-licensing agreement doesn't
mean that we're not going to compete with each other in the
marketplace. We will still compete with Intel, and fundamentally,
it will be our ATA solution vs. their non-ATA solution. That's
where the battle lines will be drawn.

Prophet: You have to be careful about standards, though. To
do something like a camera, you don't need ATAs. You could
do something much simpler because you don't need all the overhead
that's required in software to be able to support it; just
memory. You don't need socket services, and card services and
all these functions because it's not a computer.

VB: But to take the information and load it into a personal
computer...

Prophet: Yes, then you need the ATA interface.

Litchfield: That's what's nice about the SanDisk product.

VB: Let's go back to some of the other emerging applications
for CompactFlash. What are some of the VAR applications for
audio recorders and pagers, for example?

Litchfield: You might begin to see voice integration into pictures
and information that's been gathered in the field. As voice
recognition comes along, the user can walk around and, instead
of having to write or mark or enter something on a handheld
computer, he could talk to it. Think about the ability to build
in communication and to pick up voice and pictures and to send
that information elsewhere.

Those are the things VARs can look at doing. As each of those
parts begins to be economically feasible for a vertical market
and they are economically feasible for business long before
they are for consumer products-the user would be able to do
this all in one place at one time.

Prophet: Just to give you a dramatic example, we've been doing
some research into flash and its applications. The insurance
industry buys more file cabinets than any industry in the world.
What's the problem? What they're doing is capturing images.
A claims adjuster sees an automobile accident. He takes a picture
of the car. That has to be put into the file so that they have
evidence that this really happened. Then they have the bill
from the guy that did the repairs. All those things have to
be kept on file. That's a huge, huge imaging problem. Digitizing
that and capturing it in some electronic media is crucial.
Controlling it and accessing it is the other part. The critical
element is that camera and the flash memory. That is the key.

VB: But that's what document imaging is all about. People can
take all that information now, scan it into their computers
and store it on whatever it is they want to store it on-tapes,
CD-ROMs, whatever.

Litchfield: We were in imaging 10 years ago, and that was a
market that never quite came to where it should have. Part
of the problem is the size of those files. It's the manual
effort that has to go into scanning that photo or document
and identifying it. But you can take a digitized picture, put
it onto flash and move it off someplace else. It doesn't have
to be scanned, it's already there. No manual operation.

VB: So what can CompactFlash do for the pager?

Chan: With the pager, you have a really unique application.
A regular flash card is too big for the pager. It's bigger
than the pager. But CompactFlash is an ideal size.

The problem with pagers today is that if I want to reach you,
I dial your pager number, enter the number that I'm at and
sit by the phone until you call me. The nice thing about this
is that I'll be able to leave you a voicemail on the CompactFlash
disk. Then I can go about my business. When you get out of
your meeting or whatever, you can listen to it. You can save
it or delete it. That will make pagers a lot more useful than
they are today.

Prophet: The other implication here is for the VAR. If resellers
add services and value to paging technology, they're opening
up markets that traditionally haven't been touched.

Litchfield: From a VAR's standpoint, that is what's key about
all of this. All of a sudden, this technology has opened up
an immense potential market that has never been touched.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Memory: RAM Realities For Resellers -- Rising prices, tight
supplies and shortages promise to make the memory market unstable
for the next several years, but there are ways to protect yourself
and your customers

By:
Rick Cook

n the 1930s, it became popular among a certain fashionable set
to say, "A woman can never be too rich or too thin." In the
'90s, it has become fashionable among computer users to say,
"You can never have too much memory." Getting caught without
enough RAM has caused VARs to say much less quotable things.
That's because another industry saying-"chips always get faster,
better and cheaper"-doesn't hold true for memory anymore.

"Memory prices are the same as they were a couple of years ago,"
says Manouch Moshayedi, CEO of memory vendor Simple Technology
Inc. "Traditionally, the price has gone down." As a result,
a 4-Mbyte memory chip that cost $14 a few years ago still costs
$14, instead of dropping into the $4 to $5 range as it would
have if normal historical models had held.

This situation probably won't change until the end of the decade,
if then. No one expects a panic in the RAM market, but rising
memory prices, tight supplies and sporadic shortages are going
to be facts of life for the future.

"There's definitely more demand than supply," says Cheri Kaplan
Smith, director of technical products for Merisel. "There's
a delta [excess demand] of about 20 percent."

Like everyone else, VARs have to adapt and plan ahead. Sue Telerico,
product manager at Entex Information Systems, a Rye Brook,
N.Y.-based systems integrator, says Entex is preparing for
tight supplies.

Part of the concern is Windows 95. The current RAM situation
is strongly influenced by the release of Microsoft's new operating
system and the need to put at least 8 Mbytes of RAM in even
a minimally equipped Win95 machine. Microsoft says you can
run Win95 with only 4 Mbytes of memory, but people who are
using the new OS say 8 Mbytes is about the practical minimum
and that 16 Mbytes is much better.

Because the Pentium processor is said to be the perfect platform
for Win95, the market for RAM used in Pentium systems, notably
EDO RAM (Extended-Out DRAM) for main memory and SRAM (static
RAM) used for cache, is especially affected. But that's not
the whole story. DRAM has been on allocation for nearly six
years. Even when the Win95-induced bulge of DRAM moves through
the pipeline, demand will still exceed supply.

"As we move to the end of 1996, we'll see the supply-demand
ratio change to something like 10 percent below demand," says
Gary MacDonald, vice president of marketing for Kingston, a
manufacturer of RAM modules. "That's probably what the market
will declare typical or normal."

As a practical matter, 10 percent to 20 percent shortages don't
mean a DRAM drought. They do mean you'll have to make RAM supply
part of your planning. You'll usually be able to find the RAM
you need, although you may have to call around to get it and
the prices might change quickly. The underlying problem is
supply (See sidebar, "Supply-Side 'Dis'Economies"). Manufacturing
of advanced chips of all kinds is in short supply and will
probably stay in short supply for at least the rest of the
decade.

Another part of the problem is the proliferation of RAM types.
It used to be that DRAM was DRAM, and that's all a VAR had
to worry about. Now there is DRAM for main memory, SRAM for
cache, Video RAM for video subsystems and so on. Even DRAM
is getting specialized, with EDO RAM, plus the different kinds
of memory modules such as SIMMs and DIMMs, used to pack RAM
tighter into systems. This means memory manufacturers have
to further subdivide memory capacity and suppliers have to
put it in the right kinds of packages.

"The makers of PCs, laptops and workstations have thrown so
many different things on the motherboard that you need a specific
type of memory applied to each machine," says Moshayedi. "Because
of that, even if standard types of parts are not in short supply,
you may still have a major problem."

So what's a VAR to do? The first thing is to understand that,
like it or not, you're a RAM player. You will be supplying
RAM as part of a solution sale. According to Dataquest Inc.,
a researcher in San Jose, the average system shipped by vendors
in 1995 had slightly more than 7 Mbytes of RAM installed. By
the time it reached the desktop, the average system had roughly
15 Mbytes of RAM on board. By 1997, Dataquest predicts the
average business PC will have approximately 24 Mbytes of RAM
and will be shipped from the factory with 12.

"The PC OEMs have been shipping base unit configurations because
they're so price-sensitive and because of memory allocations,"
says Kingston's MacDonald. "Then they let the distribution
channel actually complete the fulfillment." The result is the
"instant upgrade," where the VAR or dealer adds RAM before
the system reaches the customer. "For the corporate account
reseller, the value-add is going to be building in the additional
DRAM and static RAM."

You can't afford to burden your customers with sluggish systems.
After all, less memory means slower computers. Plan your sale
to include the extra RAM your customers will need and price
accordingly. Depending on the economies of the situation (nature
of the sale, market conditions and prices, kind of memory needed,
time frame, availability of memory from the OEM, etc.), you
may want to order systems from the manufacturer with additional
RAM already installed, or add third-party RAM yourself. The
decision will depend on the relative costs, product availability
and the customer's requirements.

One of the rather peculiar results of the RAM shortage is that
system makers can be cheaper than third-party suppliers for
RAM. Manufacturers, especially big players such as Compaq and
IBM, often get the best prices because they buy on long-term
contracts and in large quantities. Sometimes they pass the
savings on to VARs who order machines with extra memory.

Then again, sometimes not. The manufacturers may want to use
that memory to pump out more basic systems and price their
memory upgrades accordingly. Moshayedi advises checking price,
supply and availability of a RAM part before writing a bid
that includes it. Usually a quick phone call to your supplier
can give you the information you need.

Beyond supply, there are other considerations. First, make sure
you have the right kind of memory. This means not only the
right kind of chips, but also the right modules. SIMMS (Single
In-line Memory Modules) are still common, but they're being
replaced by double-sided DIMMs (Dual In-line Memory Modules)
in newer systems. This is a common source of confusion in ordering
memory. Make sure you know all the relevant specs (module type,
bus width, kind of memory, speed) when you order memory. Don't
assume two products are equivalent.

One way to be sure is to order by make and model of computer
rather than by memory specification. Some companies make it
easy by providing extensive cross-referenced lists showing
what memory products go with what computers. Companies such
as Kingston and Simple take this a step further by supplying
their customers with electronic catalogs that cross-reference
their product lines with machines. If a part is especially
hard to get, it can be worthwhile dealing with a vendor that
makes its own memory modules. Often those companies can fabricate
hard-to-find modules on short notice.

Another caution: Be sure you can easily upgrade the memory in
the machines you sell. Having 16 Mbytes may be enough now,
but in another couple of years your customer may want 32 or
even 64 Mbytes. Can you add the extra RAM to the existing motherboards
or will you have to do an expensive RAM swap or an even more
expensive motherboard replacement?

Long Memories

learly, now is the time to build relationships with vendors
or distributors to make sure you can get the RAM you need.
"The key in this market is your relationships," Telerico says.
"You need to develop long-term relationships with memory providers.
When these problems become extensive, it's your relationships
with your suppliers that will carry you through."

One way to do this is to leverage your business. "A VAR who
is talking to a supplier on a daily basis can always get stable
pricing," says Moshayedi. "When you're spreading yourself too
thin and your numbers are down, no one thinks you're very important."
At the same time, it's important to have more than one source.
"Having a sole supplier is not a good strategic position to
be in now," says Telerico. "I work with three or four primary
suppliers and a couple of secondaries."

Besides Kingston, Simple Technology and PNY Electronics Inc.,
VARs buy memory products from distributors such as Merisel
or Ingram Micro. Wherever you get your memory, though, continuing
relationships are important.

Tell your customers what you're up against in the RAM market.
Although allocations have existed in the memory business for
five years, many customers are unaware of it. "We've set the
expectations with our customers based on the fact that the
industry is experiencing supply challenges," Telerico says.
"We either provide them with an alternative or inform them
there's an extended lead time. Generally, they stick with us."

Don't promise more than you can supply. If you don't have the
memory, or if it will be back-ordered, say so. Specify memory
precisely in your bids and help your customers interpret the
significance of those specifications. If the specifications
aren't complete, the customer could end up with slower, less
satisfactory memory dragging down the performance of the system.

Balance is the key to getting the best performance out of modern
computers. This means you have to understand what each system
will be used for and how it fits into your customer's overall
architecture. Obviously, more is more when it comes to memory.
But there is such a thing as too much memory, especially too
much DRAM or expensive cache SRAM.

Similarly, you must balance video memory against requirements.
A graphics workstation needs a lot of video memory, while a
server can usually get by with minimal video memory and a desktop
PC may only need 1 Mbyte on the video card.

If you fully understand your customer's requirements, it's not
difficult to strike the right memory balance. The shortage
won't go away anytime soon, but it's only a problem if you
let it be one. If you maintain a good relationship with your
suppliers and communicate with your customers, you'll minimize
your memory problems.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Chip Storage: Supply-Side `Dis'Economies

By:
Rick Cook

Memory products have been in short supply for some time. The
underlying problem is that supplies of advanced semiconductors
of all sorts are tight, and there's no relief in sight. Demand,
driven by an explosion of memory use in both computer and noncomputer
products, is just too high for chip makers to keep up with.

According to industry experts, it will take more than a dozen
advanced semiconductor factories opening every year for the
next decade just to keep up with the demand. "That's probably
a minimum," says Brian Matas, an analyst with ICE, a Scottsdale,
Ariz., semiconductor market research company.

Intel's response to such industry forecasts was the buzz at
the last SEMICon/West show in San Francisco in July 1995: "There
aren't that many cement trucks in the world," an Intel spokesman
said. Enough cement trucks, maybe. But the supplies of chip
making equipment, designers, engineers, skilled construction
workers and trained operators are definitely going to be stretched
to the limit to meet the demand.

There is also the cost. In 1990, new chip factories cost an
average of $1 billion each. Today the average is closer to
$1.5 billion each, and by the end of the decade those fabs
will be closer to $2 billion. No one can afford excess capacity,
so fabs are planned to come on-line when needed.

Finally, the semiconductor industry is becoming more highly
integrated and problems anywhere in the world affect the market
quickly. When the power went off on the Malaysian island of
Penang earlier this year it had a nearly immediate effect on
the spot market where RAM is freely traded. A fire in a Japanese
plastics factory, an earthquake in Kobe all have trickle-down
effects on you.

Experts predict a combination of steady-to-gently-rising prices
and spot shortages. At press time, DRAM supplies were good,
but SRAM-used as cache memory-was in short supply. By the time
you read this, SRAM should have caught up to the demand, but
something else may likely be tight.

Planning critical memory needs as far ahead as you can will
save you loads of frustration. Forecasting demand and balancing
that with the advantages of just-in-time purchasing isn't easy,
but if having memory on hand is crucial to your customer relations,
it may be necessary for a while longer.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "36"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Net Gain from Networked CD-ROMs -- The growing need to access
corporaate data on CD-ROMs opens doors for network-savvy VARs

By:
Rick Cook

CD-ROMs are going corporate. The need to network them means
sales for you-if you can do the job. "It's a booming market,"
says Richard Krueger, vice president of marketing for Meridian
Data Inc., a maker of networkable CD-ROM products. "It's an
area that's really starting to take off."

The main reason networking CD-ROMs is becoming such big business
is the proliferation of data that is stored on and read from
disks. Databases, manuals, new application software, images,
regulations, legal decisions and other business-critical information
are being published on CD-ROMs. Increasingly, more organizations
need to make that data available to more of their employees.

CD-ROM-savvy VARs installing these optical systems on their
clients' networks are getting in on a growing market. "We're
seeing quite a bit of it," says Ed Amash, director of imaging
systems at Accudata Systems Inc., a VAR in Houston. Market
size is relative, of course. Networked CD-ROMs will probably
always be small potatoes compared with desktop CD-ROMs. "There
are probably 53 million CD-ROM drives installed [to date],"
Meridian's Krueger says. "But only a small proportion of those
are going into corporate LANs."

Still, a small proportion of a 53-million unit business that
doubled in the past year alone is quite a bit of business.
Network installations are especially attractive to VARs because
there is more chance to add value. A desktop CD-ROM drive can
be bought from a superstore retailer for $200 or less and installation
is relatively straightforward. Networking CD-ROM drives takes
far more expertise and is much more likely to be VAR territory.

Fundamentally, companies put CD-ROM drives on their networks
for two reasons: to reduce costs and/or to increase security.
The security issue is simple: CD-ROMs are easy to slip into
a pocket or purse. Given the cost of the information, it is
worth safeguarding the disks by keeping them in a central location
where they can be shared, but not so easily removed.

The cost-savings issue is a bit more intricate. Some companies
save money by networking CD-ROMs the same way they save money
by networking printers. Hardware costs can be kept lower when
users share resources. But with CD-ROM drives so inexpensive,
it's hard to justify the expense of a jukebox or bank of CD
ROM drives just on hardware savings alone.

Software savings are usually more important because they can
be much larger. Many commercial databases are very expensive.
Something as simple as a year's worth of newspaper back issues
can cost $800 annually. And many of the more specialized databases,
such as court decisions, can run thousands or tens of thousands
of dollars per year per copy. As a result, sharing those databases
is the only logical way to go.

Either Way, It's a Winner

Regardless of which features convince your customers to sign
on the dotted line, networking CD-ROMs is a classic value-add
sale. To be successful, a VAR has to know the technology thoroughly
and understand what the customer needs. "You can't simply call
up your distributor and say, 'I want Toshiba drives,'" says
Michael Raab, president of Optical Laser Inc., a Huntington
Beach, Calif., distributor of optical storage products. "Networked
CD-ROMs are still a solution sale. The important thing is to
select the right solution."

Networking a CD-ROM system can be done a number of different
ways. Raab reels off the possibilities: "You can hook up to
the network file server, use a dedicated PC as a CD-ROM server
or you can do a direct LAN attachment." Some systems use Terminate
and Stay Residents (TSRs), some use NetWare Loadable Modules
(NLMs), while others use LAN attachment units. "Those methods
may seem like small differences to the salesperson, but to
the user they can make a big difference."

Finding Your Market

lthough networked CD-ROMs are usually thought of as a vertical
market product, they are used in so many vertical markets that
they are becoming almost universal. Every market that needs
to access a lot of information is increasing its use of CD
ROMs. They're familiar, affordable and accessible. Users in
law offices, medical offices, imaging businesses, libraries,
publishing, wholesale and retailers with catalogs are hot on
the CD-ROM trail. The question isn't so much which markets
use CD-ROMs as it is which ones don't. Unlike some kinds of
hardware, selling networked CD-ROMs usually doesn't involve
demonstrating the need to the customer. "The sale usually isn't
driven by you," says Amash, "It's driven by their understanding
of the availability of published data."

One of the most important decisions a VAR has to make is the
kind of CD-ROM reader the client's network needs. A single
CD-ROM drive is by far the least expensive solution-if it will
work. The problem is that the client is either limited to using
a single disk or someone has to change disks manually. This
may be acceptable if the primary use of CD-ROMs is an occasional
software upgrade or the like, but most network installations
need more than one drive.

Jukeboxes provide access to many different disks, but not all
at once. A stack of drives is generally more expensive, but
it keeps more of the data available all the time. "A jukebox
gives you access to a large number of disks for relatively
few readers," says David Butler, manager of sales and marketing
for Plextor, a maker of CD-ROM drives in Santa Clara, Calif.
"That's a good solution if you have a range of [CD-ROM disks]
that need to be accessed, but it's not for a whole lot of people
who need access to the information at once."

Applications for jukeboxes might include historical information,
blueprints and financial records. A CD-ROM stacker, or "tower,"
is better suited to applications where many people need the
same information on a recurring basis. It boils down to needing
to access information online vs. near-line.

"If data availability is critical, then you need a tower," says
Amash. "But if data availability is random and not always mission
critical, then a jukebox would be the way to go."

Butler points out that the choice is not either/or. "Both needs
exist and both can exist in the same organization at the same
time. It makes sense for the VAR to work with the IS manager
to identify what the organization is trying to accomplish and
to mix and match the right products to do the job."

Whether you choose a jukebox or tower, reliability and availability
are important factors for networked CD-ROM systems. Network
CD-ROM drives typically work much harder than their desktop
counterparts. That makes it worth paying extra for higher-quality
and more reliable drives. If a desktop CD-ROM drive fails,
one user is inconvenienced. If it's a networked CD-ROM drive,
everyone may be locked out from critical information. Pundits
say the speed of the drive doesn't seem to affect the reliability
and there are a range of prices in every speed category.

Like RAID systems, some companies, including Plextor, now offer
CD-ROM towers with hot-swappable drives and power supplies.
A network sale should probably include at least one shelf spare
so the customer can get the system back on track quickly.

VARs also can add value by selling a CD-Recordable (CD-R) system
as part of their packages. Customers who need jukeboxes can
often benefit from keeping data produced in-house on CD-ROMs
as well. With the dropping cost of CD-R drives and the growing
ease of use of the software, this option makes sense for many
companies today. As the VAR implementing such a solution, you
must be sensitive to more than just the hardware and software
needs of your clients, though. Another important consideration
is the corporate culture-specifically the degree of centralization
required. Some companies prefer to have their CD-ROM drives
centralized under the MIS department. Others want the drives,
and the control, in the individual departments or even the
workgroups that are actually using the information.

One reason MIS needs to stay involved is the drive letter dilemma
 Multiple CD-ROMs on a network can "eat" drive letters. "It's
unfortunate that the Novell and Windows paradigms require a
one-to-one correspondence between a drive letter and a peripheral
device like a CD-ROM drive," says Meridian's Krueger. "If you're
in a small- to medium-sized company, your users almost immediately
run out of drive letters."

Often, NetWare and Windows NT associate a drive letter with
a device; in a networked environment, that means you're likely
to run out of drive letters long before you run out of devices.
There are several ways around this problem, all of varying
expense and degree of difficulty. Most of them involve software
add-ons that let the system treat multiple CD-ROM drives as
a single device.

Two examples: Meridian Data offers versions of its CD-Net products
as standalone software, as a subsystem to attach to a PC on
the network or as a complete CD-ROM server built into a tower.
Stac Inc.'s new CD-QuickShare compresses the contents of the
CD-ROMs onto hard disks for quicker access. In both cases,
many CD-ROMs appear to the network as a single virtual CD-ROM
drive.

Despite those considerations, networking CD-ROMs is not rocket
science. "It's not a no-brainer, but it doesn't require a systems
design engineer," says Amash. "It's just a matter of understanding
the needs, the growth direction of the customer and a couple
of cultural issues to get a feel for what is required."

Quick Scan

Meridian Data Inc. Scotts Valley, Calif. (800) 767-2537, www.meridian
data.com

Optical Laser Inc. Huntington Beach, Calif. (800) 795-2381,
arseniob@opticallaser.com

Plextor Corp. Santa Clara, Calif. (800) 475-3986

Stac Inc. San Diego, Calif. (619) 794-4300, www.stac.com




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "37"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Case Study: Driving CD-ROM Sales -- VAR's slick system helps oil companies
access information online

By:
Rick Cook

One of the good things about selling networked CD-ROM solutions
is that the customer often comes looking for you. Take Ed Amash
of Accudata Systems Inc., a VAR in Houston who cites his company's
experience with a large oil company it first made contact with
at a seminar Accudata hosted on CD-ROMs on the network. "They
came up to us afterward and said IBM was publishing all the
manuals for their mainframes on CD-ROMs and they wanted their
technical people to have access to all those CDs online," Amash
recalls.

The initial contact quickly led to the qualifying session that
narrowed down the oil company's exact needs. Although there
were only 11 CD-ROMs in the set, the company wanted room for
expansion. After discussing the company's requirements, Accudata
proposed a two-unit tower system with 14 drives in each tower
using Meridian Data's Model 314 CD-ROM servers. By using two
servers, the customer got slightly better performance and,
more importantly, redundancy.

Installing the CD-ROMs and associated software was handled by
IBM after Accudata had integrated the servers. Accudata people
stood by during the installation to iron out any problems that
might have arisen. The sale took roughly six months to complete,
but Amash says some are done in as little as two weeks so the
client can try out the software within the publisher's free
trial period. In general, he says, sales cycles for networked
CD-ROMs run three to six months.

One of the differences in CD-ROM sales is that the real product
is information, not hardware or software. "Generally, your
customer is someone who's looking for something to run the
CD-ROM titles," Amash says. "That's what drives the sale."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "38"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Tomorrow's CD-ROM -- High-density formats will open up new uses

By:
Rick Cook

Despite its greatness today, tomorrow's CD-ROM will be better.
Two separate camps, which had independently been developing
a new high-density CD-ROM format, have reached an agreement
for a new standard called Micro UDF, more commonly known as
digital video disk, or DVD. The DVD standard is comprised of
four subsets-one for the entertainment industry and three for
computers. Although the first introductions in 1996 will probably
be for home video players, the technology and format will be
similar for the data storage products that follow.

The first computer DVD phase will be a read-only version that
offers roughly 4.7 Gbytes on a single layer of the disk. "The
size of software is going up dramatically, and the sizes of
the databases distributed on CDs are growing," says Ray Freeman,
facilitator for the Optical Storage Technology Association
and president of Freeman Associates, a market researcher in
Santa Barbara, Calif. "Multimedia presentations will take up
a tremendous amount of space." Future versions of the CD-ROM
disk will have multiple layers, and the disks will eventually
be double-sided and multilayered.

The second phase will allow users to record their own CDs and
read them on the same drive. The third phase will offer recordable
and erasable technologies in one, ultimately reaching a capacity
of 17 Gbytes. All three phases will be backward-read compatible
to allow them to read disks recorded today.

Ease of use and the addition of recording and erasing operations
will open new doors for CD-ROM usage. The easier a technology
is to use, the more commonplace it tends to become. And the
more commonplace, the more likely DVD will be to appear on
networks.

CDs are going to be a fact of network life for a long time to
come. If you're equipped to network CDs effectively, you'll
have an advantage with your clients over VARs who don't hold
that expertise-no matter how the technology evolves.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "39"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Real-World Challenges -- From dealing with substance abuse to
paying taxes, it's all part of the manager's job


January is an important time in a business. It's when you put
directives in place in preparation for the new year's challenges.
A critical time because your groundwork affects your standing
at year's end.

In our first installment of Executive Challenge (page 149),
an enlightened VAR says it best: "Prepare now because it can
be devastating when you don't know what to do." He's talking
about firing an employee for drug abuse. The ordeal took a
tremendous toll on his company. It could have been much easier
had he been prepared.

Evaluating vendors' channel programs is also important. Program
Profiles (page 152) highlights Computer Associates, Attachmate
and Maxoptix Corp.'s programs. In Distribution (page 156),
there's important information about sales tax. Many distributors
are getting tough on VARs who aren't collecting tax on interstate
sales. And just in time for tax season, we're putting you to
the test with our VARBiz Quiz (page 152) on income tax returns.

With the challenges also comes great promise. In the end it
will be your foundation that determines your outcome.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "40"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Executive Challenge: The Hidden Problem -- Develop a policy to fight 
substance abuse

By:
Deidra-Ann Parrish

We don't tolerate it in our politics, in our schools or even
in athletics, so why tolerate substance abuse in the workplace?

In a Gallup Organization study, employers say they consider
drug abuse a "very serious" problem. Yet nearly 75 percent
of that group have no specific policy for dealing with substance
abuse in their own companies.

The reason? "It's one of those things that you cross your fingers
and close your eyes to, hoping it won't come back to haunt
you," says John (not his real name), president and founder
of a multimillion-dollar software development company. Recently
John had to tackle his biggest challenge yet: firing a longtime
colleague-we'll call him Dave-with a substance abuse problem.

"Dave was a heavy drinker at trade shows and after hours," says
John. "But no one made a big deal about it because we all had
a drink or two at events like that."

Dave, however, drank to excess. Politely ignoring his slurred
speech and off-handed remarks became routine for his colleagues.
After late nights at out-of-town events, his absence at morning
meetings wasn't unexpected nor reprimanded.

In retrospect, John says, "We felt what he did during off-hours
was none of our business as long as he got his work done."
But the company's tolerance may have been the worst solution.
Dave's drinking got worse. Monday morning hangovers lasted
most of the week. Some suspected that his habit may have graduated
to cocaine use. And eventually, Dave's work suffered.

The president finally confronted Dave about his declining performance,
and he confessed his problem with drugs and alcohol. That was
lucky for everyone because John had no idea how to handle the
problem had Dave denied it.

John should have had a companywide policy on drug use from the
start. But his dilemma was now past that, so he did what most
small to midsize companies do: He counseled Dave himself, gave
him several leaves of absence and 101 chances to save his job.

John's reaction was typical of managers at smaller companies
with no official policy for employee substance abuse, says
Bruce Wilkinson, president of Workplace Consultants Inc., New
Orleans. But, he adds, it's a mistake for any company to get
directly involved. "It's the employer's responsibility to support
and document the condition, not to diagnose or treat it."

Dave's drug habit was costing him $100 a day by the time he
confessed. After a difficult year, he was finally let go. John
and his staff immediately began discussing options for implementing
a company substance abuse program.

In tackling this prickly subject, first determine what your
position will be on substance abuse. Consider what measures
you'll use to ensure a drug-free workplace and what penalties
you'll impose for offenders.

Since the laws on employee drug testing vary by state-it's legal
in all states and a few have made it mandatory-you'll generally
have the freedom to decide what action jibes with your corporate
culture. There are serious considerations on both sides of
the issue.

In a survey of drug users who called the (800) COCAINE hotline
at Fair Oaks Hospital, Summit, N.J., 75 percent used drugs
at work; of that group, 64 percent said drugs adversely affected
job performance and 44 percent sold drugs to other employees.

Further, a Gallup survey of more than 1,000 U.S. employees shows
97 percent of respondents consider workplace drug testing appropriate
under certain circumstances, i.e., when sufficient evidence
warrants suspicion of drug use.

A comparison of substance abusers vs. nonabusers revealed abusers
were absent from work two and a half times more than nonusers;
productivity of abusers was 25 percent to 33 percent lower;
abusers' off-the-job accidents were four to six times greater;
and their claims for worker compensation were three times greater.
The cost of substance abuse to the collective business community
is estimated to be between $60 billion and $100 billion a year.

But with drug testing comes some problems. Certain methods are
intrusive and physically uncomfortable. Furthermore, some of
the most common methods of testing have been known to produce
false positives: The most reliable drug tests are typically
expensive, ranging from $75 to $200 per test.

In addition, a policy of random or unfair drug testing can create
dissension among employees. In such instances, there's risk
of legal battles. In John's company, applicants are now required
to take a drug test, but testing is not ongoing. "The initial
test would send a strong enough message to our employees."

Develop A Plan of Action

Once you've handled the drug testing issue, determine what action
your company will take if employees violate the drug policy.
Employers are becoming more enlightened about addiction, therefore
many institute supportive programs that allow employees to
seek professional counseling. Be clear on the conditions with
this option: set a time limit; indicate the level of pay you
will provide during the counseling period; and stipulate what
ongoing procedures you will use to monitor compliance with
policies. You also need to research health insurance options.

Be careful to design policies that will stand up in the face
of legal scrutiny. Joseph Ortego, a commercial litigator with
Rivkin, Radler & Kremer, Uniondale, N.Y., says your policy
should state that "action will be sought only after there is
evidence of reasonable probability of drug abuse." For example
 excessive absenteeism, erratic behavior, decline in performance
and independently corroborated reports from reliable sources.
The policies must apply to everyone equally-including yourself.

In John's company, a group of 10 employees formed a task force
to monitor adherence to the new policies, plan drug awareness
programs and resolve conflicts. Some employees were put off
by the new focus on drug abuse prevention.

"I had to explain that this isn't about singling anyone out
to punish them," John says. "It's about maintaining standards
and protecting our workplace. In the long run, this allows
us to be more focused and more profitable."

It wasn't an easy transition. As in many reseller companies,
his employees are close-knit. Many were on board when he founded
the company. John didn't want to upset that dynamic.

For more than two years, Dave's personal battle was affecting
the entire company, John says. It had become a destructive
presence: "It was the single toughest thing my company has
been through." Now that the dust is settling, he feels it was
best that it happened.

"We were closing our eyes to real-world issues, and it bit us
right in the butts. For people who have never experienced this
sort of thing, I'd advise them to prepare now, because it can
be devastating if you don't know what to do."

Contact Deidra-Ann Parrish at (516) 733-8531; Internet, dparrish@cmp.com




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "41"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

VAR Deals: Trio's In the Army

By:
Krista Ostertag

When word's out that the U.S. Army is looking for a solution,
the bids come marching in. This time TRW, a Midwest City, Okla.,
VAR, Target Technologies Inc. and AT&T joined efforts on what
will be a $11.4 million, five-year contract providing desktop
videoconferencing for all U.S. defense departments. TRW demonstrated
seven basic configurations, including three point-to-point
systems; POTS, the LAN and ISDN versions; as well as multipoint
systems. TRW offered the Army a range of technology, including
Target's C-Phone technology and components from AT&T, Intel
and PictureTel.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "42"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

VAR Deals: COLD Cola Coming

By:
Krista Ostertag

What more appropriate document imaging solution for Coca Cola
Enterprises than a COLD system? Combined Computer Resources
Inc. (CCR), Dallas, won the $1 million-plus contract for the
Computer Output to Laser Disk system. CCR will perform batch
processing of invoices, moving them from AS/400s to COLD systems,
to be installed in 38 locations. Coca Cola estimates its internal
return on investment during a five-year period will be more
than 250 percent.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "43"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Customer Speak: What I Want In a VAR

By:
Karen Balch

Odwalla Inc., a juice maker in Half Moon Bay, Calif., knows
how to squeeze out a profit. But Dennis Barr, office systems
manager, says that with only a modest group of MIS people in
house, Odwalla relies on its VAR relationships. Here's what
makes them work.

VARBusiness: How do you choose a VAR?

Barr: First, I have several companies respond to RFPs. That
way, I can make an apples-to-apples comparison. Then I rely
on the word of someone who has used another company, because
that's a firsthand account of how they've performed. That's
the end product-their performance.

VB: What makes a good VAR?

Barr: Responsiveness in support issues would be number one.
When I call, are they there, or do they get back to me in a
reasonable time? I need to have someone I can talk to in less
than half an hour. Support, though, is slightly different.
[It's important that the person] can answer my questions. An
answer to a problem might be good in one environment but not
another.

I need to know I can call 24 hours a day, seven days a week
and get someone who can give me answers. I don't want them
calling me all the time. That can be overbearing. But I'd like
them to check in periodically. I've requested that my two engineers
at Edge [Information Systems, Odwalla's VAR in San Jose] open
an account on my e-mail so I can send them messages, and they
check it daily. That does a lot for me. If I'm having a problem,
they'll know it. Finally, I like information from VARs that
their companies are stable. If one of my engineers gives notice,
I'd like the VAR to not only call me and let me know that I'm
losing one of my support engineers, but also to assure me that
I have another one being brought up to speed.

If you have questions to ask end users, contact Karen Balch,
(714) 223-3614; Internet, kbalch@cmp.com




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "44"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Program Profiles: CA's Varsity Program Gives Each Player a Fair Turn

By:
Mara Lenuzza

Computer Associates' new VARsity program allows VARs from any
of its existing channel programs to obtain support and expertise
on any of its client-server software products.

The channel programs are segmented by product function: systems
management, database and application development and financial
management. For the most part, the programs had operated independently
from each other and offered varied services. Now VARs can apply
market development funds across the different programs, participate
in trade shows free of charge and access CA's nine testing
and demo centers nationwide.

The program makes it affordable for VARs to cross over into
new or unfamiliar product categories; the cost of enrollment
for any one product-specific program is $2,500. VARsity lets
you join a second program at a 50 percent discount. For subsequent
programs, the fee is waived altogether.

Another change the software giant implemented is the addition
of the Premier program status. The new level supersedes the
existing silver, gold and platinum levels. "Premier partners
will most likely be platinum VARs who are willing to make a
significant financial commitment to us," says Mark Marron,
senior vice president of channel sales.

Premier VARs have exclusive access to CA's video production
studio, marketing team and database. In addition, they receive
perks such as product rebates, VARsity jackets and chances
to win tickets to NBA, NFL and baseball events.

The company, in Islandia, N.Y., is recruiting VARs for the new
program. Existing resellers will automatically be signed on
as VARsity players.

For more information, contact Marron at (516) 342-5224.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "45"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Program Profiles: Attachmate Ramps Up Business

By:
Mara Lenuzza

Attachmate Corp. is launching the Remote Access Medallion Program
RAMP-which it hopes will attract VARs currently reselling remote
access products who want to add the Remote LAN Node (RLN) software
suite to their software lineups.

This is an overhaul of what was Digital Communications Associates
Inc.'s VAR program before the company's January 1995 merger
with Attachmate. Now under the Attachmate name, the $390 million
software vendor has made some noteworthy changes. The vendor
now gives a free 8-port product to VARs who complete its $900
training course. Previously, VARs received free training but
were given only two-port products.

In addition, to maintain the integrity of its VAR channel, Attachmate
will more strictly enforce the $40,000 annual volume commitment.

Attachmate has assigned territory sales engineers to answer
questions solely about the RLN suite. Product executives provide
joint sales calls and lead dissemination, and channel account
executives are available via phone to take literature requests
and to assist with the market development funds program.

Attachmate's efforts for the RLN division mostly focus on the
VAR channel. "We sell direct only if it will provide pure convenience
to the end user," says Ana Quintana, channel marketing manager
for RLN, Alpharetta, Ga. Roughly 80 percent of RLN sales go
through the channel.

Quintana says she's looking for VARs that have annual sales
upward of $5 million, have 10 or more employees, are Novell
certified and sell into Fortune 1000 companies. For additional
information, contact her at (770) 442-4220.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "46"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Program Profiles: Maxoptix Pops the Question To Optical Storage VARs

By:
Mara Lenuzza

After a 10-year courtship with VARs, Maxoptix Corp., Fremont,
Calif., now has its first reseller program for network VARs
and systems integrators, the Maxoptix Valued Partner (MVP)
Program. The vendor wants to sign 1,000 U.S. VARs to sell its
AX and PX storage solutions.

MVP members will get vendor support through a sales program,
a marketing program and an authorized service center. The sales
program gives partners exclusive access to the AX and PX lines
and provides on-site sales training, a sales lead program and
an assigned account manager to help with joint sales calls.
The marketing program gives members a 50 percent discount on
demo equipment. They also get development funds, access to
evaluation products and a dedicated in-house marketing team
to help with seminars, trade shows and other efforts. Partners
who invest in certification will benefit from Maxoptix's authorized
service center.

For more information, call Mitch Cipriano at (510) 353-9700,
ext. 221.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "47"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Distribution: Financial Planning -- Taxing duties and coping with mergers

By:
Karen Balch

Unpaid Taxes, Increased Margin?

Having distributors drop ship directly to your customers' locations
can save on shipping costs. But if you're not collecting taxes
on those sales, you may be incurring a liability.

Even if you are collecting the taxes, some of your competitors
other VARs and mail-order houses-may not be. As a result, you
may be losing sales based on a perceived cost delta. But the
Computing Technology Industry Association (CompTIA), Lombard,
Ill., is lobbying for fairness.

In early 1994, CompTIA supported a bill called the Tax Fairness
for Main Street Business Act. The bill called for any mail
order business doing more than $3 million in annual sales or
with sales into any given state that exceed $100,000 to remit
sales taxes to the state of the products' final destinations.
Passage of the bill would have narrowed the price gap some
mail-order houses currently thrive on. Plus, it would have
provided a standard for collecting those taxes.

The bill failed. But CompTIA plans to support a reintroduction
of the bill soon. Meanwhile, if you don't have a valid reseller
certificate for the state of destinations, distributors such
as Hall-Mark are passing the taxes on to you. As a national
distributor, that's a necessity; as a VAR, it's good business.

Subsidiary Sales: Good and Bad News

What is it with distributors selling off their subsidiaries
lately? MicroAge recently sold Kelly Micro Systems, its memory
subsidiary, to Simple Technology, a memory manufacturer. Last
July, Western Micro Technology sold its semiconductor business
to Reptron Electronics. The sales beg the question: Why buy
subsidiaries such as those in the first place?

The distributors likely perceived a synergy between their businesses
and the subsidiaries they purchased, says Allan Adler, chairman
and CEO of MSI Channel Research & Consulting, Seattle. Kelly
Micro is a memory company and MicroAge sells many computers.
Memory is often in short supply, so the purchase seemed logical.

But, in the memory market, MicroAge couldn't compete with bigger
players such as Kingston and Simple. It just wasn't MicroAge's
core competency to be a memory maker. As a result, MicroAge
has refocused its efforts on doing what it does best.

The industry trend toward selling off such subsidiaries, then,
may be due to two factors: competition and economics. Distributors
and aggregators can't afford to neglect their core competencies.
Given that "distributors haven't been busting the profit envelope
lately," as Adler says, selling businesses that aren't core
is an ideal way to generate capital.

That proved true for Western Micro. The sale of Western Micro's
semiconductor business helped pave the way for its own expansion
and distributor acquisitions. But money was not the driving
factor in the sale of Kelly Micro, according to Wes Richards,
president of MicroAge Channel Services. MicroAge wants to continue
to grow its VAR base, and Richards says that requires a refocusing
of efforts and a shift to a new training and education-oriented
paradigm that will come about this year.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "48"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Heads Up: Sales Cycle Is As Sales Cycle Does

By:
Deidra-Ann Parish

In VARBusiness' State of the VAR Market survey, VARs defined
the length of their sales cycles. Contrary to popular theory
that shorter sales cycles are best, profiles of VARs with cycles
of one month or less and those with cycles of six months or
more show each can be successful.

despite the difference in selling prices and revenue, both groups
realize profits. It's apparent that the two business models'
sales strategies complement their sales cycles so each attains
healthy profits.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "49"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Industry Watch: Revenge of the Nerds -- Despite bad press, CTOs have become
the darlings of our industry

By:
T.C. Doyle

Which industry terms make your skin crawl? That's one question
we asked in our annual State of the VAR Market survey. While
most of that data was published in our Dec. 15 issue, the answer
to this provocative question was not. "MIPS" is an unpopular
term, which one VAR defined as "Meaningless Indicator of Processor
Speed." Others said they dislike "GUI." Sounds too much like
the stuff that sticks to the floor of the local cinema, they
said.

But we've found that what really peeves VARs is the term "computer
geek." The legendary success of nerd icons Bill Gates, Steve
Case and Marc Andreessen has given rise to the stereotypical
computer nerd. But not without good reason.

Though they might pay less attention to Donna Karan's latest
ready-to-wear collection and log fewer aerobic hours on StairMasters,
the bonafide computer geeks working at VAR businesses have
become the darlings of an industry. Whereas vendors once spent
vast sums courting VAR business owners and sales personnel,
many are now making a direct appeal to the VAR's chief technologist,
more often than not the "computer geek" in residence.

"Within a VAR organization, you can generally identify three
constituents: the VAR business owner, the national sales manager
and the chief technologist," explains John Neilson, vice president
of the organizational business unit at Microsoft. "In past
years, everyone thought the best way to get a VAR behind your
products was by convincing the business owner that you had
the solutions he or she needed," he says. "Or you might have
tried to appeal to the sales manager with a variety of financial
incentives that speak his or her language. But because solutions
have become more complex, the need to rethink this approach
has become apparent."

What Neilson and others have identified is a phenomenon that
is influencing how vendors and distributors recruit, train
and provide financial assistance to VARs. Business owners are,
at heart, pragmatists who will drive their organizations as
business trends and opportunities dictate, while sales managers
will follow money trails and sell whatever makes those cash
registers ring. Increasingly, they both are guided by chief
technologists who introduce their colleagues to new technologies
and products while shielding them from the potential harm of
others.

"We're not out there training the owners [of those resellers],"
says Sun Microsystems chief executive Scott McNealy. "We're
out there training the technologists, the people who are on
the streets in front of the customer. Those are the ones we've
got to get excited about and competent on our technology."

The sales engineers, the field engineers and the technologists
are even more important than the sales reps, he adds. "The
salespeople who are out there making the sale are always looking
to their engineers, their technical support people, saying
'This is right? We can handle this, right?' They need someone
with credibility who can walk in and say 'Yes, we can solve
that problem.'

Ian Bonner, vice president of global channels marketing for
IBM Software, is another channel executive who is spending
more time trying to appeal to chief technology officers. Without
the CTOs' support, IBM's BESTeam VAR program "would not be
firing on all cylinders," Bonner says.

Bonner offers advice on how to woo the individual who can make
a difference. "Step one [in recruiting] is getting the business
owner to say, 'I'm prepared to look at the IBM BESTeam and
software products.' Step two is to get the director of sales
to understand the potential that IBM software products offer
him in making his numbers and achieving his revenue targets,"
he says. "None of those steps can happen, however, until the
technical person within the organization feels comfortable
about making that sales call, about installing the product,
about being able to generate service revenue from the installation
of the products, about supporting the products and about the
combination of the products to provide a solution."

Because vendors are catching on to the influence chief technologists
now wield, more CTOs are turning up at restaurants across the
United States-the pampered guests of those with products to
push. Vendors are keenly aware of whose bread they're buttering.

Ironically, if there is one thing the stereotypical computer
technologist craves less than lunch with strangers, it is probably
a business title that glorifies what he or she does for a living.
Most technologists are known for the long hours they spend
troubleshooting systems or testing software, not the time they
spend trying to glamorize their titles. Hence, vendors are
already lamenting that they are having trouble identifying
who within a VAR organization is the resident chief technologist.
Is it the head service technician? Is it the labs' general
manager or the vice president of systems? It can be all three.
Regardless of their titles, those individuals have become the
"go-to" people for 1996.

Contact T.C. Doyle with your opinions at (801) 649-0979; Internet,
tcdoyle@cmp.com




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "50"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Taking Care Of Business: Apart From the Crowd -- To stand out you need a 
unique selling proposition

By:
George Colombo

The Question:

How can my company really distinguish itself?

The Answer:

I've been working with resellers of all types for almost 12
years. In that time, literally every reseller with whom I've
consulted-and there have been thousands-has claimed to be a
provider of superior service and support. Not only is it impossible
for everyone in the business to provide superior service and
support, but also, as far as your customers are concerned,
this claim is meaningless.

Saying you offer superior service makes no significant impression
on customers. "Superiority" in this context does nothing to
differentiate your business from any other.

If you want to make an impression, formulate what marketing
people refer to as a unique selling proposition (USP). Create
a concise statement detailing why a customer should buy from
you instead of your competitors.

First, your USP should focus on a single aspect of your business
that is unique in your marketplace. Second, it should target
a theme that's important to your customer. Finally, your USP
should be as specific as possible.

Perhaps the classic example of a USP is the one upon which Tom
Monaghan built the Domino's Pizza empire: "Fresh, hot pizza
delivered in 30 minutes or less, guaranteed." It satisfies
each USP criterion. A simple, concise statement that focuses
on a single element of the business to the exclusion of all
others.

While there is clearly a vast difference between delivering
high-tech solutions and delivering hot pizza, the principle
is the same. So are the benefits. Spend some time evaluating
your company's function, and you'll be able to devise your
own USP.

In 50 words or less, (1) highlight one unique characteristic
of your business; (2) address an issue important to your customers;
and (3) do this in a way that is specific. If your USP meets
those criteria, you will find that the rest of your marketing
efforts will flow from it easily.

I'd love to see what you come up with. Send me your USP. Perhaps
we will feature some of the best examples in this column. Good
luck.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "51"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Monitor Mining



CTX International has introduced The DiamondTron 17XA, a high
performance monitor, as part of its Expert Series line. The
DiamondTron 17XA is a 17-inch monitor that combines a flat,
square-cornered display screen with a shorter tube neck. The
monitor is designed to create a compact enclosure without distortion.
An electron gun and 0.25-mm aperture grill mask deliver the
focus from center to corner. The DiamondTron supports Macintosh
resolutions of up to 1,152 x 780 at 75 Hz and PC resolutions
maxing at 1,600 x 1,200 with refresh rates up to 160 Hz.

Highlights:

 The DiamondTron is compatible with SUN and SPARC workstations.

 The CTX On-Screen-Display lets the user manipulate image and
color characteristics with the touch of a button. Thirty digital
controls allow the user to work with the entire screen area
while using color-matching capabilities.

 The Super Star CTX Power Management System reduces power consumption
to less than 5 watts when idle. That complies with EPA Energy
Star guidelines and ISO 9241-3 requirements.

Available: Immediately, through authorized distributors

List Price: $1,199

Vendor: CTX International, Walnut, Calif. (800) 888-2012




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "52"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Doc Management With the Greatest of Ease



Primax Electronics' PaperEASE is a document management system
incorporating a user interface that closely resembles a standard
office setting. Users can fax, photocopy and e-mail by scanning
documents in black-and-white or grayscale (resolution of 100
dpi to 400 dpi) between 2 inches x 3 inches and 8.5 inches
x 24 inches through the sheetfeeder and into the management
system. PaperEASE supports drag-and-drop capabilities, and
comes packaged with Xerox's Textbridge OCR software. Requirements
include an IBM-compatible PC with a 386 or higher microprocessor,
4 Mbytes of RAM (8 Mbytes or more is recommended), Microsoft
Windows 3.1 or Windows 95 operating system and a parallel printer
port.

Highlights:

 PaperEASE has a document archiving and retrieval system.

 The system supports Microsoft's Word, Excel and Access; Lotus'
WordPro, cc:Mail and 1,2,3; and Aldus' Pagemaker programs.

 Users can enlarge, reduce, crop, lighten and darken scanned
images from within the document manager.

Available: Immediately, through authorized distributors

List Price: $249

Vendor: Primax Electronics, Sunnyvale, Calif. (408) 522-1200




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "53"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

It's Time For An Update



Project Updater by Time Line Solutions Corp. is a Windows 95
compatible client-server workgroup application that acts as
a storage vault for data within Time Line 6 (and higher) for
Windows and Microsoft Project 4. The Project Updater server
is designed to automate project updating and status reporting
in a multiuser environment with a team manager in control of
project updates and information. An updating section allows
users to track effort or costs for specific assignments and
communicates updates directly to the project manager's system.
E-mail can be sent directly to any user and attachments made
in various screen views can be included elsewhere.

Highlights:

 Project information resides in a database with other company
data to allow multiproject summary and detail reporting.

 A single interface with a calendar format displays each user's
assigned tasks.

 The transaction-based system stores user updates with time
phased history.

Available: Immediately

List Price: $9,995 for database server with three-user license

Vendor: Time Line Solutions Corp., Novato, Calif. (800) 222
TLSC




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "54"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

PentiumPower From A to Z-Note

By:
Wendy Sisselman

The Z-NOTE family of Pentium notebooks from Zenith Data Systems
includes a high-end Z-NOTE GT and a midrange Z-NOTE MX. The
Z-NOTE GT supports full-motion, full-screen video, Sound Blaster
compatible audio and an optional battery-powered MPEG video
playback card. It's configured with an 11.3-inch SVGA TFT display,
a 64-bit Mobile Pentium 75-MHz or 90-MHz processor, an 810
Mbyte or a 1.3-Gbyte EIDE hard disk drive and 8 Mbytes of RAM
that is expandable to 40 Mbytes. The product also features
PCI local bus architecture, 256-Kbyte secondary cache, 1-Mbyte
video DRAM and a built-in video graphics accelerator.

The Z-NOTE MX, also with Sound Blaster compatability, uses an
AccuPad control functioning as mouse and pointer and offers
an optional ReadyDesk port replicator to bridge stationary
office peripherals and the notebook.

Highlights:

 Z-NOTE GT's modular SmartBay design lets users drop in a second
hard drive, swap the CD-ROM drive for a 3.5-inch, 1.44-Mbyte
floppy drive, or use an optional NiMH or Li-Ion battery.

 Z-NOTE MX's integrated AC adaptor module is designed to swap
with the floppy disk drive module and can also be traded for
a second battery module or operated externally with the floppy
drive in place.

Available: Immediately, through authorized resellers

List Price: Starts at $3,999 for the Z-NOTE GT; $5,699 with
11.3-inch SVGA TFT display. The Z-NOTE MX starts at $2,799

Vendor: Zenith Data Systems, Buffalo Creek, Ill. (800) 533-0331,
www.zds.com




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "55"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

End Accounting Nightmares

By:
Wendy Sisselman

Visual AccountMate is a Windows 95/NT-based accounting and inventory
management software package written in Microsoft's 32-bit Visual
FoxPro 3.0. The System Manager controls system log on/off,
password setup and selection of companies, modules and functions.
General ledger, accounts payable/receivable, sales order, purchase
order and inventory control functions can be customized through
Express Icon hot buttons in the System Manager and accessed
at various remote locations based on network hookup. A built
in internal electronic mail system is designed to let many
users communicate without exiting the system. Various levels
of security protect AccountMate system access.

Highlights:

 The source code version lets users customize reports, screens
and colors; the developer version allows users to develop vertical
applications and link them to Visual AccountMate.

 The general ledger function lets users define up to 52 periods
of financial data and maintain years of data on file.

 Photo imaging capabilities store full color photographs of
employees and product inventory.

Available: Immediately, direct from vendor and authorized distributors

List Price: Starts at $995 for a compiled version; $1,295 for
the source code version; and $1,795 for the developer version.

Vendor: SourceMate Information Systems Inc., Mill Valley, Calif.
(415) 381-1011




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "56"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Dedicated to Network Faxing

By:
Wendy Sisselman

Castelle Inc.'s FaxPress NLM is a software-only, NetWare-loadable
module with client-server architecture that lets users send
and receive faxes without a dedicated file server. The software
runs independently of front-end operating systems, application
software and fax hardware, and supports ISDN boards, fax/modems
and intelligent fax boards. Faxes can be composed in Windows
or DOS with multilanguage text capability, and the server-based
fax processing returns full use of the workstation when fax
transmission is complete. Designed for networks of two to 50
users, FaxPress NLM is expandable up to 1,000 users (independent
of network size), 64 lines per server and 32 servers per LAN.
System requirements include NetWare 3.11 or higher and a 32
bit processor.

Highlights:

 Compatible with other file server-based communications products
including NetWare Connect.

 Modems do not need to be located on the main file server.

 System configurations can be changed without the server coming
down or software being reloaded.

Available: Immediately, through authorized distributors

List Price: $595 for a five-user version

Vendor: Castelle Inc., Santa Clara, Calif. (800) 289-7555




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "57"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

A WebScan a Day Keeps Viruses Away

By:
Wendy Sisselman

McAfee Associates Inc.'s WebScan antivirus software integrates
a full-featured browser and electronic mail package and uses
a two-step process that holds and scans downloaded files and
attachments prior to opening. This process detects traditional
and boot, file, multipartite, stealth, encrypted and polymorphic
macro viruses. Infected files are identified and destroyed
at the user's request. WebScan can be used with most Web browsers
based on the Mosaic browser engine and can scan Microsoft Word
DOC files and Zip, self-extracting EXE-, ARC- and ARJ-compressed
file formats.

Highlights:

 WebScan supports Windows 3.x, Windows 95 and Windows NT.

 E-mail module supports MIME-compliant file attachments and
has a built-in spelling check, address book supporting aliasing,
distribution lists and sorting.

 An automated installation routine allows users to choose an
Internet access account with CompuServe's Interserve division
or configure the product for use with any other Internet provider.

Available: Immediately through vendor and authorized distributors

List Price: $65

Vendor: McAfee Associates Inc., Santa Clara, Calif. (408) 988
3832, www.mcafee.com




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "58"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Fargo's Colorful New Persona

By:
Wendy Sisselman

Fargo Electronics Inc.'s Persona II ID card printer allows PC
or Mac users to print text, photo images, graphics, bar codes
and digital information in a range of 16.7 million colors at
300 dots per inch. A Windows print driver is included for PC
users with Windows-based imaging and printing software and
uses full-color and monochrome dye sublimation technology to
print on dual-side PVC or polyester synthetics. Print speed
ranges from 20 seconds to two minutes per card.

Highlights:

 An in-line print mechanism in one sweep laminates both sides
of the card with thermal transfer film (2-6 microns thick)
or polyester chip (1-2 mm thick) with a clear or holographic
type overlay.

 An optional magnetic stripe encoding module and smart card
encoder can encode or program IDs as part of the print process.

Available: Immediately, through authorized distributors

List Price: $6,995; the magnetic stripe and smart card encoding
options are priced at $495 each.

Vendor: Fargo Electronics Inc., Eden Prairie, Minn. (612) 941
 9470, www.fargo.com




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "59"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Comtrol Launches RocketPort

By:
Wendy Sisselman

The RocketPort PCI from Comtrol Corp. uses a PCI bus interface
and is designed to provide a 32-bit access path. Capable of
sustaining ISDN terminal adapters at bonded or compressed speeds,
users can tie into ISDN by joining an Internet service and
connecting an ISDN terminal adapter, such as an external modem,
to the RocketPort. Application-specific integrated circuits
(ASICs) are designed to optimize serial I/O functions by dedicating
one 36-MHz processor to every eight ports (from 8 to 128 ports)
while eliminating the need for the processor, bus interface
and other logic.

Highlights:

 The ASICs designate I/O as their sole task, focusing full processor
resources on handling and moving data at maximum speed.

 The unit is designed to support bi-directional communication
speeds up to 230.4 Kbytes/s (RS-232) or 460.8 Kbytes/s (Octable)
with little-to-no performance loss as more serial ports are
used or as RocketPort controller boards are added.

 For users of Pentium-platform processors, the RocketPort PCI
enables the use of the PCI slot.

Available: Immediately

List Price: $696 for the 8-port model; $886 for the 16-port
model

Vendor: Comtrol Corp., St. Paul, Minn. (612) 631-7654, www.comtrol.com




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "60"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

ATM Access Gets a Boost

By:
Wendy Sisselman

The CS600 ATM Access Concentrator from OnStream Networks delivers
structured T-1 circuit emulation, native LAN extention and
integrated Web-server capabilities. The product's T-1 interface
module can transfer structured T-1 data and voice traffic from
existing data service unit/channel service units, T-1 multiplexers
and PBXs, allowing users to establish individual Digital Signal
0 virtual connections to multiple user sites prior to aggregating
traffic for ATM WAN transport.

Highlights:

 Works across LAN/WAN environments while all six Ethernet interfaces
are in use.

 With the direct Ethernet 10Base-T interface module, users can
achieve 10-Mbyte/s Ethernet speeds and throughput across their
ATM WANs.

 A management module equipped with onboard SNMP capabilities
and OnStream Network's enterprise-specific Management Information
Base allows configuration, monitoring and performance management.

Available: Immediately, through vendor and authorized distributors

List Price: Starts at $15,450

Vendor: OnStream Networks Inc., Santa Clara, Calif. (408) 727
5151




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "61"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Look, No Driver

By:
Wendy Sisselman

Dynatex Inc.'s Regency SCSI controller is a plug-and-play mass
storage system designed to work without specified drivers.
It connects to any server with a SCSI Bus and supports RAID
levels 0, 1, 3, 4 and 5. It has a dual-host system that automatically
activates the secondary host in case of primary host failure.

Highlights:

 Compatibility with RISC 6000, HP 3000, Sun, Digital and Silicon
Graphics operating systems.

 Microprocessors deliver a transfer rate of 40 Mbytes and 3,000
I/Os per second.

Available: Immediately

List Price: $3,200

Vendor: Dynatex Inc., Lakewood, N.J. (908) 886-1400




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "62"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Up & Comer: Sky to Earth: You're Covered

By:
T.C. Doyle, Tom Farre and Richard March

Recognize this man? Think he looks a bit like a young Bill Gates?
Well, 24-year-old Sky Dayton is hoping, and his company, Internet
access provider EarthLink Network Inc., is making a run at
our hottest market. Based in Los Angeles and previously targeting
the Left Coast only, EarthLink now has 150 points of presence
for local access around the United States and is reportedly
growing 10 percent a week. Subscribers to Dayton's service
get a free Netscape browser and a free home page-not bad considering
monthly charges as low as $19.95 for unlimited access. Asked
for a quotable company mission statement, something like Gates'
"information at your fingertips," Dayton said, "The Internet
is the most incredible communication medium the world has ever
seen. EarthLink aims to be the dominant Internet access company."
A little wordy, but his heart's in the right place...




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "63"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

VARNews: Now, Let's Talk Profits



Why are these men smiling? The man in the middle, Michael Leavitt,
is the governor of Utah. And the men flanking him, Eugene Loveridge
(l) and Dan Masterson, were recently honored by Leavitt and
the Mountain West Venture Capital Group. Their company, Erudite
Software, a VAR in South Jordan, Utah, was just named the state's
fastest-growing company. In the past five years it has grown
from three to 120 employees, while sales rose an astounding
18,000 percent! Great job!




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "64"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Hot Stuff: The 'Universal Client'



It's not Oracle CEO Larry Ellison's $500 Internet box, but maybe
you could call it the enterprise version. The $995 Explora
from X-terminal manufacturer NCD Systems, Mountain View, Calif.,
does a lot of what a low-cost, small footprint PC replacement
should do. Running with NCD's WinCenter Pro multiuser NT software
on a Pentium server, the Explora promises Pentium-like performance
for graphical Windows apps at terminal prices. Plus, NCD's
strong Unix heritage gives the PowerPC-based Explora strong
credentials in the Internet and Unix applications arena. You
can add a floppy drive, CD-ROM and other peripherals to Explora,
which NCD calls the "universal client," but then you're moving
closer to the PCs it could be replacing, so what's the point?




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "65"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Riding the CTI Technology Explosion -- Maturing, standards-driven
technology sets off a computer telephony boom

By:
Peter Jordan

Howard Lubert almost salivates when he thinks about the numbers:
"Ten million companies in the United States have phone systems,"
says the Philadelphia-area VAR. "The revenue opportunity for
CTI [computer telephone integration] is an even bigger opportunity
than the LAN market back in the '80s, when we started doing
networks." With 1.7 million servers in the United States, Lubert
notes, there are already 1.7 million prospects for CTI, and
the rest of the 10 million could be prospects for both.

"I just can't think of any other market that has this revenue
potential for VARs," adds Lubert, president of HEL Inc., a
systems integration business specializing in turnkey LANs and
network connectivity services.

Recently certified as a CTI engineer, Lubert is spreading the
good news about the huge market potential wherever he can.
As national education chairman of the Business Technology Association,
Kansas City, Mo., he has even prepared two half-day videotapes
on the business of CTI and on implementing CTI.

One VAR he doesn't have to convince is David Condra, president
of Nashville, Tenn.'s Dalcon Computers.

"If you're a solution provider in almost any industry, you're
going to bump into a telephone," says Condra. "We don't see
CTI as an option. It's just a matter of a right opportunity."
Like many VARs, Condra is still waiting to jump in, but he's
keeping his eyes open for the right chance and may consider
partnering with a vendor to get into the market.

Market researchers bear out the optimism of VARs like Lubert
and Condra. "The components needed to fuel exciting CTI growth
are finally in place," says Gary L. Andresen, an analyst at
Dataquest Inc., San Jose, Calif. Andresen expects the total
U.S. market for CTI to grow from $1.48 billion in 1995 to $7.91
billion in 1999, an annual rate of about 50 percent.

An exclusive CRN/VARBusiness survey of 300 managers in midsize
companies in a mix of industries confirms CTI's promise. Though
only 9.3 percent are already invested in CTI technology, 49
applications percent more plan to invest over the next two
years. Although fax solutions like fax broadcast and fax on
demand are the most popular computer telephony today, the technology
for far more complex CTI solutions has ripened.

CTI Saves Time and Money

Computer telephone integration is just what the name suggests
technology integrating the two most important information systems
of most businesses: telephone systems and computers. It ranges
from a stand-alone desktop system enabling a user to dial by
clicking on an on-screen phone number, to voice-processing
subsystems that automate customer service, to complex call
center operations integrating the functions of a client/server
network and a multiline PBX switch.

Anyone who does a lot of business over the telephone is a potential
CTI customer. The most obvious competitive benefit of CTI is
that it saves time-and time, as the clich says, is money.

If you simply click on a name or number rather than dial it,
you save several seconds-especially if a sequence of long-distance
carrier-access and credit-card numbers is involved.

"When I'm dialing from my home office, I use my Sprint card,"
says Buz Brooks, director of CTI for Norstan Integration Services,
a $300 million VAR in Maple Grove, Minn., that started as a
telephone interconnect company but has evolved into systems
integration. "It takes 30-some-odd digits to do it manually,
but if I'm using my desktop PC and ACT! [contact management
software], I bring up the name, hit alternative access, click,
and it's dialing."

Users can save a lot more time with inbound calls, especially
if their computer tells who's calling them and retrieves the
caller's record before they even answer the phone.

How much time and money a business can save depends on the kind
of calls it handles. "If you take a lot of short calls, and
CTI saves you 15 percent on a 1-minute call, that's a big savings,
especially if you have 800 lines," Brooks says. "But saving
15 seconds on a 40-minute call obviously isn't a big percentage."

Far more important than the cost of the 800 service, of course,
is the cost of an employee's time. If you can help a registered
nurse handling insurance inquiries to work 25 percent more
efficiently, you've created a major reason to install a CTI
system.

Servicing the Customer

Beyond the efficiency improvements CTI enables are the re-engineering
possibilities of tying a phone system to a computer system.
CTI enables phone-intensive businesses to give customers individual
attention and boost employee productivity.

Brooks is working with a customer that has a wide mix of clientele,
from elderly to quite young. Callers can set up their accounts
so they do all their business automatically with an interactive
voice response (IVR) system, or so that they always talk to
a customer-service representative (CSR), as is generally preferred
by older customers.

Caller ID or Automatic Number Identification (ANI) can be an
important part of a CTI system that handles inbound calls,
letting the computer system identify a caller and retrieve
his or her record before the phone is even answered. Caller
ID is an embedded analog signal available from the local phone
company that arrives between the first and second ring, whereas
ANI arrives on a separate digital channel with 800 service
and some other long-distance calls.

"If you get a hit on the caller ID or ANI, you go to the computer
and say, 'Here's Jane Doe's record. What's our strategy for
Jane Doe?' You can get down to individual marketing," Brooks
explains.

"The customer-contact strategy might be that if I call on the
800 line for delivery information, I might want to be sent
to a voice response system, where I can key in a number and
get an instant status report," says Brooks.

When CTI systems can do such intelligent routing, sales and
marketing executives tend to get excited.

The time is ripe for VARs and integrators to get into telephony.
For starters, standards are emerging-including TAPI for the
desktop, TSAPI for the LAN, and SCSA for multivendor hardware
software integration. And the once-proprietary world of PBX
switches is opening up, in a development similar to what happened
to mainframe computer vendors when they were forced to move
to open systems.

Change Is Coming

"Proprietary technologies have provided a measure of security
and safeguards to the vendors in that industry," says Mike
Munsch, executive vice president of R.W. Bennett Corp., a VAR
in Raleigh, N.C. "They felt that as long as they had proprietary
technology, they didn't have to be price-competitive, but change
is going to happen."

"This technology has been in use for quite a while, but it's
been very convoluted," explains Chuck Smith, executive vice
president of Dialogic Communications Corp. of Franklin, Tenn.,
a VAR specializing in voice processing systems. "Now our computer
can talk directly to the computer inside the PBX. This makes
things much more efficient, and manufacturers are making prices
much more reasonable."

Beyond the emerging plug-and-play TAPI products for the individual
desktop, CTI is an attractive VAR opportunity because it usually
involves consultative selling and long-term relationships.
Many CTI solutions are scalable, enabling a VAR to start out
providing a customer with a CTI solution for a single telephone
intensive department, then move out into the corporation and
implement CTI on virtually every desktop that has a workstation
and a telephone.

"An installation can be from as small as a half-dozen agents
on up to thousands," says Ron Charnock, president and CEO of
NPRI Inc. of Fairfax, Va., a call-center solution provider
that has been doing CTI installations since 1986. "The technology
is very scalable today, but that wasn't the case five or six
years ago. It's a good time for people to get into CTI, because
the initial market education has been done, and stable products
are out there."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "66"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

The Customer for Computer Telephony - The profile is broad,
since telephon productivity is mission-control for most businesses

By:
Peter Jordan

Early CTI adopters were companies like airlines, with massive
call-center operations based on mainframes and proprietary
links to PBX switches. Today, though, since the technology
is becoming more affordable and scalable, thousands of potential
customers exist.

Even though only 9.3 percent of the users surveyed by CRN/VARBusiness
research are already invested in CTI, a large majority consider
CTI's desktop productivity features useful. More than 80 percent
consider fax functions useful, while 75 percent would enjoy
integrated messaging-the ability to access phone, voice-mail
and fax messages from a PC.

More than half say retrieving E-mail by phone, sending E-mail
to remote locations, and using graphical software to operate
their phones would be useful.

On the networked CTI side, most managers consider a variety
of computer telephony functions very useful in improving customer
service- things like automatic faxing after phone conversations,
screen pops of all customer records as a call comes in, and
the ability to gather information from customers while they
are on hold. More than a third of managers believe the ability
to record personalized greetings for customers would be very
useful, as would the ability to record customer service or
sales conversations.

As promising as this sounds, there is no single market for CTI,
according to VARs who have been selling it. CTI is a land of
a thousand niches, says Ron Charnock of solution provider NPRI
Inc., Fairfax, Va.

"There's not going to be just one CTI market," he says. "It's
a thousand niches defined by the specific solution you bring."
The more mission-critical a company's telephone activity is,
the more value the user can realize from CTI.

The most obvious target, explains Charnock, is the typical call
center operation, such as QVC Home Shopping Network or the
call centers of Louisville, Ky.-based health-care giant Humana,
which have about 600 or 700 employees handling customer service.

Charnock's firm did the Humana installation. "They handle HMO
work, customer service, and new subscribers, so they're back
ending a lot of the 800-number activity they do for advertising,
setting appointments for their field people, and doing a variety
of different things for their customer service centers," he
says.

For most call centers, CTI technology is now a must-have item.
Ripe targets include financial services and telecommunications
providers. "It's at the point where people in almost any midsize
company recognize the concept and understand the value proposition,"
says Charnock.

The debt collection agency of France-based COFIDIS-the financial
subsidiary of 3 Suisses International, a leading French mail
order company-has 100 agents averaging 5,000 outbound calls
a day. Using predictive dialing technology, the system launches
calls and monitors their progress so only the connected calls
are routed to the CSRs.

As soon as the system gets a "hit," it pops the client's account
on the CSR's screen and connects the phone call. Gone are the
days when CSRs wasted their time on manual dialing, no answers,
disconnected phones and answering machines.

A pay-per-view cable-TV supplier is an obvious target for CTI,
says Bart Stanco, vice president of the Gartner Group market
research firm, Stamford, Conn. "A customer calls to order a
pay-per-view heavyweight fight. We automatically check your
balance, and if you're overdue, we transfer you to accounts
payable instead," he says.

Chuck Smith, executive vice president of Dialogic Communications
Corp., Franklin, Tenn., says his company installs systems in
nuclear power plants that automatically dial employees and
emergency personnel in the event of an emergency, then screen
inbound calls so harried managers can know whether someone
important is calling in the midst of the emergency.

In the classic John Naisbitt phrase, CTI technology allows a
"high tech, high touch" approach that uses automation to treat
customers individually. An airline might move a million- mile
frequent flier ahead in the phone queue past someone whose
only contact with the airline has been a $59 super-saver ticket,
Stanco suggests.

In environments like help desks, customers who call back a few
minutes after a previous call should probably be automatically
routed to the technician they talked with before, because they
probably have additional questions about the same problem.
CTI would enable such routing.

Almost all catalog houses route customers differently based
on age, says Stanco, automatically sending over-40 customers
to live CSRs and the under-40 crowd to an IVR system.

ANI and caller ID are of most use today in a home-to-business
environment like QVC rather than business to business. In most
cases, when someone calls from a large business PBX, ANI cannot
identify the individual caller and may not even be able to
identify the business.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "67"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

The High-Tech Way to "Hold the Anchovie

By:
Peter Jordan

When you call a Domino's store and order a pizza, the employee
may ask your name and address, but in most cases, it's already
on a computer screen. Between the first and second rings, an
interface unit detects an embedded analog caller ID signal
and feeds it into a 486 PC. Using your phone number as its
primary key, the database in the 486 retrieves your record
and pops it onto the screen before the order taker can even
say, "Domino's Pizza. Can you hold?"

It doesn't take a genius to figure out the value of automating
the retrieval of that kind of information and placing it in
front of employees before they answer the call. For starters,
in addition to saving time, you've got a lot better chance
of getting that sausage pizza topped with peppers and mushrooms
to the right door if the driver is reading from a clearly legible
printout rather than a hand-scribbled or manually typed order
sheet.

"It cuts way down on mistakes like typing errors," says Tim
Monteith, vice president, information services, at Domino's
corporate headquarters in Ann Arbor, Mich. "But it also allows
us to store special instructions like 'Go to the side door
and honk,'" Monteith says.

"It also helps in situations like high school kids ordering
10 anchovy pizzas delivered to their principal and giving me
an address different from what's on the screen," Monteith adds.

Beginning in 1993 and finishing last year, Domino's installed
the system in all 700 corporate-owned stores. Many of its 3,500
independently owned franchises also use the system.

"The new system saves time, increases accuracy and allows much
more complete management information," says Monteith. "It's
a lot easier to train new employees, and the calculations are
done correctly, including taxes."

Because the system stores a customer's previous orders, "We
get some college kids who think it's cool to simply say 'the
usual' and hang up," Monteith chuckles. "But we're not supposed
to do it that way."

Although employees could actually greet customers by name before
they identify themselves, Monteith says it would appear "invasive"
to do so, so employees are instructed to ask who you are when
you call, even though they already know.

While the order-taking system is the most visible aspect of
the automation of a Domino's store, "Many other things are
happening behind the scenes," says Monteith. "The system is
calculating the time it takes to make the pizza, it's serving
as a time clock for employees, it's running the payroll, it's
tracking food costs, and it's transmitting all that information
to the home office."

Your neighborhood pizza parlor may seem an unlikely location
for state-of-the-art automation, but Domino's has figured out
how to use computer telephone integration and a plain old point
of-sale system running on a 486 PC with multiple terminals
to achieve the kind of MIS controls and efficiencies much larger
operations are still dreaming about.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "68"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

How to Make The Computer Telephony Sale -- VARs who have been
there suggest finding a champion and layering solutions from
the desktop

By:
Peter Jordan

Despite the obvious theoretical advantages of CTI for most telephone
intensive businesses, it's still not an easy sale.

As with any new technology, VARs face potential end-user skepticism
 89 percent of the users queried in the CRN/VARBusiness survey
said high reliability was a very important technical attribute,
meaning the first challenge is to convince customers the technology
will work as promised.

Customers also want to be sure any CTI installation is upgradable,
uses industry standards, requires low maintenance, is expandable,
and is compatible with existing telephone systems. If this
seems like a tall order, one bright spot is that less than
half of users expect a CTI solution to use components from
leading vendors. In other words, VARs can resell products from
new and emerging companies, so long as they meet other customer
requirements.

When NPRI Inc., Fairfax, Va., made its first CTI sale to health
care giant Humana, Louisville, Ky., the telecommunications
staff did not believe the system really worked, says NPRI president
and CEO Ron Charnock. "They literally traced the cables between
the computers and the telephone system," he recalls. "A person
with 30 years of telecommunications experience didn't believe
you could hook up a computer and a phone."

St. Louis Novell integrator Bill Barry of MJB Associates, just
now getting into networked CTI, says his first step is to install
a system in his own business and work out the bugs. "You've
absolutely got to do this," he says. "I don't know anything
in this business where you can fake your way through it."

Once he gets an in-house system up and running, it will be a
starting point for sales demonstrations to potential customers.

The fact that users in the CRN/ VARBusiness survey also place
a high value on user friendliness and on excellent support
and maintenance is further indication that they want a lot
of hand-holding as they move into the unexplored territory
of CTI.

Another obstacle to a CTI sale is that it requires bridging
a major gap between two separate technological cultures, telephony
and MIS.

The consensus seems to be that misunderstandings are rampant
between computer and telephony user cultures, and that VARs
need the skills of a multilingual diplomat to go between them.
Take a term like "terminal equipment." To a computer professional,
that means a screen and a keyboard, but to a telephone expert
it's anything that plugs into the public network. "If you plug
the world's biggest supercomputer into the network, it's just
a terminal to the phone guy," says one industry watcher.

The term "reliability" is another chance for misunderstanding
 While the computer side might brag about 99 percent availability,
a telephone pro whose system was up only 99 percent of the
time would get fired very quickly.

"I don't see it as 'us against them,'" says Susan Mills, principal
of Technology Marketing Partners, a CTI consultancy in Berkeley,
Calif. "The one who has the advantage is the one who can most
completely satisfy the needs of the customer and think broadest
and most long-term about those needs. I don't see a technology
bias driving that: I see that as a business-practices bias."

But the gap isn't just cultural; it can be technological as
well. Gartner Group research finds that systems-management
complexity and costs increase 9 to 28 percent with a CTI installation.
"The problem centers around a dual database for configuration,
administration, and management," says Bart Stanco, vice presi
 dent at Gartner.

To help bridge the gap between the two cultures and technologies,
computer VARs and integrators that are serious about making
a major play for the CTI market should consider either hiring
telephony expertise or partnering with firms with mastery of
the field.

Randall Bennett of R.W. Bennett Co., Raleigh, N.C., recruited
Mike Munsch, who used to own a telephone interconnect company
and serves on the board of the North American Telecommunications
Association, to add telephony expertise to his traditional
Novell Platinum business.

Bennett's first CTI sale was automation of a support center
for a company that does independent software support for Fortune
500 companies. The major reason the sale went through was that
R.W. Bennett teamed with the local AT&T office to develop the
solution.

"At this point, no one can go in and offer an all-encompassing
solution," Munsch says. "Companies need to learn how to partner.
In the computer industry, VARs have done that for a long time,
but I know from personal experience that the telecommunications
industry never has done that. Not only did they not partner,
but they saw everyone as competitors."

But the alternatives for AT&T with the Raleigh help desk operation
were either partnering or no sale, says Bennett: "We were talking
about a half-million-dollar system. The local rep wanted the
sale. It worked great-both of us got business we wouldn't have
gotten."

MJB's Barry suggests two groups of customers are particularly
ripe for a CTI sale: Customers who still have no voice-mail
system at all, so they'll soon be making a major investment
in telephone equipment, and customers "who are so annoyed at
their interconnect provider they want to throw their whole
phone system out."

Return on investment in a call-center operation is relatively
easy to demonstrate: It's obvious, for example, that if a screen
of information reaches CSRs at the same time as a call, CSRs
will be able to process significantly more calls than if they
have to first figure out who's calling and then manually retrieve
a record.

Demonstrating such ROI is important to making the CTI sale:
More than 60 percent of users expect a fast payback on CTI,
according to CRN/VARBusiness research.

Find Your Champion

But with management and knowledge workers, the benefits of CTI
can be more subtle, requiring a long sales cycle and a thorough
understanding of the way the user does business.

"In my mind, you should sell to the person in the organization
who's going to use it," says Munsch, who for years went to
the MIS or telecommunications department and sold them what
they thought they needed. But the problem with CTI, he says,
is that it's not an essential service and it's not universal.
It benefits only a certain portion of the company.

"The guy in the warehouse doesn't need it," Munsch says, "so
you're going to have to sell it to the manager of the department
that will use it, and that manager has to feel so strongly
that it's going to benefit their department that they're willing
to champion it, go to the telecommunications manager and MIS
manager, and say, 'I need you guys to work together.' You have
to involve people who will be the champions."

CRN/VARBusiness research suggests that one way to find your
champions is to convince them of your excellent customer support
 More than 80 percent of users expect that from a CTI supplier.
A majority also need you to understand their business model,
and to offer local support and the ability to customize the
system you sell. Only 16 percent demand a supplier they have
worked with before, indicating opportunities for VARs reaching
out to new CTI customers.

Overcoming technological inertia is a problem, though, since
telecommunications managers typically like the status quo.

Begin with the user, not the technology center, advises consultant
Mills. "The whole point is to become a strategic ally with
end users." A CTI implementation will become an expensive boondoggle
if you don't have buy-in from whomever will actually benefit
from the technology right from the beginning.

The Layered Look

One way to create an appetite for a full-blown, network-based
CTI solution is to try to get customers to use simple plug
and-play desktop solutions like autodialing, suggests Buz Brooks
of Norstan Integration Services, Maple Grove, Minn. "It's important
to get something up and running quickly that people can use,"
he says. "Then it's kind of like an onion skin. You start layering
more capabilities."

The next step might be software that lets users control all
communications functions from a single graphical interface.
Integrated messaging, where the screen shows all voice, fax
and E-mail messages on a single screen, allows the users to
choose which ones to read first.

Also possible are several types of fax and voice processing
systems, which either improve customer service or increase
employee productivity by automating information and account
functions when customers or suppliers call in.

A full-blown CTI implementation is a consultative solution sale
that often involves business re-engineering, warns the Gartner
Group's Stanco. "It's not all plug-and-play. It's more like
build-and-sweat," he says. But the payoffs in value-added sales
and long-term customer relationships will be worth the sweat
for VARs who build their way into the explosive CTI market
at the right time, with the right resources and the right partners.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "69"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec08.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1

Personalized Marketing for Every Customer

By:
Peter Jordan

Computer telephone integration (CTI) allows businesses to micro
market to each individual customer, says Barnett Bezme, director
of sales and marketing for New York-based Amarex Technology
Inc., which has been integrating midsize to large call centers
for the past 10 years.

With a typical Amarex customer like New York's Chemical Bank,
Amarex's first sale is an interactive voice response (IVR)
system, the application that allows customers to punch numbers
on a phone in response to a recorded menu tree to find out
such information as their account balance.

"At Chemical Bank, 80 percent of the calls go through an IVR
system, and the customers are totally satisfied," Bezme says.
"The other 20 percent go to an agent."

The installation of an IVR system for an end user like Chemical
Bank "is a no-brainer in terms of return on investment," says
Bezme. "When you can handle 80 percent of 3 million calls a
month without human intervention, it will pay back within a
month."

Once he installs an IVR system, Bezme is in a prime position
to get the end user to consider CTI for the calls the automated
attendant can't handle. It's when you add the CTI on top of
IVR that you begin to realize the micro-marketing potential
of a marriage between the phone system and the customer database,
Bezme explains. Once the system identifies a customer-either
through caller ID or an identification number-you can send
a picture of the customer's relationship with the bank to the
agent.

The system does a security check, then puts a history of the
call on the customer service representative's screen.

Once you match an inbound call to a customer record, "a lot
of sophistication is possible," Bezme points out. "If you're
Spanish-speaking, I might have a key on the host database record
routing you to a Spanish-speaking representative, or you might
be a Gold Card member."

The best kind of customer for CTI-based micro-marketing is a
repeat customer, says Bezme. Every time the customer contacts
your business, you can build more details into the record.

Although Amarex works at the implementation level rather than
the strategic level, the technology enables business re-engineering,
so Amarex often partners with SHL System House, a nationwide
systems integrator.

Reference selling is important within each vertical, says Bezme:
A bank wants to see an IVR system working in another bank,
even though it may be the same technology an insurance company's
customer service department uses.

His advice for VARs entering the CTI marketplace? "Find a partner
and go slow. When you go into a mainframe, it's a lot more
complicated than it looks, and when you talk to a switch, every
switch has a different protocol."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B34-3</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B028-342</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec29.html 205.156.212.5 19970114225352 text/html 476619
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:49:46 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:43 GMT
Content-length: 476431
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ec29.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. <BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>ANALYSIS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Start: Okay, okay. Lemme don my asbestos underwear and explain myself.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(742 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>LETTERS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>Letters: Does Microsoft Play Monopoly?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(297 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Letters: Designer Windows</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(245 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Letters: The Exon Word Spill</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(249 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Letters: Long Live the Floppy</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(123 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Letters: This Headline..er, Stinks</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(87 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Letters: A Key Concern</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(94 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Letters: Correction</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(50 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>We want to hear from you! Please send your letter and phone</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(40 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWSTRENDS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>Newstrends: DirectX APIs Mean Business</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(282 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>Newstrends: Another Crack at the Hand-Held Market</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(177 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>Newstrends: Micro Multimedia</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(198 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>Newstrends: A CD-R In Every Home?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(117 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>Newstrends: And Now, It's the Virtual Teller</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(310 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>Newstrends: Inside the Corporate Web</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(272 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>Newstrends: A Taxing Situation</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(222 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>Windows Top Ten: Windows' Top Ten Software</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(82 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>Recap</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(285 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>Newstrends: Smart Warning</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(85 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>Newstrends: No Applications Here</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(74 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>Newstrends: Money: Good News and Bad</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(64 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>Newstrends: Alliances Online</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(100 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>Technology Watch: And the Oscar Goes to ... Trinity</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(232 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>Technology Watch: Acrobat: Gunning for HTML</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(119 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>Technology Watch: Dialing Up Savings</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(165 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>Notes From The Lab: From Winmag Central -- We Could Use a Utility</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(246 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>Notes From The Lab: Netwotking Nuggets</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(142 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>Notes From The Lab: Update -- Monitoring Cuts</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(108 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>Notes From The Lab: Heads Up</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(240 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>WINTIPS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>WinTips: Win95 Tips of the Month</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(698 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ANALYSIS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>Explorer: Why are mighty banks afraid of little software companies?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1099 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>ReadMe File: Coming Soon to a computer screen near you: MPEG</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1114 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>Windows at Work: Quit smoking. Lose weight. Give to charity. Sound familiar?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1099 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ANAALYSIS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#34"><A HREF = "#34"><LI>Dialog box: I'm sitting at my Mac, pondering the most overhyped product&nbsp;in history.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1126 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEW PRODUCTS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#35"><LI>Multimedia: A Rich Mixture of Sight and Sound</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(705 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#36"><LI>In Brief: Notebook Computers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(70 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#37"><LI>In Brief: Desktop Projectors</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(56 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#38"><LI>In Brief: Speakers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(70 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#39"><LI>In Brief: Personal Organizers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(74 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#40"><LI>Digital Input: HP OmniGo 100 -- Hold a World of Info in Your Hands</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(201 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#41"><A HREF = "#41"><LI>Digital Input: TV One DeltaScan and TV One DeltaScan-PRO -- Images Go from&nbsp;PC to TV</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(129 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#42"><LI>Digital Input: Connectix QuickCam -- Plug and Picture</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(82 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#43"><LI>In Brief: Videoconferencing</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(70 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#44"><LI>In Brief: Tape Backup</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(84 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#45"><LI>In Brief: Fax Modems</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(62 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#46"><LI>Notebook Computers: AST Ascentia 950N/90 -- Speed and Video to Go</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(148 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#47"><LI>Notebook Computers: Kiwi OpenNote -- A Kiwi That Can Take Flight</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(161 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#48"><LI>Notebook Computers: Epson ActionNote 890 Series -- Take Action Notebooks</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(97 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#49"><LI>In Brief: Notebooks</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(193 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#50"><LI>Internet Access: Instant Internet 3.0 -- Fast and Wide Connections</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(134 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#51"><LI>Internet Access: CyberJunction -- NT: A New Internet Frontier</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(107 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#52"><LI>Internet Access: iCAT Electronic Commerce -- Purr-fect Catalogs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(69 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#53"><LI>In Brief: Internet</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(210 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#54"><LI>Database: Prospero -- Safety Through a Tempest of Apps</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(134 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#55"><LI>Database: BMDP/Diamond -- Color Your Statistical World</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(121 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#56"><LI>Database: Optimas Library -- When Image Is Everything</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(66 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#57"><LI>In Brief: E-Mail</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(53 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#58"><LI>In Brief: Help Authoring</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(168 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#59"><LI>Graphics: Gryphon Batch It -- Convert a New Batch of Images</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(144 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#60"><LI>Graphics: SolidWorks 95 -- Solid Work for a CAD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(123 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#61"><LI>Graphics: Instant 3D for Windows 95 -- Eye-Popping Words</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(79 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#62"><LI>In Brief: Imaging/Graphics</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(223 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#63"><LI>Business Software: Visual AccountMate -- Hold Win95 and NT Accountable</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(150 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#64"><LI>Business Software: Crush -- Crush the Competition or Crash</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(144 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#65"><LI>Business Software: WinMerge 2.1 -- Point-and-Shoot Merging</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(91 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#66"><LI>In Brief: Bar Coding</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(181 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#67"><LI>Input Devices: Mitsumi Wireless Mouse -- Let Your Mouse Run Free</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(152 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#68"><LI>Input Devices: Interlink DeskStick -- Joystick Makes Its Point</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(123 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#69"><LI>Input Devices: P.I. Engineering WhyKeyKey -- WhyKeyKey? Why Not?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(80 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#70"><LI>In Brief: Input Devices</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(181 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#71"><A HREF = "#71"><LI>Mapping Software: Maps and Data for Microsoft Office 95 -- See the World from&nbsp;Your Desktop</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(122 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#72"><LI>Mapping Software: FirstMap -- Map a Smart Business Course</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(116 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#73"><LI>Mapping Software: Select Street Atlas -- Become Streetwise</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(91 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#74"><LI>In Brief: Utilities</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(189 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#75"><LI>Networking: Rumba Office 95/NT -- Keep Your Network Data in Step</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(136 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#76"><A HREF = "#76"><LI>Networking: Remote Access -- FMI PC Card family -- This Deck's Stacked with&nbsp;Cards</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(98 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#77"><LI>Networking: Remote Access -- Eicon Diva -- Make Beautiful Music</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(77 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#78"><LI>In Brief: UPS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(205 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#79"><LI>Programming: StarTeam -- Get Your Project Together</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(155 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#80"><LI>Programming: Wise Installation System 4.0 -- Use Self-Installing Executables</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(128 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#81"><LI>Programming: VanGui -- An Original VanGui</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(82 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#82"><LI>In Brief: Programming</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(171 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>WINLAB FIRST IMPRESSIONS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#83"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: Paradox 7 -- Easy Way from Data Maze to Database</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(951 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#84"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: Toshiba Tecra 700CT -- 120MHz Book's a Burner</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(738 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#85"><A HREF = "#85"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: Harvard Graphics 4.0 for Windows 95 -- &nbsp;Smooth Delivery for Your Pitch</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(630 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#86"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: NEC Versa 4000C and 4050C -- The Complete Notebook</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(758 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#87"><A HREF = "#87"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: NEC PowerMate P133 and Ready 9542 -- &nbsp;Twin Towers for Home, Office</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(759 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#88"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: FileMaker Pro 3.0 -- Old Friend with New Relations</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(667 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#89"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: Windows Draw 4.0 -- Palatable Price for Paint App</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(660 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#90"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: CA-SuperProject 4.0 -- The Best Laid Plans</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(640 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#91"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: voysAccess for Visual Basic -- Dialing for Data</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(595 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#92"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: ClarisDraw 1.0 -- Drawing on Mac App-titude</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(695 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#93"><A HREF = "#93"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: Dabbler 2 and Wacom ArtZ II Tablet -- &nbsp;Take One Tablet and Paint</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(674 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#94"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: miroConnect 34 wave -- New Board Surfs Comm Waters</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(318 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#95"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: CleanSweep 95 -- Snappier App Zapper</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(427 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#96"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: d-Time 95 -- Cache In for a Speedy CD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(269 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#97"><A HREF = "#97"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: Art-Scan Professional 3.95 -- Scant Effort for &nbsp;Swift Scans</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(339 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#98"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: Canon BJC-210 -- Bubbling with Color</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(240 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#99"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: PaperMaster 2.0 -- Master the Paper Monster</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(375 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#100"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: askSam 3.0 -- Play It Again, Sam</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(239 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#101"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: MyAdvancedBrochures 95 -- Biz Docs Made Simple</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(361 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#102"><A HREF = "#102"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: Sejin Wireless Keyboard Model SPR-8630WP -- &nbsp;Look, Ma, No Wires</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(234 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#103"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: First Aid 95 -- Snafu Sniffer Suggests Solutions</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(389 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#104"><A HREF = "#104"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: Hewlett-Packard LaserJet 5Si MX -- &nbsp;Workhorse Laser for Workgroup Printing</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(256 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#105"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: PowerDesk 1.0 -- Roll Your Own Desktop</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(356 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#106"><A HREF = "#106"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: Dr. Solomon's Anti-Virus Toolkit for Windows 95 -- &nbsp;This Doctor Makes House Calls</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(284 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#107"><A HREF = "#107"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: Mosaic in a Box for Windows 95 -- &nbsp;Sleek Intro to the Net Set</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(251 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#108"><A HREF = "#108"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: Virtus WalkThrough 2.5 -- &nbsp;The Shape of Things to Come </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(366 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#109"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: EasyPhoto 2.0 -- Dress Up Docs with Digital Pics</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(203 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#110"><A HREF = "#110"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: ArtMedia Monitors TC1864 and TG1882 -- &nbsp;Practically Perfect Pictures</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(345 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#111"><A HREF = "#111"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: AcerNote Light -- Bantamweight Book &nbsp;Won't Break Your Budget</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(254 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#112"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: Visioneer PaperPort Vx -- Port in a Paper Storm</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(376 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#113"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: Sharp PC-8800 -- Easy on the Eyes (and Ears)</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(259 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#114"><A HREF = "#114"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: Texas Instruments Extensa 455T -- &nbsp;Book Brings Value, Saves Bucks</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(373 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#115"><A HREF = "#115"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: Apple Color LaserWriter 12/600 PS -- &nbsp;Appetizing Apple Offers Crisp, Colorful Pages</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(263 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#116"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: AppleVision 1710AV -- Multimedia MacMonitor</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(244 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#117"><A HREF = "#117"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: Robotech Cobra XLT P133 Multimedia System -- &nbsp;Jazzy 133 for After-5 Fun</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(373 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#118"><A HREF = "#118"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: Packard Bell Multimedia Corner Computer -- &nbsp;Angular PC Is a Niche Product</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(263 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#119"><A HREF = "#119"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: Zenith Z-Station GT 590MM -- Lots of Vroom, &nbsp;Little Room</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(363 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#120"><LI>Winlab First Impressions: Maximus P-133 -- Mini Tower of Power</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(262 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#121"><LI>Connectivity: Collabra Share 2.0 -- Enterprise Wise</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(629 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#122"><LI>Connectivity: OnTime Enterprise for NetWare 3.0 -- Well-Appointed Scheduler</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(634 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FEATURES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#123"><A HREF = "#123"><A HREF = "#123"><LI>Cover Story: The Worst and Best of Win95 -- You've read interviews, &nbsp;experimented with previews and seen a million overviews. Now you're ready&nbsp;to use Windows 95 in the real world. And we're here to help you. </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(123 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#124"><A HREF = "#124"><A HREF = "#124"><LI>Cover Story: Eight Ways to Work in Windows 95 -- After studying the work&nbsp;habits of dozens of Win95 users, we identified eight basic&nbsp;PC personalities. Which best suits your computing style?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(4675 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#125"><A HREF = "#125"><LI>Cover Story: Lock Your Windows -- Here's how to plug seven common Windows&nbsp;security holes.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1027 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#126"><A HREF = "#126"><A HREF = "#126"><LI>Cover Story: The Win95 Top 10 List -- Explorer, folders, drag and drop: Here's&nbsp;a list of our 10 favorite Windows 95 features, and tips on&nbsp;how to take advantage of them.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(795 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#127"><A HREF = "#127"><A HREF = "#127"><A HREF = "#127"><LI>Cover Story: The Win95 Bottom 10 List -- Nothing is perfect, and that includes&nbsp;Windows 95. So, we compiled a Bottom 10 List as a counterpoint&nbsp;to our Top 10 List. But instead of just griping, we came up&nbsp;with a few solutions that you can work into Win95 on your own.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1089 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#128"><LI>Cover Story: In a Word, "Wow!"</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(380 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#129"><A HREF = "#129"><LI>Kill Your Fax Machine -- Dump the office fax machine for the&nbsp;superior combination of your fax modem and Microsoft Exchange.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1992 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#130"><LI>The Right Way to Set Up Microsoft's Fax</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(435 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#131"><LI>The Fax on the Competition</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(653 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#132"><LI>Features We'd Like to See</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(208 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PULLOUT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#133"><LI>How To Buy a ... Pointing Device</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(452 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#134"><LI>Tracking Input Trends</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(234 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>WINLAB PRODUCT COMPARISONS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#135"><A HREF = "#135"><LI>Winlab Product Comparisons: The Sound & the Fury: Multimedia Upgrades -- &nbsp;Is Installation Easier with Win95? It Can Be-If You Get the Right Hardware</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(560 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#136"><LI>Winlab Product Comparisons: Aztech Labs Stellar 6X</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(349 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#137"><LI>Winlab Product Comparisons: Creative Labs Sound Blaster Discovery CD 4x</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(395 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#138"><LI>Winlab Product Comparisons: Creative Labs Sound Blaster Performance 4x</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(370 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#139"><LI>Winlab Product Comparisons: Diamond Multimedia Kit 4400</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(346 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#140"><LI>Winlab Product Comparisons: Kiss Technology Super Edition</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(382 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#141"><LI>Winlab Product Comparisons: Reveal Quad Elite XL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(399 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#142"><LI>Winlab Product Comparisons: Reveal Quad Ultra</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(523 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#143"><LI>Winlab Product Comparisons: Speed Demon -- Fast is great, but easy is better.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(376 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#144"><A HREF = "#144"><LI>Winlab Product Comparisons: Installation Tips -- First, you have to &nbsp;make it work.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(646 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#145"><A HREF = "#145"><LI>How We Tested: The Multimedia Microscope -- It's a question of installation&nbsp;ease, sound quality and drive speed.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(415 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#146"><LI>Report Card: Recommendations</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(183 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#147"><A HREF = "#147"><LI>Winlab Product Comparisons: A Gaggle of Gigs That Won't Break the Bank -- Add &nbsp;Big Storage for Only a Few Bucks</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(483 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#148"><LI>Winlab Product Comparisons: Fujitsu M1614</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(224 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#149"><LI>Winlab Product Comparisons: Quantum Fireball 1080</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(268 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#150"><LI>Winlab Product Comparisons: Seagate Medalist 1080sl</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(221 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#151"><LI>Winlab Product Comparisons: Western Digital Caviar AC21000</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(333 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#152"><A HREF = "#152"><LI>Winlab Product Comparisons: The Easy Way to Install a Hard Drive -- &nbsp;A step-by-step approach to upgrading</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(529 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#153"><A HREF = "#153"><LI>Winlab Product Comparisons: Enhancing Your Hard Drive -- &nbsp;You may need more stuff to make it all work.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(418 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#154"><LI>Report Card: Recommendations </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(190 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>HOW TO</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#155"><LI>Optimizing Windows: Explorer Gives You the Big Picture</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1727 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#156"><LI>Getting Started: Whither Goeth, Oh Nobel File?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1171 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#157"><LI>Power Windows: Data Backups to Make Mom Proud</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1516 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#158"><A HREF = "#158"><LI>Power Windows: The Best of Both Worlds -- Have your old software and &nbsp;long filenames, too.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(351 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#159"><LI>Power Windows: Build a Tunnel to Long Filenames</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(408 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#160"><LI>Networking Windows: System Policies Keep Users in Line</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1469 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#161"><LI>Networking Windows: So You Wanna Be A Systems Programmer</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(161 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#162"><LI>Windows NT: NT's Future Looks Bright</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1707 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#163"><A HREF = "#163"><LI>Windows NT: The Big SUR -- Here are some of the features you should see&nbsp;in Microsoft's Shell Update Release and companion products.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(452 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#164"><LI>Programming Windows: Better the Devil You Know</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1697 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#165"><A HREF = "#165"><LI>Programming Windows: A Glossary of Common Controls -- New MFC classes &nbsp;for the Windows 95 common controls.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(297 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>R&R: RESOURCES AND RECREATION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#166"><LI>Hot Picks: Stormy Weather</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(95 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#167"><LI>Hot Picks: Drive Time</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(101 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#168"><LI>Hot Picks: Job Lists You Can Bank On</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(100 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#169"><LI>Game of the Month: Ready, Set, Go!</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(161 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#170"><LI>Hot Picks: Tickle the Ivories</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(72 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#171"><LI>Hot Picks: Picture This</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(83 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#172"><LI>Hot Picks: Compelling Rappelling</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(123 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#173"><LI>Book of the Month: Inside Windows 95</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(139 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#174"><LI>Snapshots</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(283 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>WINDOWS ONLINE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#175"><LI>Here's How: Hire a Web-Building Team</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(203 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#176"><LI>New on the Net: Go on a Virtual Job Hunt</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(175 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#177"><LI>Windows Online: Online News</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(103 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#178"><LI>Windows Watch: Know What Works with Win95</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(81 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#179"><LI>Winmag Online: Have We Ever Covered ?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(56 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#180"><LI>Recommended Downloads -- Superior Shareware</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(698 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RECYCLE BIN</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#181"><LI>Recycle Bin: Screen Saver O' the Month</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(89 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#182"><LI>Recycle Bin: This Means War!</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(34 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#183"><LI>Recycle Bin: When is a CD-ROM Not a CD-ROM?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(22 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#184"><LI>Recycle Bin: A Miscreant Monitor</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(21 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#185"><LI>Recycle Bin: Easter Egg O' the Month</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(74 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#186"><LI>Recycle Bin: EXPRESS ROUTE TO REDUCED PRODUCTIVITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(31 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#187"><LI>Give us a sign! We're looking for road signs or any signs that</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(64 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Start: Okay, okay. Lemme don my asbestos underwear and explain myself.

By:
Fred Langa

Many of you wrote to me about my October 1995 editorial discussing
the enhanced DriveSpace 3 that's part of Microsoft Plus for
Windows 95 (a.k.a. Plus Pack). Some of the calmer letters took
a decided "Are you nuts?" tone. Others were out-and-out flames
suggesting I was worse than nuts and that the only good way
to increase disk space was the good old-fashioned method of
buying more platters.

Hang up those flamethrowers! In the early days, some disk compressors
were indeed bad news. They were exotic add-ons that diddled
with your system at a very fundamental level down in the guts
of DOS, making the system do things it wasn't designed to do.
If anything went wrong, it was often catastrophic. The earliest
adopters of disk compression technology all too frequently
lost the entire contents of their hard disks.

That was then. In recent years, disk compressors have become
robust and reliable. And with Win95, Microsoft has built basic
disk compression right into the operating system. Now, you
can roughly double your effective disk space with little added
risk. (With a good backup system, which you should be using
anyway, the risk can be literally zero.)

The Plus Pack's DriveSpace 3 goes a step further than Win95's
standard compression. DriveSpace 3 is capable of standard DriveSpace
compression plus two higher levels of compacting, HiPack and
UltraPack.

HiPacked files take a bit longer to write to the disk but are
faster to read. This type of compression is ideal for .EXE, .DLL 
and similar files that are normally written once (at installation)
and then only read from the disk. With HiPack, you can save
space and time.

UltraPack squeezes files even tighter. It's best for dense archival
storage of little-used files that you still want handy. UltraPacked
files occupy minimal space but do take a bit longer both to
read and write.

Like its predecessors, DriveSpace 3 works invisibly in the background.
It's normally quite conservative: It doesn't automatically
apply the CPU-intensive highest levels of compression unless
and until you tell it to. A companion program called Compression
Agent helps that process.

Out of the box, the Compression Agent assumes any file you haven't
accessed in a month is ripe for dense archival storage, and
automatically flags those files for UltraPack compression.
(You can set the interval to be whatever you want.) You also
can specify which levels of compression (none, normal, HiPack
or UltraPack) to apply to each file, file type or directory.
When you run Compression Agent, it dutifully trundles off across
your disk, squeezing or fluffing all the files per your instructions.

It takes a while to run, so it's best done during lunch or overnight.
(See the Power Windows column in the October 1995 issue for
information on the Plus Pack's System Agent, which can automate
all kinds of tasks like this one.)

But wait, as they say, there's more. If you have a large hard
disk, compression software takes care of the associated wasted
"overhead."

If you have a 500MB hard disk, for instance, DOS (and Win95)
divides the space into 16KB clusters. This means if you save
a 1-byte file to your disk, that file still will automatically
and unavoidably consume 16,000 bytes of disk space. It's even
worse with larger hard disks. If your hard disk holds more
than about 528MB, you'll have 32KB clusters. That means saving
a measly little 1-byte file will eat 32KB of disk space-incredibly
wasteful.

Disk compression software lets you avoid much of this waste.
With DriveSpace 3, for example, a file can occupy as few as
512 bytes, so a 1-byte file wastes only 511 bytes-not 16,000
or 32,000.

This reduced overhead really adds up. DriveSpace 3 made my 1
gigabyte hard disk look like 2.76GB. Plus, it saved me well
over 300MB that would have been needlessly wasted by corpulent
clusters.

If the phrase "disk compression" has you reflexively reaching
for your flamethrower, maybe it's time for a fresh look. Whether
for the efficiency of unwasted cluster space or for elbow room
on diminutive hard disks, modern 32-bit disk compression can
be a nice addition to your system, especially now that other
vendors are starting to ship their 32-bit disk compressors.
You're not just locked into using Microsoft's solution anymore.

Now, may I please get out of this flameproof suit?




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Letters: Does Microsoft Play Monopoly?



Surprisingly, many readers rushed to Microsoft's defense in
its ongoing antitrust battle with the Justice Department. Less
surprisingly, the flame war generated by our Dialog Box debate
over the Exon Amendment rages unabated.

I was intrigued by Mike Elgan's comments about whether Microsoft
has violated antitrust regulations (The Explorer, October 1995).

Microsoft has been unfairly dumped upon by the Feds. I'd love
it if someone, anyone, would stand up for those who do produce
something of value in this country, instead of knuckling under
to the same old bromides that regulation is necessary. Jason
Lockwood, via the Internet

A copy of Mike Elgan's column should be sent to the Justice
Department, since it is obvious that Mike has a better grasp
on computer-related antitrust issues than Washington does.

Craig Bonvechio

via the Internet

Mike Elgan says Microsoft's OS dominance has no effect on its
applications success. In fact, he called this idea "hogwash."
Well, his dismissal of this idea is "balderdash." Consider
the number of neophyte computer users who see "Microsoft" all
over their OS documentation and on their startup screens and
think that a Microsoft product is more suitable for use with
the OS because the name matches.

Microsoft makes good applications. However, there are many behaviors
that smack of anticompetitiveness and monopolism. The proper
thing is for Microsoft to avoid even a hint of impropriety.

Rob Stewart

via the Internet

In a world where successful people and businesses are routinely
despised because of their success, I found Mike Elgan's piece
on Microsoft refreshing. The hurdle of overcoming all this
resentment is plenty of challenge for any company; federally
imposed legal hurdles are simply not necessary.

Greg Scharer

via the Internet




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Letters: Designer Windows



I very much enjoyed Mark Hebert's article about being a closet
Windows graphic designer (Dialog Box, November 1995). I have
been designing on a PC since PageMaker made its first version
for the PC. I struggled with cross-platform compatibility issues
and the smug looks from the Mac users, but now I'm glad I have
PC experience. PC graphic artists may have the last laugh after
all.

Robert O. Allan

via the Internet

I appreciated Mark Hebert's column.

I have been a graphic designer/desktop publisher/interactive
multimedia title developer for seven years now all on Windows.
I don't have to convert a company's corporate data into a format
a Mac can read before using it (saves lots of time and money
for everyone); I can give it back to a client in a form that
can be further manipulated by the company; I can charge less
because of the lower overhead; I can offer much more flexibility;
and I can match or better their output.

Karen DeFelice

via the Internet

Pioneers like Mark Hebert and I will get the word out to our
peers. With software differences being nil, pricing favoring
the Windows platform and operating speeds being arguably better,
the days of Mac systems dominating the graphics arena are numbered.
When you cut right to it, clients don't care how their collateral
is created, only that it sells product.

Steve Prestek

via the Internet




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Letters: The Exon Word Spill



Sen. Jim Exon's column (Dialog Box, October 1995) was hardly
worth the space. We've heard all this poppycock before. The
only part of it that aroused me was that I don't like being
referred to as part of the "hands-off elite." The elite are
in Washington. Out here in the hinterlands, we're just simple,
practical people who are tired of self-serving politicians
who use "for the good of our children" to justify every petty
little regulatory urge they choose to pursue.

Gene Warner

via the Internet

Sen. Jim Exon said some groups will do anything to defend the
status quo on the Internet. He's right. The Internet is the
First Amendment come to life. Let us keep it that way!

Gabor Morocz

via the Internet

I do agree with Sen. Exon that there's a lot of material on
the Internet that's inappropriate for children. Perhaps online
services should limit access to adults only. We don't let children
drive on our interstate highways. Why do they need to be driving
on our Internet highways?

Robert A. Swirsky

via the Internet

It is sad to see the ignorance that Sen. Exon voices. How can
you legislate a network that goes beyond national boundaries?
Don't spend my tax dollars having the government do a parent's
job.

Jose Nieves

via the Internet

Yes, pornography is evil. But censorship is more evil.

Nat Elam

via the Internet




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Letters: Long Live the Floppy



While I agree with Fred Davis (ReadMe File, November 1995) that
the floppy drive has not seen any improvement in quite some
time, I cannot see CD-R as the answer to the floppy disk's
obsolescence. The floppy disk is inherently reusable, is much
more environmentally friendly, is easy to use and has a proven
track record. The CD-R is like all CD-ROM systems: temperamental,
not reusable, easily dirtied and hard to read by the system.

Ken Adamek

via America Online

Your article "It's time to deep-six the now-obsolete floppy
disk drive" was one of the dumbest things I've ever read. Did
you ever notice the price of a CD-R?

Raymond L. Warwick

via the Internet




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Letters: This Headline..er, Stinks



I have come to expect thorough reporting, informative articles
and thought-provoking commentary when I read WINDOWS Magazine.
I was disappointed with the thoughtless and less-than-professional
"attention-grabber" to lead off the Fred Davis column ("Here's
what's really good about Windows 95: It sucks less!" ReadMe
File, October 1995). While the words used may be common nowadays
in some circles, in my opinion they reflect a decided lack
of professionalism and do not belong in your otherwise fine
magazine.

Paul Schleusener

via the Internet




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Letters: A Key Concern



I'm responding to your recent article "Key to Making Changes"
(News, October 1995). I have encountered many keyboard arrangements
over the years. Each has its pluses and minuses, but the two
biggest overall minuses are the varied placement of the "nontypewriter"
keys (especially the backslash and backspace keys) and the
offset of the "typewriter" keys to the left. The auto manufacturers
have moved many controls to the steering wheel, and it seems
logical for the computer industry to do the same with keyboards.

Wilbur C. Bragg II

via CompuServe




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Letters: Correction



In our November New Products section, we erroneously said Blue
Sky Software's "RoboHELP 95 turns Windows 95 and Word 6.0 32
bit into hypertext authoring tools." In fact, RoboHELP 95 turns
Word 7 for Windows 95 and 32-bit Word 6.0 for Windows NT into
hypertext authoring tools.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

We want to hear from you! Please send your letter and phone

We want to hear from you! Please send your letter and phone
number to: Letters, Windows Magazine, One Jericho Plaza, Jericho,
NY 11753, or by e-mail to winmag@cmp.com. We reserve the right
to edit letters for length and clarity.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Newstrends: DirectX APIs Mean Business

By:
Jim Forbes

Sometime in the (near) future, even novices will be able to
create presentations that involve highly complex three-dimensional
graphics. The reason: Microsoft has been playing games with
Windows 95.

While most of the attention devoted to the still-new operating
system has focused on its business applications, a few people
like Micro-soft game developer Alex St. John-worked on software
code that controls the display of graphics, creates novel ways
for programs to use sound and video, and builds support within
applications for 3-D graphics.

These snippets of code are collectively called the DirectX APIs.
Microsoft was supposed to ship them with Win-dows 95, but they
arrived a couple of months later. Developed to make Win95 a
better games platform, the new APIs speed graphics by up to
25 percent, according to Eric Engstrom, a software development
manager with Microsoft.

Software analysts stress that there is a link between games,
which run best on high-performance systems, and business applications.
The DirectX APIs, said Dan Lavin, an analyst with research
firm Dataquest, "could provide a significant advantage for
business software developers."

Direct3D, one of the most important APIs, has yet to ship. Deve
loped by Microsoft after its acquisition of the graphics firm
Render-morphics, Direct3D allows developers to quickly create
rendered animation segments. Companies such as LucasArts, Activision
and Papyrus say they will use the new API, which adds less
than 300KB to the size of a program.

Microsoft is certainly looking forward to some big business
with the emphasis on business-with the new APIs. Said St. John,
"We think of the DirectX APIs as being the genie we just let
out of the bottle."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Newstrends: Another Crack at the Hand-Held Market

By:
Jim Forbes

It may be d j vu all over again, but the names are different.
The new OmniGo 100 personal organizer is from Hewlett-Packard,
and it runs on GEOS from Geoworks.

Only a couple of years ago, conventional wisdom had it that
Compaq should attack the "companion" market-very portable machines
that retain the look and feel of a desktop PC-with products
that ran Microsoft's WinPad. But HP, which has built a reputation
for notebooks and palmtops, thinks it's found a better path
to Windows applications-without Microsoft.

While the OmniGo is a far cry from the products touted by Compaq
and Microsoft, it is a true second-generation hand-held that
lets users exchange data with PCs running Windows.

Ironically, HP was to have been among the first manufacturers
to use the ill-fated WinPad OS. But the company actually balked
at the price long before Microsoft itself abandoned its Win
Pad plans. The decision appears to have paid off; the OmniGo
is a good 300 percent less costly than what Compaq had proposed.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Newstrends: Micro Multimedia

By:
Jim Forbes

Multimedia is big-so big, in fact, that you can soon expect
to see chip manufacturers deliver new CPUs designed specifically
for multimedia applications.

First, Intel has the P55C (Newstrends, October 1995). The company
will only confirm that it's an enhanced Pentium processor with
multimedia code extensions, and delivery is set for the second
quarter of this year.

Cyrix is taking a more aggressive approach with a preliminary
demonstration of its technology, a prototype part called the
5GX86. It includes an on-chip graphics accelerator and other
integrated functions that could make it attractive to cost
conscious OEMs.

Finally, AMD may also get in the hunt by including multimedia
microcode in its new Am5x86.

Virtually all these products are aimed at the SOHO market-which
is very big. Worldwide sales of notebooks and desktops now
exceed 4.5 million units per month, and nearly 40 percent are
multimedia-capable.

But it's a market that cares as much about price as performance.
And Cyrix's price tags have already drawn AST and Epson, which
signed on for its 5X86 and 6X86 (or M1) series. In short, the
chip wars could soon get even more heated.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Newstrends: A CD-R In Every Home?

By:
Dave Raffo

Every computing product has a magic price barrier that it needs
to crack if it wants to entice the mainstream user. For CD
recorders, analysts said that magic number was $500-half the
average price.

Enter Panasonic's PowerDrive2, which now costs $499.95. "Basically,
we decided to get out of the niche market and attack the mass
market," said Rich Harada, marketing manager for optical products.
And if other vendors follow Panasonic's lead-they may have
no choice-CD-Rs may yet catch on at home.

The PowerDrive2 is a removable, rewritable 650MB phase-change
optical disk and quad-speed CD-ROM drive. Consumers liked it,
says Panasonic, but not the $895 price tag. Maybe now they
will.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Newstrends: And Now, It's the Virtual Teller

By:
James E. Powell

Even as the Internet becomes an increasingly popular medium
for providing company information or technical support-or just
whiling away the time-consumer acceptance of online services
remains quite low. That's a challenge to firms like Intuit,
whose future rests with online offerings such as home banking.

Intuit's Quicken for 96 takes a big step toward getting customers
to experiment with online services. The financial management
software includes a custom graphical World Wide Web browser
to cruise Intuit's home pages, which include personal finance
tips, details about online offerings from banks and order forms
for Intuit software. Company sources say the sites could eventually
provide stock quotes and other financial data. There are no
plans-yet-to conduct financial transactions via the service,
but given partner Netscape's intense interest in secure online
commerce, such features will probably become available in early
1996.

The browser is a modified version of Netscape-the most popular
Web cruiser now available-that permits customers to visit only
the sites Intuit selects. Customers wanting to upgrade to a
full Internet browser, meanwhile, can call another Intuit partner,
Concentric Communications, which is offering an hour of online
time for $1.95 per month or seven hours for $9.95. That's the
lowest-cost plan yet available from Internet service providers.

One Click Away

The installed base of modems is growing, thanks to their inclusion
as standard equipment on new PCs, and easy one-click access
to the Internet should help Quicken's 8 million users. The
company decided to form an alliance with an Internet provider
because Web pages can be changed quickly to respond to the
ever-shifting nature of financial data.

Users of Intuit's chief competitor, Microsoft Money, also have
access to the Net via the Microsoft Network. However, they
must already be members of MSN, which comes at a price; Intuit's
offering is free.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Newstrends: Inside the Corporate Web

By:
Jim Forbes

Never mind "World Wide"; one of the more interesting aspects
about the Web is the growing number of private home pages,
with access limited to employees of a specific corporation.

"Corporate home pages are an important tool for enhancing internal
communications in workgroups and [extended] settings," said
Ed Hott, vice president of Internet provider Inters in Sunnyvale,
Calif. In fact, Internet consultants report that corporate
interest in the World Wide Web-which, unlike the rest of the
Internet, abounds in graphics, sound, hypertext links and other
multimedia elements-as an internal communications medium is
at an all-time high, and getting higher.

Oil giant Chevron is among the companies using the so-called
Intranet to disseminate information and make software updates
available to its 42,000 employees. This has also sparked interest
among staffers who want to publish technical and other newsletters.
"There is tremendous potential in private Web pages that are
adapted to collect information or that serve as two-way interactive
links to network-enabled applications," said Kirk Trambel,
an analyst with Chevron.

This trend has great implications. For example, if the Web becomes
a true medium of collaborative computing in the corporate world,
it could hurt Notes, the groupware product that induced IBM
to buy Lotus. Moreover, several vendors are scrambling to help
corporations do what they need to do on the Web. Borland, Oracle,
Microsoft and Netscape are among those aiming products at this
market. And while Netscape gets most of the press, analysts
point to Microsoft's forthcoming Blackbird, which helps corporate
and third-party developers build networked, Web-based apps,
as a product that could fit the bill.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Newstrends: A Taxing Situation

By:
Eileen McCooey

When the holidays are in full swing ... can tax season be far
behind?

Some of those who turned to tax software last year may have
not-so-fond memories of unhappy returns. Several products had
bugs, and vendors scrambled to issue mea culpas and fixes.
This year, they're determined to avoid a sequel.

For example, Intuit, publisher of TurboTax, has doubled its
testing but is ready to cope with problems. "We have an infrastructure
in place that would enable us to ship hundreds of thousands
of [fixes] immediately," reported Guy MacNeill, group product
manager for tax software. And most vendors are setting up online
forums, bulletin boards, fax-back programs and free support.

The bottom line: Makers of tax software can't afford not to
take such steps. "At current price points [typically $20 to
$40], vendors can't afford to release maintenance versions,"
said Lance Dunn, director of software development for Parsons,
which publishes Personal Tax Edge.

Vendors have enhanced the '95 tax year versions with a wealth
of advice. TurboTax, for example, has over 100 video clips
with pointers from tax experts. Kiplinger's Tax-Cut and Per
sonal Tax Edge also use multimedia to counsel users on tax
saving strategies. Most programs now offer context-sensitive
advice and make it easier to import data from personal-finance
programs.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Windows Top Ten: Windows' Top Ten Software


 
Sept. Aug.

1 1 Microsoft Windows 95 Upgrade* from Microsoft

2 2 Microsoft Plus* from Microsoft

3 6 SoftRAM95* from Synchronys

4 4 UnInstaller from MicroHelp

5 3 Norton Utilities Upgrade* from Symantec

6 8 Norton AntiVirus Upgrade* from Symantec

7 7 Netscape Navigator from Netscape

8 - Microsoft Works* from Microsoft

9 5 Remove-IT from Vertisoft

10 - Norton AntiVirus* from Symantec

* Win95 Source: PC Data




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Recap



Microsoft announced that through a combination of upgrades and
the shipment of preloaded PCs, sales of Windows 95 officially
passed the 7 million mark less than two months after Win95's
release. o Lotus put its IBM-enhanced weight behind Notes Release
4.0, the integrated messaging and groupware package. The pre
release version was sent to 10,000 Lotus Business Partners
and other customers. At press time, the company said the product
would ship before the end of 1995. o Microsoft released updated
drivers to deal with a potential security problem in Windows
95. Some end users had found that after a remote administrator
logs off a system, other network users have read-only access
until that system is restarted. Only NetWare users who have
enabled File and Print Sharing along with Remote Administration
are at risk. o Netscape announced Power Pack 1.0, a suite of
add-on applications that extends the capabilities of Netscape
Navigator for Windows. Combining Netscape SmartMarks, Chat
and multimedia add-on applications from Adobe and Apple, among
others, the product lets customers take advantage of five add
on apps. o According to a survey conducted by leading OEM Packard
Bell, almost 25 percent of PC households already have more
than one home computer, and another 14 percent plan to buy
another. o Corbis, the digital media company owned by Bill
Gates, first acquired the entire Bettman Archive, one of the
world's largest photo collections, then reached an agreement
to distribute images owned by The State Hermitage Museum in
St. Petersburg, Russia, which has one of the world's largest
art collections. o Digital Equipment released FX!32, software
translation technology that allows Windows 95 applications
written for Intel-based machines to run on Digital's Alpha
chips.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Newstrends: Smart Warning



Quantum and Symantec's Norton Smart Doctor for Windows 95, an
application that warns PC users of impending device failures,
is among some 35 products being developed by various vendors
to support the SMART (Self-Monitoring, Analysis and Reporting
Technology) System industry standard for hardware devices.
Launched last summer, the SMART System calls for disk-

drive monitoring by the drive as well as the host computer,
plus a graphical user interface designed to alert the user
when a device is about to fail.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Newstrends: No Applications Here



To no one's surprise, Novell decided to put WordPerfect, its
umbrella applications business, up for sale. The decision came
not too long after the company decided to abandon its UNIX
business. After struggling to make itself a player in the applications
arena-WordPerfect's word processing software steadily lost
ground to Microsoft Word, while its office suite barely got
off the ground-Novell announced plans to focus on doing what
it does best: networking.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Newstrends: Money: Good News and Bad



According to Microsoft, nearly 450,000 people took advantage
of the company's offer for a free download of Money, its personal
finance product and rival to market leader Quicken. However,
the rollout was marred by what the company called a "minor
problem" with the online bill-payment feature. The company
hastily sent out a fix that was also posted on Microsoft's
Web site.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Newstrends: Alliances Online



Online service provider CompuServe struck several strategic
alliances. The company joined forces with Premiere Communications
to launch the CallingAll Card, which looks like a phone card
but actually gives members a "virtual office" that includes
fax mail, voice mail, speed dial, conference calling, travel
services, and up-to-the-minute reports on news, weather and
sports. CompuServe also announced plans for a service that
enables users to view multimedia clips online without having
to download playback software and multimedia files. It's the
goal of a deal with Macromedia that will bring the firm's Director
Player technology to the online environment.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Technology Watch: And the Oscar Goes to ... Trinity

By:
Jim Forbes

Don't look now, but the next big thing in Windows computing
could be seen on a really big screen. Some of the brains behind
the mid-1980s product Video Toaster are working on a new device
that, despite its vaporware status, has already been pitched
by Intel's CEO Andrew Grove to Steven Spielberg.

Trinity, from a company called Play, is a standalone box that
connects to Pentium PCs running Win95 or Windows NT via a PCI
card. In ess-ence, Trinity, which starts at about $6,000, allows
video professionals to turn their computers in-to digital editing
stations. Like Video Toaster, which worked with Commodore's
Amiga, Trinity allows videographers to edit and add a variety
of complex special effects to digital video images. It can
accept up to 29 expansion cards.

Trinity has several features that previously required rack-mounted
solutions. For example, it supports 10-input digital switching,
chroma keying, and the addition, creation and manipulation
of color special effects. It includes a timeline editor, audio
mixing and ultra-high-speed (10-nanosecond) character generation.
The system also supports a 330Mb-per-second proprietary networking
solution that allows users to interconnect PCs in production
environments.

Play is bootstrapping its growth from an existing product, Snappy.
And though officials say they won't develop one- or two-card
versions for the low end, next-generation versions of Snappy
will support some of the effects generated by Trinity.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Technology Watch: Acrobat: Gunning for HTML

By:
James Alan Miller

Acrobat, Adobe's electronic publishing tool, has been slow to
find a niche. But its recent integration into browsers could
signal a major change.

Acrobat allows a document to retain its look without requiring
the user to have the application used to create it. And because
Acrobat has given documents an elegant look and feel, Adobe
hopes it will overtake HTML.

Netscape is now developing a plug-in architecture for its next
generation browser. This will allow a future version of Acrobat,
expected this year, to render PDF files (Acrobat's file format)
in Netscape itself. Look for Acrobat to appear in several upcoming
online packages, including AT&T's Internet service and Microsoft's
Black-bird browser.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Technology Watch: Dialing Up Savings

By:
Ian Etra

Remember VocalTec? The firm sparked interest when it introduced
the Internet Phone, a software package for voice communications
in real time between two PCs on the Internet. The idea had
a simple premise: Linking the PC and the phone via the Net
could lead to big savings.

Now some other companies are targeting the same goal. Quarter
deck recently rolled out WebTalk, which provides full duplex
phone capabilities over the Net. WebTalk can also be used on
one PC to broadcast to multiple PCs running the program, and
is bundled with the Mosaic browser. Quarterdeck believes WebTalk
could become effective in collaborative computing.

Coming from a different angle, IDT, a provider of Internet access
and international callback services, allows a user to initiate
a phone call via the Net. The "call" is placed through a switch
that handles communications routing. In its rollout period,
the service will be available only for dialing into the U.S.
and the U.K.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Notes From The Lab: From Winmag Central -- We Could Use a Utility



Okay, you caught us, and now we have to don the dunce cap. The
Windows 95 upgrade guide feature in our November 1995 issue
mentioned that Norton Desktop contains a utility to convert .QAG 
files back to Windows .GRP files. No such luck. Let's
face it-we were staring out at the playground instead of paying
attention in class. Maybe someone (hello, utility programmers!)
will come up with a solution.

The arrival of the first 120MHz notebooks bodes well for power
portable lovers. A quick look at the Gateway 2000 Solo ($5,999),
complete with 1GB hard drive and impressive Wintune scores
200 MIPS, 67 MFLOPS and more than 13MB-per-second disk transfer
triggered a Pavlovian response among the WinLab rats. Stay
tuned to upcoming WinLab reviews for a look at the new performance
standard in notebooks, which are still evolving.

That buzz you're hearing might not be feedback from your speakers,
but bugs being ferreted out of Win95. Microsoft recently posted
a fix on its online forums to address a problem with linking
cells to multiple worksheets ... Maybe Office95 should have
included a flyswatter.

For those not yet connected to the Internet (Hello, McFly! Rejoin
the 20th century!), here's a way the plain old telephone can
help answer your Win95 questions. A Fast Tips for Windows 95
number (800-936-4200) has been set up to answer frequently
asked questions and provide special-announcements information
on the Microsoft support network, plus other important facts.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Notes From The Lab: Netwotking Nuggets



Here are a couple of tricks for networking types courtesy of
Mark Frale, WinMag's Network Administrator (with an assist
from Microsoft). To add long filename support to a NetWare
3.11 server, you must load a patch from Novell, available online
at ftp.novell.com/pub/netware/nwos/nw311/osnlm. Run the file
311PTD.EXE to extract the file OS2OPNFX.NLM. To see the long
filenames, Windows 95 machines must add a value to the Registry
in the HKey_Local_Machine\System\CurrentControlSet\Services\VxD\Nwredir\
section-add a SupportLFN key value and insert a line with a
binary value of 2.

Network administrators also can receive NetWare messages in
a flash by running Windows 95-and best of all, it's absolutely
free! Run WINPOPUP.EXE (conveniently located in your WINDOWS
directory) minimized to stay one step ahead of trouble. You
can also use WINPOPUP to chat with others instantly if you
can't wait for an e-mail response.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Notes From The Lab: Update -- Monitoring Cuts



Sampo has dropped below the 1K barrier, but we're talking low
priced monitors, not low memory. The AlphaScan GLX-KDM-2077E
20-inch monitor (WinLab Product Comparisons, February 1995)
lists for $995 and is the first large-format display we've
seen at this price threshold.

Texas Instruments' notebook prices are also taking a downward
spiral. The TravelMate 5000 line (WinLab First Impressions,
September 1995) now starts at $2,999 for a 75MHz Pentium model
and tops out at $4,799 for a P90.

The teeny-tiny Datasonix Pereos storage cartridge ("Hardware
Heaven," June 20, 1995) now boasts an equally small price.
The 1.25GB unit is now $499, down from $649.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Notes From The Lab: Heads Up



Bully for our alert readers! Craig Bull of the University of
Dayton submitted this tip in response to the problems with
Zoom modems (November 1995). If your modem won't dial out because
your phone service beeps to indicate that you have a message,
don't panic. You can issue the command "ATX3" to instruct your
modem to dial even if it doesn't detect a tone-or better yet,
include this command as part of your initialization string.

Like everyone else, we ran for Office-95 because of the promises
including long filename support. But our first response was
to vote against the way files are saved in Word95-that is,
with a .DOC extension. That happens even when you try to customize
the extension (e.g., FEATURE.JAN becomes FEATURE.JAN.DOC). 
To get around this naming convention, you only need
a good quote-okay, two quotes: Surround your document name
with quotation marks ("FEATURE.JAN")

Jim Powell, our man in Seattle, recently received an Acer Aspire
133MHz desktop that has a dramatic new look, including a curved
dark-green system and a monitor with Swiss-cheese holes on
top. Alas, it had so many problems we couldn't do a full review.
The disk-drive door fell off, the cover wouldn't go back on
properly, and there was a loose part rattling around somewhere
that must have come free during shipment. We called Acer, and
the company plans to redesign the case for systems shipping
in the spring.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

WinTips: Win95 Tips of the Month


 
Eject! Eject!

Right-click on the CD-ROM icon in My Computer and select Eject
from the Context menu to eject the CD from the drive.

Write Makes Right

The Win95 installation wipes out Windows Write and associates
your .WRI files with the new WordPad. If you want to keep Write,
copy WRITE.EXE and WRITE.HLP to a diskette before you install
Win95.

Space: The Final Frontier

Find out where all the drive space is: Open My Computer, select
all or some of the drives in the folder, right-click on any
of the drives and select Properties from the Context menu.
You'll get a tabbed dialog containing available-space information
on each of the selected drives.

-Dave Caracappa via the Internet

Switch to Setup Switches

By adding switches to the Setup command, you can control what
the Win95 Setup utility does. To find out what those switches
are, just type SETUP /? at the command prompt.

When 'Up' Brings You Down

If you navigate the Start menu with arrow keys, you know that
items on the top of cascading menus are selected until you
press the down arrow to select items below. To get to the bottom
of a long menu, press the up arrow key. When the top menu item
is selected, pressing the up arrow key brings you to the bottom.

No More Longing for Long Filenames

Get in the habit of using long filenames! Suggestion: Flag files
you

don't use but don't want to delete either. If you're going to
make a backup file, remember that you can add a "second extension."
For example, instead of renaming the AUTOEXEC.BAT file AUTOEXEC.BAK,
rename it "AUTOEXEC.BAT.backup created on January 13 1996."

Bill Davis

via CompuServe

Disable AutoRun

AutoRun plays CDs as soon as you put them in the drive. If you
don't like this feature, you can turn it off. Right-click on
My Computer and select the Device Manager tab. Find your CD
ROM drive on the list, then double-click on it. Select the
Settings tab and deselect Auto Insert Notification.

Tell DOS Who's Boss

Batch files in Win95 leave a telltale DOS residue-the open MS
DOS Prompt window. To close it, create a shortcut to the batch
file, right-click on the shortcut to bring up the Properties
dialog, select the Program tab and click on the Close on Exit
item at the bottom.

DriveSpace Isn't Just for Hard Disks

Use DriveSpace for diskettes! Just remember that if you need
to format them in the future, you must do so from the DriveSpace
utility.

Launch Folders At Startup

You already know you can put programs and documents in your
StartUp folder to launch things at Win95 startup, but you can
also put folders in there. Just follow the normal procedure
 Right-click on the Start button and select Open, double-click
on the Programs folder, then the StartUp folder. Now drag the
folder of your choice into the StartUp window.

The End Is Near

If you've got a folder window open and want to get to the bottom
of it, don't use the scroll bar. Just press Ctrl+End.

A Smart Restart

Sometimes you need to restart Windows to make a settings change
take effect. But there's a faster way. Select Shut Down from
the Start menu, then press and hold the Shift key when you
click on Restart the Computer, then (still holding down the
Shift key) click OK. When the screen prompt reads, "Windows
is now restarting," you can let go of the Shift key. Performing
this action bypasses the boot sequence.

It's a Cool Feature, Period!

You DOS veterans know that typing two periods after the Change
Directory command (CD ..) brings you to the parent directory
of the current directory. The Win95 MS-DOS prompt improves
on this by the use of three periods and four periods to bring
you to the parent directories once and twice removed, respectively.

Got a hot tip? Send it to melgan@cmp.com or Mike Elgan, Windows
Magazine, One Jericho Plaza, Jericho, NY 11753.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Explorer: Why are mighty banks afraid of little software companies?

By:
Mike Elgan

This year, banks and software vendors will wage a bloody war
over the future of banking. Even international financial behemoths
are scared to death of the comparatively small Intuit and Microsoft.
The two companies have been jockeying for control over online
banking standards ever since the U.S. Justice Department derailed
their merger.

You may scratch your head at my characterization of Microsoft
as a "little software company." But compare Bank of America's
assets of $228 billion and 97,500 employees to Microsoft's
less than $10 billion in assets and 18,000 employees-they're
in different leagues.

The notion of a couple of software makers scaring banks with
cheap consumer products like Quicken and Money may seem absurd.
Fewer than 10 million people use personal finance applications,
and only 400,000 to 700,000 use PCs to bank online.

But although most Americans still bank the old-fashioned way,
a widespread infrastructure for a fully digital banking future
is forming behind the scenes at a breakneck pace. The American
Bankers Association predicts the number of medium to large
banks (with assets of $1 billion or more) offering PC-based
transactions will nearly quadruple this year, from 11 percent
to 42 percent. Not surprisingly, huge advertising campaigns
are in the works that will introduce millions of Americans
to the wonders of online banking.

The appeal of online banking

Online banking makes current statements available to you 24
hours a day, and lets you pay bills with the click of a mouse.
Bill-paying transactions are simple transfers from your account
to the payee's. If the receiver can't accept electronic transfers,
the service prints a check and mails it.

Much of the bill-paying is automatic: The software reminds you
what bills are due when. No more writing checks or balancing
your checkbook. No more licking stamps or shuffling off to
the branch office. And it's cheap: about $10 a month or less.
Savings in stamps and envelopes alone pay for the cost of service
for most families.

Personal finance applications that support online banking, such
as Quicken, Money and Meca's Managing Your Money, not only
facilitate transactions but also keep track of them. They show
exactly where your money goes by letting you slice and dice
the data as you can with a spreadsheet. Some services even
help you invest online-buying and selling stocks, monitoring
your portfolio and conducting research to stay on top of the
market.

Why banks are scared

As the number of online transactions soars, banking steadily
migrates into the familiar turf of software developers. The
banks realize how little they know about this business, and
that's why they're scared.

Banks win customers by creating a perception of security, stability
and solvency. This perception is based on images of big, indestructible
vaults (as if the banks keep all the money in there), towering
pillars and solid names built around words like National, America
and First. Customer loyalty is based on the psychology of trust.

Software companies are out to change all that. They want us
to view banking as just another form of information processing,
and money as just another form of information. They want to
transfer customer loyalty from the trusted bank to the preferred
software application. Financial institutions would become low
margin, invisible providers of services whose main feature
is low cost.

As in the applications software market, the one who controls
the standards of online banking wins. That's why Microsoft,
Intuit, a host of technology companies and banks are scrambling
to own the standards, and thus the future, of online banking.

Reacting out of concern that borders on panic, banks are doing
everything from giving away copies of Quicken and Money to
buying software companies to launching online services. But
banks don't know how to compete in this new environment. That's
why they're hitching their wagons to software and technology
partners as fast as they can.

Bank of America and NationsBank bought MECA, which will offer
Manage Your Money to bank customers and continue to sell it
in retail stores. Digicash, Open Market, Block Financial Software,
4Home Productions and Netscape offer different software front
ends to banking services.

A 21-member consortium of American banks and technology companies
is working on an initiative called the Electronic Check Project
to make Internet-based checking available within two years.

That opens up the whole issue of security. Software vendors
are responding to users' concerns by developing ways to protect
online transactions. CheckFree Corp.-which provides the secure
bill-paying back-end services for Quicken, CompuServe and Prodigy
is offering a new product called CheckFree Wallet that enables
secure credit-card transactions over the Web.

In September, Microsoft and new partner Visa announced their
own means of enabling secure online credit-card transactions,
Secure Transaction Technology (STT)

Netscape, MasterCard, IBM, Digital, CyberCash and GTE cried
foul at the announcement. Complaining the standard wasn't open
to competitors, they urged companies to support their acronym
 SSL (Secure Sockets Layer)

A two-horse race?

Despite all this competition, Microsoft and Intuit remain in
the best position to control the future of online banking.

Though Microsoft dominates most of the software categories it
enters, here it's playing the ill-fitting role of David taking
on the online Goliath Intuit. There are more than 8 million
Quicken users out there-many of them fanatics-versus fewer
than 2 million Money users, despite a 450,000-unit giveaway
of the Win95 version that expired last October.

Quicken 5 tends to get better reviews than Money for Windows
95. It's more powerful and offers more services for investors.
The current version runs on both Windows 3.x and Win95; the
current version of Money runs only on Win95. Each company has
relationships with more than 20 major financial institutions.

Given Intuit's dominance, why is Microsoft even considered a
contender? Because Microsoft is brimming with both vision and
cash. Microsoft is in the unique position of owning an operating
system (the operating system, really), an online service, a
personal finance application, a huge Internet presence and
a few billion in cash. Oh, and the company never gives up on
what it considers a good idea.

So, Intuit and Microsoft are the favorites in the online banking
race. You get to decide who wins when you go to your local
computer superstore and buy cheap shrink-wrapped personal finance
software.

No wonder banks are scared!

Contact Executive Editor Mike Elgan in the "Explorer" topic
of WINDOWS Magazine's areas on America Online and CompuServe,
or at the addresses on page 18.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

ReadMe File: Coming Soon to a computer screen near you: MPEG

By:
Fred Davis

The latest ladle of acronym soup being served up to Windows
users is MPEG-which stands for Motion Pictures Experts Group.
MPEG is a standards committee composed of people from the motion
picture industry and the high-tech world who got together a
few years ago to develop a standard for compressing full-motion
video for digital playback. That committee's work resulted
in the MPEG standard, which has been around for a few years
but has suddenly gotten a giant boost, thanks to-you guessed
it-Microsoft.

Microsoft took a well-deserved drubbing for its anemic Video
for Windows in Windows 3.1. With VFW 3.1, you could watch a
jerky, postage-stamp-sized movie on your computer screen in
what seemed like a pathetic imitation of Apple Computer's QuickTime.
Because Microsoft wanted to make multimedia a Windows 95 cornerstone,
it launched a vigorous campaign to promote MPEG as a primary
video standard for Win95. The centerpiece of Microsoft's strategy
is MPEG for Windows 95, a special software driver that Microsoft
licensed from MediaMatics, a small MPEG developer. Although
Microsoft couldn't include this in its initial Win95 version,
the company is making it available to developers for incorporation
into their products and will release it as a free add-on to
both Win95 and Windows NT.

MPEG is a system for both encoding and decoding full-motion
video, like movies or video clips. Software developers use
special encoder hardware in the thousand-dollar-and-up category,
such as the RealMagic Producer add-in card from Sigma Designs,
which takes output and compresses it into the MPEG file format.
To view an MPEG movie, you need an MPEG decoder, which can
be hardware, software or a combination of both. Sigma Design's
RealMagic card, which worked in conjunction with your computer's
video card, was the first marketed product that allowed PC
users to take advantage of MPEG. In addition, more than 60
other MPEG playback cards from a host of manufacturers are
now available. These cards generally sell in the $100 to $300
range.

MPEG for Windows 95 enables a Pentium-class system to play MPEG
encoded videos without any additional hardware. Microsoft has
pitched MPEG for Windows 95 as part of the newly announced
Multimedia PC 3, or MPC 3 specification for multimedia computers.
The MPC 3 spec calls for a system with a minimum of a 75MHz
Pentium processor, 8MB of RAM, wavetable audio and a quad-speed
CD-ROM drive. This specification is expected to be widely supported
by hardware and software vendors as a minimum target for the
next generation of entertainment and gaming software. Like
most Microsoft products, MPEG for Windows 95 doesn't run well
on the minimum configuration; in fact, you really need a 90MHz
Pentium just to get so-so performance.

Normal videos display about 30 frames per second (fps) to fool
your eye into seeing smooth, seamless motion. MPEG for Windows
95 running on a 90MHz Pentium will only play around 24fps,
so the image will not appear quite as smooth as it should.
In addition, MPEG for Windows 95 produces neither good sound
nor accurate colors. The color problem also affects resolution,
so that images appear chunky and splotchy. Why such poor video
quality? To explain, I'll need to tell you a few technical
details.

The type of MPEG used on PCs is called MPEG I, which specifies
a 352x240-pixel output resolution. Since this is less than
a third the size of your PC's screen, most MPEG decoders expand
the image to fill the entire screen using a technique called
upsampling. When the MPEG decoder upsamples an image, it replicates
pixels to achieve the larger size. The exact technique used
to replicate the pixels makes a real difference in the video
quality. A simple decoder makes a straightforward replication,
resulting in the worst quality. The better decoders use fancier
tricks, such as interpolating the pixels and smoothing algorithms.

Microsoft's MPEG for Windows 95 employs one of the worst MPEG
decoders I've ever seen. My suspicion is that MPEG for Windows
95 is really just a come-on for buying dedicated MPEG hardware,
either on a separate card or as part of a new video card. After
seeing some MPEG clips using MPEG for Windows 95, you'll be
excited by the prospects of MPEG, but frustrated by the performance
of the software-only approach.

This scenario fits in well with Microsoft's apparent overall
strategy of making Win95 the decade's hardware upgrade engine.
If you do get suckered into springing for dedicated MPEG hardware,
at least you'll find a dramatic performance turnaround. The
software-only MPEG for Windows 95 plays the MPEG video at 24fps,
with AM-radio-quality audio, and sucks up just about all the
processing power of a 90 or 100MHz Pentium. But if you add
a dedicated MPEG decoder chip to lend the CPU a helping hand,
you can play back a full 30fps video with CD-quality audio,
placing only a 10 percent load on the rest of your system.
A good hardware decoder also makes a full-screen image appear
sharper because it uses fancy tricks to smooth out the pixels
when it replicates them.

MPEG will become a major buzzword this year. You'll see it all
over ads for most systems. But buyer beware! As I hope you've
learned from this column, not all MPEG is created equal. For
example, Packard Bell currently offers the software-only version
on its systems, so you'll be watching some pretty murky movies.
IBM is shipping MPEG on all its new Aptiva systems and uses
a hybrid hardware/software approach that decodes the video
using the system's Pentium, but decodes the audio using IBM's
Mwave audio card. This intermediary approach provides better
quality than going software-only, but still saps most of your
system's horsepower. Compaq is taking the high road on some
of its Presario systems by offering a full hardware MPEG decoder,
which provides good quality video while minimizing the impact
on system performance.

Because hardware MPEG decoders are the better way to go, the
heated competition in the PC marketplace will drive this approach
to the forefront. The next crop of PC video cards will offer
MPEG as a standard feature, and pretty soon we'll see MPEG
chips migrating to the motherboard. By 1997, just when MPEG
I will seem like a stable standard, kaboom! It will be blown
away by MPEG II, offering four times the resolution. MPEG II
looks better than a TV screen.

Chief Analyst Fred Davis is the author of The Windows 95 Bible
(Peachpit Press). Contact Fred in the "ReadMe File" topic of
Windows Magazine's area on America Online and CompuServe, or
care of the editor at the addresses on page 18.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Windows at Work: Quit smoking. Lose weight. Give to charity. Sound familiar?

By:
Cheryl Currid

It's January-time to start making good on those New Year's resolutions.
It's also time for my annual plea to encourage you to work
smart. If you work smart, you'll have more time to work out
and follow through on a few of your other resolutions as well.

Working smart involves rethinking how you do your job. If your
office is like most, you and your coworkers have probably transferred
many legacy habits to your current jobs. Look around. How are
telephone messages distributed?

Still using those pink message slips?

Who sets up meetings? Does your company continue to torture
secretaries and administrative staff by making them call lists
of people and manually coordinate the best meeting time and
location?

Dig a little deeper. Are you using the right tool for the task?
Do you use a spreadsheet as a glorified calculator? Do administrative
folks use the tables in a word processor to calculate expense
reports?

How does your company distribute information? Are your business
presentations chock-full of boring lists? Do managers sleep
during presentations, awaking only to render a decision?

I'm always amazed at the incredible misuse of technology. In
many organizations, you see computers everywhere, but they
don't contribute to the bottom line.

What's the solution? For starters, let's consider communications
aids, group calendars, and user training and education courses.
Communications aids combine several technologies.

Take clip art. Imagine you've prepared a business report and
you want your audience to get the gist of both the good news
and the bad news. Rather than force them to wade through nothing
but boring lists of numbers or a gaggle of graphs, try supplementing
your work with clip art. You could spread the good news by
including an image of a cheerleader, a superhero taking flight
or a person toting a bag of coins accompanied by the caption
"We're crying all the way to the bank." You can transmit the
notion of bad news quickly with a clip-art image of a golfer
missing a swing, a worried man sitting at his desk with a downward
spiraling chart behind him or a businessperson perched in a
tree with the caption, "We're out on a limb with this product."

One more tip: Put your pictures on the left side of a screen
or page, and text or numbers on the right. According to brain
research experts, this technique wakes up both sides of the
brain and gets the message across more quickly.

My favorite clip-art collection is Task Force from New Vision
Technologies. Some of the characters had my staff ROFL (that's
rolling on the floor, laughing). Along with the zany characters
are plenty of images for more staid corporate cultures where
humor isn't politically correct.

Color counts

Color is another great communicator. It speeds the viewer's
perception of trends by up to four times over black and white.

Fortunately, the cost of color has dropped considerably over
the past few years. At the beginning of this decade, a decent
color printer would have set you back $15,000 to $25,000. Today,
Tektronix, Lexmark and Hewlett-Packard provide exquisite color
output for a fraction of that cost. Top-quality color printers
now range from $2,500 to $7,500 depending on the technology
they use (laser, thermal wax or phase-change solid ink)

The price of LCD panels has also dropped. Expect to pay between
$3,000 and $6,000 for a quality LCD panel. I'm partial to those
by In Focus, Sharp and Proxima. Also, make sure you pair your
panel with a high-intensity overhead projector. No dim lights,
please!

By now, you may be wondering if the time it takes to shop for
all this stuff, and then get comfortable using it, is worth
the eventual productivity gain. It is. If you stick with it,
you'll start preparing materials faster-and, more importantly,
your audience will make decisions faster.

And start using a group scheduler. I know I've sung this tune
before, but I'll keep singing it until paper appointment calendars
are driven from desktops. They should come with a warning label
that says "Caution: This product may be hazardous to your company's
productivity."

Do I sound too severe? My firm's research shows companies that
still use paper calendars consume (make that waste) 20 to 25
percent of their administrative staff's time scheduling meetings
and updating duplicate calendar copies. The situation is even
worse for organizations slim on support staff where white-collar
professionals may spend a day a week on administrative tasks.

I shudder to think that in this age of excellent group scheduling
products-Microsoft's Schedule+, Novell's Groupwise-people still
make meetings with only slightly modified versions of a quill
pen and parchment tablet. This silently robs people of time
they could spend on more productive work, and it artificially
inflates staffing needs. Even if companies do buy group scheduling
products, many workers in the organization barely understand
how to use them.

This takes me to my last suggestion: training and education.
Lack of how-to knowledge robs companies blind. Instructor-led
courses, which cost $99 to $395 per person per day, are a small
price to pay for increased efficiency. If that's too pricey,
consider video and computer-based training courses. They're
not as effective as live interaction with instructors, but
they beat no training at all.

Special-interest groups within your organization are a good
way to spread expertise and knowledge. Users can learn a lot
from other users.

Some organizations prefer to import knowledge by hiring a consultant
to teach users special techniques about technology. Just make
sure someone opens the session with a discussion about choosing
the right tool for the task.

If you need to justify training-course expenses, use simple
math. If each person picks up only one tip from a course, then
uses it to save 30 minutes per workday, that translates to
6.25 percent of that person's average work time. It adds up
to 2.5 hours per week, or an average of $2,400 per year per
person in labor savings. That sure sounds like a decent return
on investment.

I'll bring you more productivity-boosting technologies and techniques
later this year. In the meantime, Happy New Year and best of
luck with your work-smart program.

WinMag Analyst Cheryl Currid is president of Houston-based Currid
& Company, a research and consulting firm. Contact Cheryl in
the "Windows At Work" topic of WINDOWS Magazine's areas on
America Online and CompuServe, or care of the editor at the
addresses on page 18.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Dialog box: I'm sitting at my Mac, pondering the most overhyped product
in history.

By:
BRADLEY JOHNSON

It's Windows 95. I'm wearing the "Been there, done that" T-shirt
Apple sent to journalists as part of its "Windows Truth" campaign.
The company's goal was to convince the world that Windows 95
is just a poor imitation of the Macintosh operating system.

Apple's partially right: Windows 95 makes an average PC clone
almost as easy to use as a Mac. Windows 95 isn't as good as
the Mac OS. It may not even be as good as IBM's floundering
OS/2 Warp.

But in the technology business,"best" isn't good enough. Sony's
Beta was the superior videotape standard, but most makers of
videocassette recorders opted for VHS because Sony bungled
its licensing strategy. Today, all the hit movies at Blockbuster
are on VHS. With VHS, consumers got what they deserved: a competitive
market for electronic hardware and an abundance of software.
Ditto Windows 95.

And the Mac? Been there, done that. I'm using my Mac less and
less, and spending more time on a Windows 95 PC. I'm happily
buying into the Win95 hype. Masterful hype turns a good product
into a global movement, and I don't feel like being left behind.
If this software is good enough for my haircutter, a camera
guy I met at a TV station and a cabbie, it's good enough for
me.

Microsoft, other PC software and hardware makers, and retailers
are spending an estimated $700 million on advertising and promotion
to ensure that Windows 95 becomes the VHS of computers. The
computer industry stands to make billions off the success of
Windows 95.

But there's a downside to all this hype: The product can never
live up to its buildup. As the young, obsessed managers at
Microsoft like to say, Windows 95 isn't a cure for cancer.
It can't even eradicate bugs. The software giant had to offer
replacement disks to squash a bug just days after the product's
introduction.

Bugs are inevitable in software, but the pressure is on Microsoft
to fix them-and not to leave customers stranded. Microsoft
is pitching Windows 95 to millions of people who've never even
used computers. If Microsoft doesn't deliver customer satisfaction,
its reputation will crash faster than, well, the early Windows
95 beta it sent out last spring.

Fear not. Microsoft's campus is brimming with people driven
to build good products, and the company can deliver on its
promises. Bill Gates, best known for being the richest guy
on Earth, is not P.T. Barnum selling his circus acts to suckers.
And Windows 95 isn't New Coke, an overhyped product no one
wanted. Win95 is what the computer industry and users want
and need: a good product backed by a great vision.

In the ever-changing world of computers, Gates is selling a
compelling view of where technology will take us. That's the
sort of vision Apple founder Steve Jobs and former chairman
John Sculley offered in the 1980s. Today, Apple has lost that
vision thing, but Gates is seeing 20/20 through his smudged
glasses. He's offering Windows 95 to take computer users exactly
where they want to go today. For $89.95, Windows 95 is a bargain
fare to the future.

Gates' salesmanship (read: hype) is causing hundreds of PC makers,
thousands of software developers and millions of customers
to buy into Windows 95, creating a computer supermarket of
products. The combination of mass appeal and competition means
this hype-as with VHS-is buying a good deal for users.

Microsoft appropriated many Macintosh features for Windows 95,
so it's not surprising Microsoft also borrowed the concept
of computer hype. Apple turned Macintosh into a global sensation
with a 1984 Super Bowl commercial that suggested the new computer
could save the world from Big Brother. Unfortunately, the original
Mac didn't have the software to do that or much else. Because
of bungled business decisions, what was called "the computer
for the rest of us" is used by less than 10 percent of us.

By contrast, Windows 95 succeeds clunky, tired Windows 3.x,
which is used on some 80 percent of PCs. Given that the world
had already settled for bad Windows, the introduction of good
Windows is something worth hyping.

Windows 95 is, to be sure, a media Circus Maximus. Microsoft
encouraged the frenzy with an army of public relations executives
and an aggressive effort to put early versions of Win95 into
the hands (and PCs) of journalists. During the carnival-themed
launch at Microsoft's suburban Seattle headquarters, some 3,000
journalists jostled for interviews with Gates, struggled to
find an exclusive angle on the overblown story and searched
for nonjournalists to interview. Not too different, perhaps,
from the upcoming political conventions, except Gates has a
higher ambition-it's global domination, stupid!

This was "Boys (and Girls) on the Bus" at its best. Microsoft
rented school buses to remove journalists from the grounds
after the all-day event.

In the month leading up to the Aug. 24 introduction, journalists
wrote more than 6,000 Win95 stories. During the week before
the launch, TV stations and networks ran 345 segments on the
topic, approaching the coverage devoted to Bosnia, according
to Medialink Public Relations Research. During the three weeks
leading to launch, NBC and its CNBC cable channel accounted
for 70 percent of total Win95 coverage among the major network
and cable news outlets. NBC and Microsoft, coincidentally,
have numerous business dealings.

Microsoft doesn't deserve-and doesn't claim-full credit for
this PR coup. "We just got the ball rolling," one PR staffer
says. Then all media creatures great and small jumped in, not
wanting to miss The Big Story.

A case of media lemmings rushing headlong toward the hype? There's
no doubt a bit of that, but Windows 95 is worth writing about
and reading about as a cultural and business phenomenon.

The birth of this savior is a once-in-a-lifetime event. Windows
95 arrives as the masses leap into the computer and Internet
age. It's backed by every advertising and promotional trick
imaginable, on an unprecedented global scale.

Like any pop culture phenomenon, Windows 95 has taken on a life
of its own. But when Microsoft unveils the sequel in two to
three years, it's unlikely the world will again stop to watch.
The Second Coming happens only once.

Bradley Johnson is a Los Angeles-based columnist and technology
marketing writer for Advertising Age, a weekly trade newspaper.
Contact Brad in the "Dialog Box" topic of WINDOWS Magazine's
area on America Online and CompuServe, or care of the editor
at the addresses on page 18. Have an opinion (or a gripe) about
Windows computing you'd like to share? Send it to Nancy A.
Lang at the addresses on page 18.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Multimedia: A Rich Mixture of Sight and Sound

By:
Dave Raffo

The IBM ThinkPad 760CD is the Rolls-Royce of multimedia PCs
it's for people who want everything in a notebook and don't
mind paying for it.

The ThinkPad 760CD comes with a quad-speed CD-ROM, giant 12.1
inch Black Matrix high-resolution screen (800x600 pixels),
video decoder chip for movie-like video, and MWave media processor
for stereo sound. It's capable of phone, fax and modem functions,
and it comes with a 90MHz Pentium processor, up to 40MB of
RAM and a 1.2GB hard disk.

For comfort, the ThinkPad 760CD's full-size keyboard tilts up
automatically and includes a built-in palm rest.

And there's much more: The ThinkPad 760CD runs MPEG-1 and MPEG
2 video with NTSC/PAL video output that lets you plug the unit
into a color TV. It includes 16-bit wavetable audio with Sound
Blaster, MIDI and WAV support, speakers, and built-in microphone
and headphone jacks. The 7.4-pound unit measures 8.3 by 11.7
by 2.1 inches.

$5,349 to $7,449

IBM

800-426-2968, 919-517-1950

Toshiba Satellite Pro 410CDT

The Toshiba Satellite Pro 410CDT multimedia notebook features
a quad-speed CD-ROM module, an 11.3-inch TFT active-matrix
display with 800x600-pixel resolution, and Sound Blaster Pro
compatible audio with MIDI and WAV support. It has a 90MHz
Pentium processor, and ships standard with 8MB of RAM and a
772MB hard drive with 13-millisecond access time. The Satellite
Pro 410CDT weighs 7.4 pounds and measures 2.2 by 11.8 by 9.2
inches.

$4,699

Toshiba America Information Systems

800-999-4273, 714-583-3000


Panasonic KXL-D740

You don't have to spring for a new notebook to get quad-speed
CD-ROM capability. The Panasonic KXL-D740 portable quad-speed
CD-ROM drive will keep that notebook you just bought with dual
speed CD-ROM from becoming old hat.

The 14-ounce unit connects to your notebook through a PCMCIA
Type II card, or to a desktop PC with a SCSI II interface.
The KXL-D740 measures 1.4 by 5.52 by 8.2 inches, transfers
at 600Kbps and provides about two hours of data and four hours
of audio on six AA batteries. It doubles as an audio CD player.

$499

Panasonic

800-742-8086, 201-348-7000


Real Impact

Real Impact, a 32-bit video editor, lets you seamlessly import
the files you need to create digital content for multimedia
presentations. Its instant full-screen, full-motion digital
video playback with audio eliminates the need to compile multiple
tracks. Besides presentations, you can use Real Impact for
CD-ROM titles, information kiosks and cost-effective videotapes.
Real Impact requires an Intel 486 or Pentium PC running Windows
NT.

$2,995

Avid Technology

800-875-4699, fax 508-640-9486


VideoCraft

VideoCraft's seven effects editors take advantage of Win95's
32-bit architecture, interface and OLE capabilities. The video
production tool's editors-Overlay, Stylize, Colorize, Distort,
Morph, Transition and Warp-combine to offer millions of special
effects. You can use up to three effects simultaneously to
edit videos or images. VideoCraft supports advanced Alpha Channel
compositing for ghosting, montage and other effects.

$199.95

Andover Advanced Technologies

508-635-5300, fax 508-635-5326


Umax MaxMedia TV Mini

The Umax MaxMedia TV Mini is a pocket-sized (1.5 by 1.75 by
5 inches), 8-ounce box that converts the VGA video output of
your computer into a broadcast-TV-standard signal.

The device connects to a TV for computer-based multimedia presentations
or to a VCR for video publishing. It supports 640x480-pixel
true-color-to-NTSC conversions as well as 800 x600-pixel PAL
based conversions.

$179

Umax Technologies

800-562-0311, 510-651-4000


miroVideo DC20

The miroVideo DC20 video editing card provides 640x480-pixel
full-motion digital video capture, along with editing, playback
and print-to-tape capabilities at 60-field S-Video quality.

It uses onboard Motion-JPEG compression to work at low data
rates. You can edit and store video clips and images as Motion
JPEG files on your hard drive, then output them to videotape
without any loss of resolution. The package includes Adobe
Premiere 4.0 LE software for digital video editing, visual
effects and titling. Adobe Photoshop LE and Asymetrix 3D f
x software are also included for image enhancement and special
effects. The miroVideo DC20 supports NTSC, PAL and SECAM standards.

$999

miro Computer Products

800-249-miro, 415-855-0940





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "36"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

In Brief: Notebook Computers



The HP OmniBook 5000 CTS 5/120 notebook provides desktop-like
performance with a 120MHz Pentium processor, 16MB of RAM and
a 1.2GB hard disk. The notebook, based on a PCI bus for accelerated
graphics, also includes 16-bit Sound Blaster-compatible audio,
a 10.4-inch TFT active-matrix screen and NTSC/PAL video output
that lets you connect the unit to a TV.

$6,630 (street)

Hewlett-Packard Co.

800-443-1254, 503-715-2004





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "37"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

In Brief: Desktop Projectors



The Proxima Desktop Projector 2400 is the company's entry-level
multimedia LCD projector. It's designed for traveling professionals
who make lots of presentations before small audiences. The
Desktop Projector 2400 provides 190 lumens of brightness, projects
images at 640x480-pixel VGA resolution and weighs 21 pounds.

$6,295

Proxima Corp.

800-447-7692, 619-457-5500





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "38"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

In Brief: Speakers



Two Labtec LCS-3210 speakers produce three-dimensional audio,
thanks to the speakers' Spatializer 3-D stereo sound. The Spatializer
interactive technology enriches the sound and makes you think
it's coming at you from all sides. Because the speakers don't
require a subwoofer, they generate deep bass notes despite
their narrow design. The speakers measure 11.5 by 3.34 by 9
inches.

$119.99

Labtec

360-896-2000, fax 360-896-2020





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "39"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

In Brief: Personal Organizers



The Sidekick 95 Deluxe CD-ROM is enough to make Oscar Madison
a neat freak. Not only does it include Starfish Software's
Sidekick 95 personal organizer and Dashboard 95 desktop utility,
but it throws in two interactive videos on getting organized.
Sidekick 95 Deluxe also makes going online a snap by offering
America Online software, which includes 10 hours of free connect
time.

$79.95

Starfish Software

800-765-7839, 408-461-5800





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "40"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Digital Input: HP OmniGo 100 -- Hold a World of Info in Your Hands


Combining the functions of a paper notebook and computer notebook,
the HP OmniGo 100 puts personal information and financial tools
in the palm of your hand.

The hand-held organizer packs an appointment book, phone book,
notepad, database, calculator, spreadsheet and business tools
in an 11.6-ounce unit. At 1 by 3.75 by 6 inches, the OmniGo
100 fits into your coat pocket. Its 240x240-pixel monochrome
screen folds back on a 360-degree rotating hinge, so you can
use it like a traditional notepad.

Also available for the HP OmniGo 100 are a Connectivity Pack
for connection to a Windows-based PC, Clip & Go to link it
to Windows' Clipboard through a serial port, and six Strategy
Games. The HP OmniGo 100 is based on the Geos operating system.

You use a pen or the keyboard to input information. The OmniGo's
Jotter application lets you jot notes that you can organize
later, and its Graffiti system provides handwriting recognition
capability.

The OmniGo 100 comes with 1MB of RAM, a Type II PCMCIA slot
and 3MB of ROM. It runs on two standard AA batteries and a
lithium backup.

$349 (street)

Hewlett-Packard Co.

800-443-1254, 503-715-2000





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "41"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Digital Input: TV One DeltaScan and TV One DeltaScan-PRO -- Images Go from
PC to TV


Looking for a way to turn your PC's video output into NTSC (National
TV Standards Committee) or PAL (Phase Alternating Line) video?

The TV One DeltaScan family consists of two models that convert
your computer's video signal into images that are compatible
with professional display standards. The TV One DeltaScan is
recommended for systems with display outputs of 800x600 pixels,
although it can work with outputs as dense as 1600x1200.

The TV One DeltaScan-PRO is for computers with a resolution
of up to 1024x768 pixels. Both systems include an infrared
remote-control unit, are compatible with 24-bit video subsystems
and include controls that allows precise adjustment of the
display window size.

DeltaScan, $395; DeltaScan-PRO, $695

TV One Multimedia Solutions

800-721-4044,

606-282-7303





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "42"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Digital Input: Connectix QuickCam -- Plug and Picture


The Connectix QuickCam turns your PC into an instant snapshot
developer. The 4-ounce digital video camera plugs into the
parallel port, installing as easily as a mouse.

The QuickCam's bundled software lets you take pictures and make
movies on your PC. The device produces still and video images
at up to 320x240 pixels with 64 shades of gray. It captures
video images at 15 frames per second or better.

$99 (street)

Connectix Corp.

800-950-5880, 415-571-5100





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "43"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

In Brief: Videoconferencing


Is videoconferencing becoming mainstream? The PictureTel Live
PCS 200 costs about one-third the price of PictureTel's first
videoconferencing product, released in late 1994. The PCS 200,
jointly developed with Compaq, has an interface modeled after
Microsoft Office and plug-and-play features. It offers a customizable
floating toolbar, an easy-to-use address book and support for
32-bit color in a video call.

$1,995

PictureTel Corp.

800-716-6000, 508-762-5000





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "44"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

In Brief: Tape Backup



What do you do if your hard disk crashes under Windows 95? The
Tapedisk Professional for Windows 95's codeblue feature lets
you recover without reinstalling Win95. From a boot diskette,
the tape storage system lets you restore the complete tape
backup to a newly formatted hard disk. The Tapedisk lets your
PC use a SCSI tape drive like a logical disk. Any Win95 application
can write files directly to the tape.

$249.95 (direct)

Tapedisk Corp.

800-827-3372, 715-235-3388





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "45"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

In Brief: Fax Modems



Besides providing 28.8Kbps transfer rates, the Creative Labs
Modem Blaster 28.8 PCMCIA includes Internet access and fax
software. The fax modem bundles NetManage's Chameleon Internet
Tools and Pacific Image Communications' SuperFax software.
SuperFax includes fax broadcasting, pager notification of new
faxes, a phone book, fax viewer and TWAIN support.

$249.99 (street)

Creative Labs

800-998-5227, 408-428-6600





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "46"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Notebook Computers: AST Ascentia 950N/90 -- Speed and Video to Go



For speed and desktop-like multimedia features in a notebook
computer, check out the AST Ascentia 950N/90, which uses Intel's
90MHz Pentium processor.

This notebook ships standard with 256KB of cache memory, 1MB
of video memory and a 32-bit graphics accelerator. It provides
16-bit Sound Blaster audio, 8MB of RAM, an 800MB or 1.2GB hard
disk, and either a 10.4-inch color active-matrix or TFT screen.

The Ascentia 950N/90's dual operating system install option
gives you a one-time choice of Windows for Workgroups 3.11
or Windows 95. The operating system not chosen will be deleted.

AST's Ascentia 950N/90 uses lithium ion batteries, which will
power the notebook for up to 6 hours, according to the manufacturer.
The portable weighs approximately 6.4 pounds without its battery
charger, which charges faster with the system on.

From $3,449 (street)

AST Research

800-876-4278, 714-727-4141





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "47"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Notebook Computers: Kiwi OpenNote -- A Kiwi That Can Take Flight



Looking for an expandable multimedia notebook computer? The
Kiwi OpenNote uses Cyrix's 5x86 (Intel-compatible) processor
and an open architecture designed for hassle-free configuration
and upgrades.

The OpenNote incorporates 16KB of write-back cache and ships
standard with a 540MB removable hard disk, at least 8MB of
RAM and a 100MHz processor (a 120MHz processor is optional)

Also included with the system are one Type II stacked PCMCIA
slot, a 10.4-inch dual-scan color screen, touchpad pointing
device, 14.4Kbps fax modem and 16-bit sound card, and nickel
metal hydride batteries.

With easy upgrades in mind, Kiwi uses 72-pin SIMM modules and
the Cyrix 5x86 processor, which is a plug-in module. You can
expand to 32MB of RAM through one 72-pin slot. The OpenNote
weighs 5.8 pounds and ships with Windows 95.

A quad-speed CD-ROM drive and 28.8Kbps fax modem are optional.

8MB of RAM, $2,495;

16MB, $2,795

Kiwi Computer

408-492-9188, fax 408-492-9187





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "48"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Notebook Computers: Epson ActionNote 890 Series -- Take Action Notebooks



A notebook from the Epson ActionNote 890 Series won't put you
in the poorhouse, even if it's designed for multimedia. The
890C and 895C run on a Cyrix DX4-class 100MHz processor. Both
come standard with 8MB of RAM, a 540MB removable hard disk,
an ActionPoint touchpad, palm rest and a 10.4-inch dual-scan
color display. You can choose between Windows 95 or 3.11. The
895C multimedia model adds a built-in Sound Blaster-compatible
16-bit stereo, internal microphone and speaker.

890C, from $2,099 (street); 895C, from $2,299

Epson America

800-BUY-EPSON x3000,

310-782-0770





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "49"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

In Brief: Notebooks


Does the average laptop computer lack the muscle necessary for
your applications or lifestyle? The Itronix X-C 6000 Cross
Country Computer is a rugged notebook that is available with
a self-contained 14.4Kbps modem and wireless communications
devices, a 260MB hard disk, 4MB to 16MB of system memory and
512KB of video memory. It also features a Type III PCMCIA slot,
nickel cadmium or nickel metal hydride batteries, and a 40MHz
low-voltage 486 processor. It's available with a 640x480-pixel
monochrome display with touch screen and meets most U.S. military
durability standards.

From $4,810 (with touch screen)

Itronix Corp.

800-555-4104, 509-624-6600


The Texas Instruments Extensa 550, 550CD and 550CDT are 75MHz
Pentium notebooks for home and small businesses. They ship
standard with 524MB hard disks, 8MB of RAM and modular floppy
disk drive bays that also accept an optional lithium ion battery.
The 550CD adds a dual-speed CD-ROM drive. The 550 and 550CD
use 10.4-inch dual-scan displays. The 550CDT includes a CD
ROM drive, 16-bit Sound Blaster Pro-compatible stereo and a
10.4-inch TFT display.

550, $2,499; 550CD, $2,999; 550CDT, $3,599

Texas Instruments

800-TI-TEXAS, 817-771-5856





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "50"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Internet Access: Instant Internet 3.0 -- Fast and Wide Connections


Instant Internet 3.0 lets you use the latest and greatest resources
to access the Internet more efficiently.

The new version of the hardware/software product includes a
32-bit Winsock for compatibility with Windows 95 and NT, and
the newest Netscape version. It also comes with a built-in
64Kbps ISDN connection to deliver dramatically higher bandwidth
than its previous versions. Its new administrative tools include
SNMP support, logging and monitoring facilities, and sophisticated
controls on user access.

Administrators can assign and limit access to particular Web
sites on a per-user or group basis, as well as by weekday and
time. A dynamic monitoring screen displays connection status,
transfer rates and number of connected users.

Instant Internet connects up to 50 concurrent users.

$4,495

Performance Technology

800-784-4638, 210-349-2000





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "51"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Internet Access: CyberJunction -- NT: A New Internet Frontier



A Windows NT-server based product, CyberJunction offers Internet
access, TCP/IP and host connectivity for Novell NetWare environments.
Designed specifically for workgroups, CyberJunction lets you
connect to the Internet quickly and securely.

CyberJunction includes Frontier's SuperWeb Web server, and
Frontier Internet applications from SuperTCP Suite 1.2 and
SuperHighway Access 2.0.  This bundling allows NetWare users to
improve internal and external communications through the World
Wide Web.  By providing IPX to IP bridging through a Windows
NT-based server, CyberJunction eliminates the need

for TCP/IP software on every desktop.

Five-user package, $1,795; 100-user package, $17,250

Frontier Technologies Corp.

800-929-3054,

414-241-4555





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "52"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Internet Access: iCAT Electronic Commerce -- Purr-fect Catalogs


Design customized, interactive catalogs for the Internet or
your CD-ROM with iCAT Electronic Commerce Toolkit 2.0. This
three-product set-the Commerce Manager, Commerce Exchange and
optional Commerce Engine-lets you create an electronic catalog
and conduct business either by CD-ROM or the Internet.

Manager Pro, $4,495; Lite, $1,495; Exchange, $5,000; licensing
fee for first run, Engine Pro, $35,000; Lite, $15,000

Interactive Catalog Corp.

800-558-4228, 206-623-0977





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "53"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

In Brief: Internet



You or your business can set up a graphical online system and
access the Internet and World Wide Web with the Worldgroup
Internet Server. This package includes a 20-user version of
Galacticomm's Worldgroup online system/workgroup software,
the Internet Connectivity Option 2.0 and a Dial-Out add-on
option. The new Internet extension offers proxy and pass-through
SLIP/CSLIPP/PPP.

$1,400 (street)

Galacticomm

800-328-1128, 305-583-5990


Is your business still using slow modems to connect to the Internet?
Speed things up with Netopia 630 and Netopia 640. The products
are part of Farallon Computing's family of high-speed ISDN
products and services. They provide Netopia Internet routers
and software, including the Netopia Starter Kit, Netscape Navigator
and the MS Plus Internet Jumpstart Kit. The products work with
Ethernet LANs supporting Windows 3.1, 95 and NT.

The Netopia 630 supports up to five simultaneous users; the
640 supports unlimited users.

Netopia 630, $1,299;

Netopia 640, $1,599

Farallon Computing

510-814-5000, fax 510-814-5023


The InterGO browser is aimed at students, parents and educators.
It uses scenes, including an office, library, newsroom and
even a treasure map, to connect to integrated reference resources
and to the Internet.

$99

TeacherSoft

214-424-7882,

http://www.teachersoft.com





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "54"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Database: Prospero -- Safety Through a Tempest of Apps


Prospero bridges your desktop applications, databases and Lotus
Notes. The visual software tool lets you quickly move data
back and forth among Notes, Microsoft Excel and Word or corporate
SQL databases.

And because it requires no source or OLE code, department heads
can work with information systems managers to build the bridges.
Prospero constructs an application from reusable components.
It uses OLE to integrate applications and ODBC to integrate
relational databases. You assemble graphical building blocks
to perform a specific task and connect those blocks with arrows
to indicate how you want the data to flow. When you run the
program, Prospero reads and writes data to and from applications.
The 32-bit application runs on Windows 95, 3.1 or NT.

$695 (direct)

Oberon Software

617-494-0990, fax 617-494-0414





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "55"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Database: BMDP/Diamond -- Color Your Statistical World


Just because a software program analyzes and interprets data,
it doesn't have to be drab. BMDP/Diamond, a tool originally
developed for OS/2 and UNIX, has been redesigned for Windows
and transforms data into revealing graphics.

Using tools such as 3-D scatter plots, Parametric Snake plots
and a real-time spreadsheet editor, BMDP/Diamond helps you
explore and manipulate data. It dynamically links each session's
data representation windows. Change information or color, and
the program updates those changes in all related data windows
and graphics. BMDP/Diamond directly imports from Microsoft
Excel, Lotus 1-2-3, dBASE and BMDP products. It also works
as a front-end application to other statistical packages.

$395; competitive upgrade, $295

BMDP Statistical Software

800-238-2367, 310-207-8800





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "56"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Database: Optimas Library -- When Image Is Everything



Optimas Library is a database for the image-conscious.

The multiuser image database provides data management and batch
image analysis. It enables you to cus- tomize, archive, search,
analyze and automate your image management.

Optimas Library accepts images from disk or Clipboard, as well
as those captured from TWAIN-supported scanners or multimedia
boards.

$995

Optimas Corp.

800-635-7226, 206-402-8888





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "57"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

In Brief: E-Mail



Embla 2.0 is a 32-bit enhanced version of the network e-mail
application that includes right-mouse-button access to context
sensitive menus, priority flagging, message and attachment
searching, batch sending and Netscape Navigator integration.
You can also now activate Embla from other applications.

$99

ICL ProSystems

800-755-8646, 714-855-5505





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "58"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

In Brief: Help Authoring



Doc-To-Help 2.0 is an upgraded version of the Windows help-authoring
tool. The program was updated to work with Microsoft Word for
Windows 95. It uses 32-bit architecture with support for long
filenames, automatically generates contents files (CNT files)
and makes it easy to include multimedia elements in Help files.
WexTech also released Doc-To-Help 1.7 for Word 2.0 and 6.0
users who work in Windows 95 or 3.1.

$395; upgrade to 2.0, $129; upgrade to 1.7, $29

WexTech Systems

800-939-8324, 212-949-9595


WinHelp Office 95's ToolKit includes Help-To-Source function
and Internet Access. Help-To-Source lets you convert any Windows
3.x, 95 or NT help files into their RTF (Rich Text Format)
and HPJ (Help Project) source files. Internet Access allows
you to create a jump from Windows Help to the Internet with
any Web browser. The WinHelp Office suite also includes RoboHelp
95, Mastering WinHelp and the Moving to WinHelp 95 Kit.

$599

Blue Sky Software Corp.

800-459-2356, 619-459-6365





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "59"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Graphics: Gryphon Batch It -- Convert a New Batch of Images


A graphic artist's work is (almost) never done. There are always
files to convert from one format to another. Gryphon Batch
It helps perform these critical image-processing and batch
mode operations. With its "tile" interface, Gryphon Batch It
simplifies complex graphics-processing procedures and reduces
production time.

Want to perform a color correction on a series of images? Just
drag out a few tiles and link them together; Gryphon Batch
It does the rest. The program's image utility performs tasks
in succession by "linking" specific tiles. You can resize,
adjust brightness and contrast, and convert several images
to a different file format in a single batching process.

Gryphon Batch It saves the tiles that define a particular batch
sequence. The application works in the background while you
perform other tasks.

$199

Gryphon Software Corp.

619-536-8815, fax 619-536-8932





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "60"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Graphics: SolidWorks 95 -- Solid Work for a CAD


No software is poised to take advantage of Windows 95 like CAD
programs. SolidWorks 95 takes steps to improve CAD by utilizing
Win95's long filenames, 32-bit operating system, multitasking
and resource management. The application brings the power of
production-level solid modeling to the Windows desktop.

SolidWorks 95 forms the basis of a 3-D-centric design process.
In 3-D-centric design, a fully detailed solid model is used
as a master model for producing drawings and performing other
downstream functions such as finite element analysis and numerical
control programming.

Designed for mechanical engineers and designers, SolidWorks
95 features the FeatureManager for displaying the model and
a list of features to build it.

$3,995

SolidWorks Corp.

508-371-2910, fax 508-371-7303





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "61"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Graphics: Instant 3D for Windows 95 -- Eye-Popping Words



In a world full of dull documents and pedestrian Web pages,
nothing grabs a reader's attention like 3-D.

Instant 3D for Windows 95 adds 3-D words and graphics to MS
Word, PowerPoint or any Windows 95 document or presentation.
Instant 3D allows users to turn any text into a 3-D object
with, say, a wood- or chrome-like texture. It includes hundreds
of 3-D clip-art objects.

$49

Visual Software

818-883-7900, fax 818-593-3737





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "62"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

In Brief: Imaging/Graphics



Get a whole new image with Kai's Power Tools 3. The imaging
program's new features include the KPT Lens f/x, which gives
you control over effects like smudges, noise and Gaussian blur;
the KPT Spheroid Designer, a 3-D ray-tracing engine to render
custom 3-D spheres; and KPT Interform, which lets you mix multiple
textures to create whole new textures. The KPT Texture Explorer
creates new generations of visual effects with no tiling.

$199

MetaTools

805-566-6200, fax 805-566-6385


Drag 'n Draw 1.1 is a 32-bit version of the easy-to-use chart
and diagramming program. The upgraded version, designed for
Windows 95 and NT, supports OLE 2.0, long filenames and e-mail
integration. You can drag and drop objects from libraries into
a drawing, or create a custom work of art. The product will
ship with diskettes for the 16- and 32-bit versions in the
same box.

$79 (street)

DeltaPoint

800-446-6955, 408-648-4000


As Windows PCs make inroads into the graphics area traditionally
dominated by Macs, the ability to share files is becoming increasingly
important. Canvas 3.5 for Windows 95 allows Windows users to
exchange graphics documents with Macintosh and Power Macintosh
platforms. The program runs under Windows 95, 3.x and NT.

$399.95; $99.95 competitive upgrade

Deneba Software

305-596-5644, fax 305-273-9069





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "63"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Business Software: Visual AccountMate -- Hold Win95 and NT Accountable



With Visual AccountMate, number crunchers can take full advantage
of the power of Windows 95 and NT and the programming language
of 32-bit Visual FoxPro.

Visual AccountMate's tools include Express Icons for quick access
to common functions, Drill Down for convenient access to micro
information in each field, Lookup for selecting macro information
from extensive lists and View for revealing financial details
behind summary totals.

Other features include Transaction Rollback-which prevents incomplete
entries during a power failure-internal e-mail messaging and
photo-imaging capabilities. Visual AccountMate links directly
to Microsoft Excel and Lotus 1-2-3, includes multiple password
security levels and has a built-in Report Designer for drag
and-drop form customization. AccountMate consists of seven
levels-System Manager, General Ledger, Accounts Payable, Accounts
Receivable, Sales Order, Purchase Order and Inventory Control.

Compiled version, $995; source-code version, $1,295; developer
version, $1,795

SourceMate Information Systems

800-877-8896, 415-381-1101





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "64"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Business Software: Crush -- Crush the Competition or Crash


Crush, a rather fancifully named program, can help you crush
the competition or at least keep you from getting pounded by
constantly changing market forces.

This interactive CD-ROM tool helps you develop marketing strategies
and action plans.

Enter information about your company, and Crush's database refines
marketing objectives and evaluates competitive strengths and
weaknesses. It helps you identify and analyze trends and competitors,
map competitive positions, and create reports, presentations
and action plans.

Crush's tables and charts include a Competitive Database, Market
Analysis, Positioning Charts, Action Planner and Reports Generator,
and Mentor and Case Studies. The Competitive Database spells
out your strengths and weaknesses against those of your competitors
in relation to market trends and perhaps information from your
spreadsheets. The Market Analysis defines your product and
its target audience.

$499

Hands-On Technology

800-772-2580, 415-579-7755





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "65"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Business Software: WinMerge 2.1 -- Point-and-Shoot Merging



WinMerge 2.1 lifts screen data from virtually any Windows-based
application for point-and-shoot merging into word processing
applications such as Microsoft Word, WordPerfect and Word Pro.

WinMerge lets you switch from a form letter with the click of
a mouse, so you can create form letters with drop-in merge
fields. You don't have to learn merge procedures, there's no
need to manually type in merge commands, and you don't have
to learn how to create and maintain OLE links.

$89 (direct)

Napersoft

800-380-1000, 708-778-0080





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "66"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

In Brief: Bar Coding



B-Coder 3.0 provides high-quality bar codes for labels, forms,
coupons, book covers, invoices and other documents. Its full
desktop publishing features-including color, rotation and bar
width reduction-give you complete control of the bar-code format.
B-Coder comes in two versions, B-Coder Pro and B-Coder DTP
for desktop publishers with limited bar-code needs.

B-Coder Pro, $395; B-Coder DTP, $199

T.A.L. Technologies

800-722-6004, 215-763-7900


Barcode Anything lets you design and print bar codes directly
from its database. The Barcode Anything Track database includes
templates for items you're likely to bar code, and lets you
set passwords and manage your bar-code data. Barcode Anything
Scan is a scanning pen that reads and decodes bar-code types.
The Barcode Anything Label software reads files from other
applications, and prints to laser, dot-matrix and selected
thermal printers.

$379

Zebra Technologies VTI

800-477-5589, 801-576-9700


ProSort 2.0 can presort and bar code 300,000 pieces of mail
per minute, and provides optimum postal discounts from a user's
database.

$595

Group 1 Software

800-368-5806, 301-731-2300





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "67"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Input Devices: Mitsumi Wireless Mouse -- Let Your Mouse Run Free



Tired of always tugging on your mouse's cable? Don't be trapped
by your mouse-break free from that desktop web of wires with
the Mitsumi Wireless Mouse.

This two-button cordless mouse communicates via radio to a receiver
that attaches to your PC's standard serial port, and works
from within about 3 feet of your computer. The Mitsumi Wireless
Mouse features 400cpi resolution, a 4800bps baud rate and a
retail price of about $50.

The receiver attaches to your PC via a 6-foot cable. You can
place the mouse inside the receiver when you're not using the
mouse.

The included lithium battery provides up to three years of power,
assuming typical usage.

The Mitsumi Wireless Mouse works with any PCs running Windows
95, Windows 3.1, or DOS 5.0 or higher. It comes with a two
year warranty.

$49.95

Mitsumi Electronics Corp.

800-MITSUMI, 214-550-7300





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "68"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Input Devices: Interlink DeskStick -- Joystick Makes Its Point



The Interlink DeskStick saves desktop space and is more comfortable
for your hands and wrist. It frees up space because it uses
no mousepad. And-good news for lefties-it works with either
hand.

The fingertip joystick controls the cursor, which eliminates
repeated side-to-side hand motions and awkward wrist angles.
Its Force Sensing Resistor converts changes in pressure applied
by your finger into cursor movement.

The DeskStick is symmetrically designed with click buttons located
on both sides.

The device provides standard serial or PS/2 mouse ports, is
compatible with Microsoft Mouse, DOS, Windows 3.x and Windows
95 mouse drivers, and ships with VersaPoint software in case
no driver is present.

$59.95

Interlink Electronics

800-340-1331, 805-484-1331





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "69"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Input Devices: P.I. Engineering WhyKeyKey -- WhyKeyKey? Why Not?



No, the P.I. Engineering WhyKeyKey isn't a CD-ROM title depicting
the delights of a Hawaiian beach. It's an adapter for folks
who feel that two keyboards are better than one.

The dual keyboard adapter uses the existing software interface
to let you plug in and use two keyboards simultaneously. This
would allow people who share a home PC or a workstation to
each have their own setup.

$49.95

P.I. Engineering

800-628-3185, 517-655-5523





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "70"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

In Brief: Input Devices



The Logitech TrackMan Marble uses an electronic sensing device
instead of the usual trackball's system of rollers, shafts
and wheels. You control cursor movement with a marble that
sits atop the TrackMan. A sensor tracks the motion of the marble
through dots printed on the bottom of the ball. This is designed
to eliminate tracking problems caused by dust.

$99 (street)

Logitech

800-231-7717, 510-795-8500


The Mitsumi ZW 104 Keyboard provides three new Win95-specific
keys that allow easy access to functions such as task switching,
while two Application keys support Win95 application shortcuts.
The keyboard also features ergonomically shaped keys and a
6-foot cable.

$34.95

Mitsumi Electronics Corp.

800-MITSUMI, 214-550-7300


The Corporate Source Star-Track is a cordless infrared trackball
designed for remote one-handed cursor operation. The remote
trackball weighs only about 2 ounces and has a range of up
to 15 feet at 90-degree angles. The Star-Track runs on two
AAA batteries, and comes with a recharger and presentation
software.

$79.95

Corporate Source

800-722-7748, 714-582-1946





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "71"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Mapping Software: Maps and Data for Microsoft Office 95 -- See the World from
Your Desktop



Maps and Data for Microsoft Office 95 combines with Excel to
provide point-and-click analysis of a comprehensive set of
market and demographic data. With this program, you can, for
instance, identify the median income of potential customers,
along with age patterns and housing descriptions.

The CD-ROM program provides more than 1,000 high-resolution
maps of foreign countries and every U.S. state. Each state
map contains eight map layers, including zip code boundaries,
waterways, airports, railroads, landmarks and census tracks.
Maps and Data's worldwide information includes data on population,
age, marital and employment status, housing, school enrollment,
occupation and gender. The program's data can work with MapInfo
and Atlas GIS.

$99

MaconUSA

617-254-2295,

fax 617-254-2883





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "72"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Mapping Software: FirstMap -- Map a Smart Business Course



FirstMap, a CD-ROM mapping program designed to work with Excel
95, can break down every major U.S. neighborhood into useful
demographic sales information. Now you can have the type of
marketing tools on your desktop that were previously the domain
of large corporations.

The program includes boundary maps for counties, zip codes and
census tracts. You can print FirstMap's full-color maps directly
from Excel or embed them in Word, PowerPoint or other OLE-compliant
software.

FirstMap contains hundreds of variables of U.S. census information,
including age, sex, race, household composition and income
figures. It provides information on national, state, city and
even neighborhood levels.

$69

Wessex

800-892-6906, 708-501-3662





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "73"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Mapping Software: Select Street Atlas -- Become Streetwise



Turn business and travel data from more than one million destinations
across the country into detailed street maps with Select Street
Atlas.

The program packs a complete street map of the United States
on one CD-ROM. It allows you to create a customized map of
any area of the nation, with the help of the program's and
your own databases. You can drag any of 100 icons onto the
maps, add text and highlight routes or areas.

$99 (street)

Pro CD

800-992-2376, 508-750-0000





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "74"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

In Brief: Utilities



Project Updater picks up where Time Line and Microsoft Project
leave off. The Windows 95-compliant client/server app automates
project updating and status reporting through a centralized
Oracle repository. It is aimed at managers of projects with
over 20 team members working with Project 4 or Time Line 6
or higher.

Project Update Server and three client licenses, $9,995; additional
licenses, $199 per user

Time Line Solutions Corp.

800-222-TLSC, 415-898-8200


Partition Magic 2.0 lets you reclaim lost disk space and makes
Windows 95 more efficient by modifying your PC's File Allocation
Table (FAT) file system. The program can resize clusters, more
than double the size of the Windows 95 root directory for long
filenames, and replace FDISK and FORMAT utilities with a faster
graphical utility.

$49.95

PowerQuest Corp.

800-379-2566, 801-226-8977


FontMinder 3.0 makes it easier to preview and manage fonts in
Windows 95 and 3.1. The utility's new version includes a tabbed
interface. You can preview, print and install fonts with a
right mouse-button click.

$79.95; upgrade, $24.95

Ares Software Corp.

800-783-2737, 415-578-9090





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "75"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Networking: Rumba Office 95/NT -- Keep Your Network Data in Step



You should be the one who leads when you're dancing with business
data, regardless of when you need it or where it resides on
your network. Rumba Office 95/NT uses a notebook metaphor and
OLE 2.0 support to let you control data access.

Rumba provides access to latent client/server capabilities on
IBM mainframe and AS/400, Digital VAX and UNIX systems. The
Rumba Notebook lets you organize and insert applications and
information-wherever the resources reside-into tabbed notebook
pages. Click on a notebook tab for the information you desire.

The Rumba Notebook accepts any OLE 2.0 server object. Rumba
Office 95/NT also lets you manage network printers from a graphical
console, so you can preview host print requests before committing
to printing a job.

$500

Wall Data

800-915-9255, 415-856-9255





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "76"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Networking: Remote Access -- FMI PC Card family -- This Deck's Stacked with
Cards



Fujitsu Microelectronics made its debut in the retail PC Card
market by releasing a whole deck of cards-10 in all-for communications,
multimedia and networking. All the FMI PC Card family products
are interoperable, hot swappable and Plug-and-Play compatible.
The communication cards-14.4 and 28.8 Fax/Modems, ISDN Interface
and Serial Card-enable functions such as faxing and e-mail.
The multimedia cards-SCSI 600 and 1200 Interface, and Stereo
Sound-connect to presentation, entertainment and sound peripherals.
The LAN cards-10BaseT and 10BaseT/2

Ethernet, and LAN/SCSI Combo-provide network connectivity.

From $169 to $600

Fujitsu Microelectronics

800-642-7616, 408-922-9000





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "77"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Networking: Remote Access -- Eicon Diva -- Make Beautiful Music



Even if your laptop has never spoken to your NT server
before, it can now serenade it with the help of the Eicon Diva
ISDN card. The Diva card uses IP, IPX or PPP to connect notebooks
(its PCMCIA version) and desktops (ISA version) to peer workstations,
remote networks, SNA mainframes, fax services, online services
and the Internet.

ISA bus, $595; PCMCIA Type II bus, $696

Eicon Technology

800-803-4266, 214-239-3270





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "78"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

In Brief: UPS



The HP PowerWise L1250 UPS entry to Hewlett-Packard's advanced
Uninterruptible Power Supplies family is aimed at midsized
networks and includes all its SNMP (Simple Network Management
Protocol) software on a CD-ROM for easy administration. HP's
new PowerWise Assistant tells you when something is wrong and
predicts battery wear-out. The PowerWise software supports
nearly all operating systems, including Windows NT.

$649

Hewlett-Packard Co.

800-533-1333, http:\\www.hp.

com\netserver\prodinfo.html


Only 3.5 inches high, the Best Power Rackmount Fortress UPS
models are designed for internetworking and communications
professionals. The new no-break, line-interactive, sine-wave
UPS products come in three models: 720VA, 1020VA and 1420VA.
All are compatible with Best, CheckUPS, CheckUPS II, and SNMP
interface and control products.

From $799 to $1,149

Best Power, a unit of General Signal

800-356-5794, 608-565-7200


LanSafe III 3.0 power management software protects Windows 95,
NT and 3.x systems against power outages. It lets you customize
shutdown functions on your network. LanSafe III saves works
in progress and closes network devices in a sequence you design.
The program thus saves critical workstation data to the server
before routers and bridges shut down.

$99

Deltec Electronics Corp.

800-DELTEC1, 619-291-4211





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "79"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Programming: StarTeam -- Get Your Project Together



The StarTeam players are a combined set of collaborative development
tools from StarBase. Using a single user interface to help
you maintain all project information within a central repository,
the package includes version control, defect tracking, electronic
conferencing, auditing and reporting systems (with charting).
The Visual C++ edition integrates within the VC++ project window.

Version control features include check in and out, branching
and merging, multiple directory support and fast sorting of
project information. StarTeam can convert a PVCS project database.
A side-by-side comparison utility compares different project
file versions.

The defect tracking component is integrated with project files,
so bugs are displayed when a file is checked in. Clicking on
the defect changes its status to "fixed" and updates the audit
trail. The Version History window allows direct version manipulation
through a right-mouse click.

Standalone, $549; integration with Visual C++, $299

StarBase Corp.

800-997-8272, 714-442-4400





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "80"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Programming: Wise Installation System 4.0 -- Use Self-Installing Executables



Wise Installation System 4.0 makes it easy for users to create
installation programs for Windows, including both Win95 and
NT. You create installations as a single .EXE file, or one
per disk for multiple-disk installations.

With its Custom Dialog Editor, no programming is required. You
can drag and drop installations without writing a line of code.
It includes an installation expert for fast script creation.
Wise comes with a 16-bit and 32-bit IDE. It supports calls
to DLL-based functions, scans for DLL/VBX dependencies, and
automatically compresses and splits your files across multiple
diskettes. In addition, it also supports network, CD-ROM and
ODBC installations.

Wise supports 256-color graphics and password-protected installations.

$199 (direct)

Great Lakes Business Solutions

800-554-8565,

313-981-4970





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "81"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Programming: VanGui -- An Original VanGui



With VanGui, COBOL programmers can work in a visual environment
and create true Windows applications using their familiar language
syntax.

The design tool lets you design windows, add standard Windows
and VBX controls, and change an object's properties or add
event-handling logic in COBOL. You can also preserve business
critical legacy logic. It supports calls to over 150 Windows
API functions, using COBOL parameters.

Including compiler and debugger, under $3,000

Ryan McFarland

800-RM-COBOL, 512-343-1010





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "82"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

In Brief: Programming



VtoolsD for Windows 95 lets you build 32-bit Win95 device drivers
with Microsoft or Borland C or C++ compilers. You can build
optimized drivers for high-speed devices (including Plug-and
Play hardware), create dynamically loaded and pageable device
drivers, or build drivers for virus checkers and security applications.
The toolkit includes support for communicating between Win32
applications and device drivers, and a revised utility to generate
VxD source code.

$495

Vireo Software

508-264-9200, fax 508-264-9205


Teams working in Visual Basic can design and document a project's
requirements, as well as functional, internal and quality assurance
specifications, with Vision StoryBoard 3.0. The program walks
you and your customer through an application, capturing and
annotating forms, controls and menus. Then it produces custom
reports, complete project specifications or training materials,
including screenshots. The SpecMaker feature can document all
controls on a VB form, while SlideShow illustrates VB form
transitions and logic flows using a graphical storyboard.

$249

Vision Software Tools

800-984-SOFT, 510-238-4100





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "83"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: Paradox 7 -- Easy Way from Data Maze to Database

By:
James E. Powell

From the moment you launch Paradox 7 and use the new Startup
Expert, you know you're using a vastly improved database. New
experts take you through the chores of creating tables and
databases, running mail-merge applications, building charts
or importing ASCII data. The Startup Expert even steps you
through building seven predefined applications that Paradox
7 provides, including a powerful contact manager application
complete with forms, tabbed menu choices and reports.

Paradox's Form, Report and Mailing Label Experts now let you
use aliases or path names for saving files, and accept both
queries and tables for input. The Mailing Label Expert now
allows you to define nonstandard label formats, and the Mail
Merge Expert creates documents using WordPerfect, Microsoft
Word or Paradox's own report writer. The new Chart Expert helps
you graph your data 18 different ways. Fixed-length or delimited
text files are easy pickings for the Import Expert, which also
lets you save your layout definition for future use. To give
your application a professional look, use the Application Launcher
Expert to design a tabbed window from which your forms, reports
or queries can be launched.

Version 7's Table Expert makes it easier to create a table.
Using this expert, you build a new table by selecting bits
and pieces from other databases. Cannibalize your own tables
or those provided, such as Paradox's predefined Orders table.
It's a great time-saver, especially if you need to create several
small, but similar, databases.

After you've developed your data formats, the Report Expert
helps you design the data displays. The program has several
new display options, including a pleasing 3-D look. Version
7's Report Expert also streamlines some operations, such as
adding page numbers and defining page breaks. The banded report
designer simplifies adding or repositioning fields, grouping
them and adding GUI objects such as check boxes and graphics.

The Object Explorer, which is available throughout Paradox,
lets you click on any object and change properties, such as
the font size and color and the visible/hidden setting. You
can also view the object's place in the hierarchy (report,
group, field, label and so on), and use the alignment options
to set the horizontal or vertical spacing among objects or
to make their horizontal or vertical sizes conform. The Object
Explorer also has tabs for inspecting methods and events. Double
click on a method, and an edit box pops up where you can add
your own method code.

Paradox's ObjectPAL Editor has been enhanced to include functionality
found in Borland's C++ compiler and the company's Delphi development
product. New to the Editor are color syntax highlighting, indenting
and outdenting, keyboard recording, incremental search, keyboard
mapping (to mimic Brief and Epsilon, for instance), bookmarks
and multilevel undo and redo.

The Design Layout dialog lets you quickly change an existing
report's look, switching from individual fields to a table,
for example. New controls for forms-such as list boxes with
multiselect, combo boxes, spin controls and progress bars-are
available. You can now create tabbed dialog boxes and place
data on the tab sections-an especially useful way to segregate
the information in large records. Select the number of tabs
and determine how many are displayed in each row.

Current users will be pleased that version 7 maintains compatibility
with Paradox 5 data, forms, reports, queries and applications
without any special conversion steps. Just open the objects
in Paradox 7. This means you can use version 7 to easily convert
Windows 3.x applications built with Paradox 5 to Windows 95.

Paradox 7 also supports OCX controls so you can extend its functionality
with third-party add-ins to add features like pop-up calendars
to your applications. The controls can be manipulated

with ObjectPAL, Paradox's programming language. ObjectPAL has
been enhanced with over 100 new methods, including 10 that
provide MAPI functions like Send Mail.

Version 7 can be used as an OLE automation controller (to execute
the functions revealed by another server-enabled application)
and a server (to let it be controlled)

Paradox 7 boasts a few fit-and-finish touches, too. For instance,
a new menu system organizes the functions more logically. You
can dock Paradox's customizable toolbars to any screen edge,
and add Paradox to the Microsoft Office and Novell PerfectOffice
toolbars.

Despite its new features, Paradox has some odd inconsistencies.
When you select the File/New/Table command, you're tossed directly
into the table builder, bypassing the Table Expert. But if
you pick File/New/Form, you're offered the choice of creating
a form from scratch or using the Form Expert. At times, the
Experts, too, may be sources of confusion, like when it jumps
you from step 2 to step 5. This isn't a goof. It's done to
maintain consistency among steps-step 5 always controls chart
type, for example-but it can be perplexing.

Still, Paradox 7 does whatever it can to help the new or occasional
user. The CD Quick Tour offers an animated program overview,
and the Windows 95-style help is clear and easy to follow.
Even in the beta version I tested, the help system answered
all my questions.

With Paradox 7, Borland has taken a giant step in making database
application development accessible. While there's still room
for improvement, Paradox 7 is a good choice for building anything
from a simple database to a complex data-intensive application.

--Info File--

Paradox 7

Price: $299 (street); upgrade, $89 (street); competitive upgrade,
$99 (street)

In Brief: Paradox 7 hides its sophistication and processing
power behind a more intuitive interface and expands the breadth
of its helpful experts.

Platforms: Windows 95, 3.x, NT

Borland International

800-233-2444, 408-431-1000





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "84"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: Toshiba Tecra 700CT -- 120MHz Book's a Burner

By:
Jim Forbes

While other notebook manufacturers walk the razor's edge trying
to balance performance against weight and price, veteran laptop
maker Toshiba America takes a different tack. Its hot new Tecra
700 series is powered by a 120MHz Pentium processor and, when
fully configured, can take a $6,000 bite out of your wallet.
But the unit's 7.3-pound heft makes it obvious that Toshiba
has come down on the side of performance. And the Tecra 700
delivers the goods in spades through its use of the PCI architecture
and the attention to design detail that have become the mark
of Toshiba products.

The Tecra 700 is indeed dense. The 7.3-pound travel weight includes
its surprisingly small power supply, an external 3.5-inch floppy
disk drive and case. Its dimensions and overall shape, however,
resemble those of other Toshiba notebook computers.

The unit I tested, the Tecra 700CT, arrived with an optional
quad-speed CD-ROM drive, a lithium ion battery, 16MB of RAM,
a brilliant 11.3-inch active-matrix display, Sound Blaster
Pro-compatible sound and some of the best internal speakers
I've heard on a notebook. This machine also comes with serial,
parallel, PS/2, SVGA, serial infrared and two stacked Type
II PCMCIA slots, as well as a docking-station port.

The Tecra 700 ships standard with a removable 1.2GB hard drive.
A lower-cost version with an 11.3-inch passive-matrix color
display and 8MB of RAM will also be available soon.

This computer is not designed for globe-trotting journalists
looking to write the Great American Novel over the Atlantic,
or corporate managers working on that career-defining spreadsheet
between New York and the West Coast. Not surprisingly, given
this notebook's hungry processor, hard drive and screen, its
battery life (which I measured at well under two hours) is
not a strong point. But since this machine is much more likely
to run connected to a wall outlet than on batteries, I don't
think this is a serious problem.

One of the features I particularly like on the Tecra 700 is
its ability to use the optional CD-ROM and its 3.5-inch drive
simultaneously-something you can't do with other high-end notebooks
such as the NEC Versa 4000 or the Gateway 2000 Solo. Drives
attach to a pocket on the front of the unit, under the keyboard.
This pocket will accept either the CD-ROM or 3.5-inch drive.
To use both drives, you must insert the CD-ROM into this pocket
and attach the 3.5-inch drive to an external connector that
sits on the right-hand side.

I also like Toshiba's use of a quad-speed CD-ROM drive, which
makes short work of loading complex programs.

The active-matrix color screen on the unit I tested, a prototype
version, is as suited to showing full-motion video as it is
to giving presentations in the boardroom. Video speed is greatly
enhanced by the notebook's PCI bus.

The keyboard is comfortable to use for extended periods and
sits behind a palm rest. Like all Toshiba computers, this machine
uses a stick pointing device to position the cursor. The pointer
is located above the B key on the keyboard, and its two associated
buttons are on the palm rest. All controls and switches are
easy to find and use. Lighted status displays for power, drive
access and other features are on the front, which for some
users may not seem particularly instinctive.

Like other Toshiba notebooks, this machine is built like a tank.
For added security, there's a 3-year limited warranty.

On our WINDOWS Magazine Wintune benchmarks, the Tecra 700CT
delivered an astounding 217MIPS and 67MFLOPS. The 1.2GB hard
drive had a cached throughput rating of 12.5MB per second,
and the video generated 6Mpixels per second. The unit took
an average of 28.33 seconds to execute our Word 7.0 macro,
and 24.33 seconds to complete our Excel 7.0 macro.

This machine is not for everyone. In fact, the price means it's
unlikely ever to be a big seller. Nevertheless, like other
notebooks in the Toshiba line, the Tecra 700 should be a standard
setting piece of hardware.

--Info File--

Toshiba Tecra 700CT

Price: $5,999 (with 4x CD-ROM, 11.3-inch TFT screen and 16MB
of RAM)

In Brief: This notebook computer offers great performance, uses
the PCI architecture, has an optional quad-speed CD-ROM drive
and can display full-motion video on its 11.3-inch screen.

Toshiba America Information Systems

800-993-4273, 714-837-4408





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "85"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: Harvard Graphics 4.0 for Windows 95 -- 
Smooth Delivery for Your Pitch

By:
James E. Powell

On the surface, Harvard Graphics 4.0 is much like the version
for Windows 3.1. But once you dive beneath the surface and
get beyond the standard Windows 95 features like tabbed dialog
boxes, context menus and common toolbars, you'll discover a
rich set of tips and other helpful aids, including new quick
start presentation templates. These new features will get you
up and running in no time.

For harried presenters, the Quick Presentations option provides
a variety of templates for common types of pitches. The templates
include Marketing Plan, a Quarterly Review and a Business Plan
to Partners. This version has five new templates, and all are
more than just graphic design elements-they also get you going
on your presentation's content with suggested text, such as
a sample agenda. You can also add templates that you develop
to the Quick Presentations choices.

The program's Graphics Advisor System, a combination of help
and advice, has always been impressive. You can use the Design
Checker to inspect for presentation faux pas, such as too many
bullets on one slide. The new Fixer Mode will take you to the
right place in the program to fix errors that the Advisor detected.

In addition to the Advisor, Harvard Graphics offers a couple
of other comfort-inducing features. A Quick Tour shows you
around the program and describes its major features, and the
"Five Minute Coach" provides some more-than-basic instruction
about creating text slides, building charts or delivering effective
presentations.

Harvard Graphics includes a "light" version of Harvard Montage
for managing image libraries and the more than 500 pieces of
clip art also in the package.

Some of this version's more subtle changes are worth noting.
For example, you can now include text in superscript or subscript,
and control type leading more accurately. You can use Find
and Replace across an entire presentation, and printed output
can be page numbered. When you switch between landscape and
portrait modes, the new Aspect Ratio Correction feature makes
appropriate adjustments to all the objects on the slide.

The program is extremely easy to use. You can resequence slides
by dragging them in the Slide View, and if you drag a slide
from one presentation to another, Harvard Graphics adjusts
its properties to keep it consistent with the rest of the presentation.
Other features include dockable toolbars, VCR-style navigation
controls, and slide sorter and outline views. For most options,
there are thumbnail graphics or previews to show what the selection
looks like. Though HG offers its own charting capabilities,
its OLE 2.0 support lets you drag charts from Excel or text
from Microsoft Word into a slide.

Harvard Graphics still lags behind the competition in some areas.
For instance, the program doesn't support simple animations
that are included in some rival programs, including PowerPoint's
latest release. This makes it impossible to move objects around
to create some dramatic effects. Among other things, you can't
set the bars in a bar chart to "grow" from the x-axis and you
can't fly in other graphics elements.

Harvard Graphics is a lone wolf in a world of application suites.
Most of these suites include presentation graphics programs,
so you might wonder if you really need Harvard Graphics. The
answer is a resounding yes. The product offers excellent help,
an eye-pleasing set of predefined templates and a simplicity
that belies its highly professional output.

--Info File--

Harvard Graphics 4.0 for Windows 95

Price: $290 (street)

In Brief: The Windows 95 version features an easy interface,
quick-start templates and plenty of help.

Platforms: Windows 95

Disk Space: 13MB (minimum); 37MB (full installation)

RAM: 4MB (8MB recommended)

Software Publishing Corp.

800-234-2500, 408-986-8000





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "86"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: NEC Versa 4000C and 4050C -- The Complete Notebook

By:
Jim Forbes

It's not often you run across a product that does everything
right. NEC has come very close to producing a notebook computer
that fits that criterion with its Versa 4000 family, an innovative
series of Pentium-powered notebook computers. Simply stated,
these machines are an exercise in elegance.

The NEC 4000 family comes standard with Intel's 75-, 90- or
120MHz Pentium processors for portable computers, 16MB of RAM
(8MB for 75MHz), 256KB of level 2 cache, a variety of hard
drives, and a choice of 10-plus-inch active-matrix color and
dual-scan color screens. Also standard is a full array of external
connectors including serial, parallel, docking station, two
stacked Type 2 and two IRDA-1 infrared transceivers (one on
the front and one on the back)

All the NEC Versa 4000 family members have the same basic shape
and size. They measure 2.1 by 11.7 by 9.5 inches. The travel
weight, including the battery charger, is about 7 pounds (depending
on which screen you order). The 4000C unit I examined had a
10.1-inch, 640x480 active-matrix display; a 75MHz processor;
a 540MB hard drive; and 16MB of RAM.

Although I've criticized the keyboards on previous NEC notebooks,
I like the one on this model almost as much as I like the Lexmark
keyboard IBM uses on its ThinkPad line. Unlike older NEC machines,
this keyboard includes an integrated palm rest and uses a Versa
Glide touchpad pointing device with double-tap capability.
The trackpad is located to the left-center of the palm rest,
which some users may find uncomfortable.

The NEC V4000 family's sound subsystem should please anyone
who really needs to punctuate presentations with audio. NEC
has built two decent speakers into the case. They are placed
high enough so your audience can hear your presentation clearly.

Virtually all the controls are positioned intuitively and within
fast reach. And NEC has included software that simplifies control
of the power-saving features.

Like Gateway 2000's Solo, the Versa 4000 series uses a single
bay (VersaBay II in NEC parlance) to accommodate a dual-speed
CD-ROM drive, a 3.5-inch disk drive, a second battery or a
second hard drive. Unfortunately, you can't hot swap drives.
To change from the 3.5-inch drive to the CD-ROM, you have to
power down the computer, pull out one drive, snap in the other
and reboot.

NEC gets bonus points for including a small zip-up pouch that
houses the unused drive and a hard-shell case large enough
for the computer, its documentation, the unused drive and other
paraphernalia.

The battery life on the unit I tested was about 2.5 hours without
power conservation (other than turning off the audio and removing
my 28.8Kbps modem). With strict power conservation, I was able
to run it about 3.5 hours on its single lithium ion power cell.
NEC claims Quick Charge Time takes about 2.5 hours; this unit
took less-slightly more than 2 hours.

The results of our WINDOWS Magazine Wintune 95 benchmarks were
135MIPS and 40MFLOPs for the 4000C, 5.23Mpixels per second
for the video and 9.16MB per second cached data-transfer rate
for the hard drive. The 4000C took 21 seconds to execute our
Excel 7.0 macro and 36.3 seconds to complete our Microsoft
Word 7.0 macro.

Priced at $5,100, the 90MHz 4050C -with 16MB of RAM and 810MB
hard drive-posted 162MIPS, 48MFLOPS, 5.5Mpixels per second
and cached hard drive throughput of 9.94MB per second. Times
to execute the Excel 7.0 and Word 7.0 macros were 14 and 39.66
seconds, respectively.

There are few tasks for which the Versa 4000C is not suited.
Its audio and video subsystems make it a dream for presentations,
and its Pentium processor has the horsepower for virtually
any undertaking. It has a full suite of connections, and NEC
offers a docking station that makes the Versa 4000C an ideal
desktop replacement. This notebook has a 3-year warranty.

The Versa 4000 family is brawny, yet elegant. Its VersaBay lets
you add a CD-ROM, a 3.5-inch disk drive or other peripheral
as the need arises. That, and the ability to use a docking
station that has expansion ports, make for a very attractive
and versatile-package.

--Info File--

NEC Versa 4000C and 4050C

Price: 4000C: $3,999; with 16MB of RAM, $4,474; 4050C: $5,100

In Brief: The NEC Versa 4000 family is available with 75MHz,
90MHz or 120MHz Pentium processors, lithium ion batteries,
a variety of hard drives and a CD-ROM drive.

NEC Technologies

800-632-NEC-INFO, fax 800-366-0476





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "87"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: NEC PowerMate P133 and Ready 9542 -- 
Twin Towers for Home, Office

By:
Jim Forbes and James E. Powell

NEC Technologies makes stunning monitors and rugged notebooks.
It also makes terrific desktop computers, as evidenced by the
PowerMate and Ready series. We were extremely pleased with
the two latest offerings, both 133MHz Pentium systems.

These machines are similar in many respects. Both use a PCI
bus and come standard with 2MB of video memory, 16MB of RAM,
infrared support and a generous 1.6-gigabyte hard drive. They
also boast a full battery of ports, full-sized keyboard, NEC
branded mouse, 16-bit Sound Blaster-compatible audio and great
speakers. Both are housed in a wide mini-tower case that allows
easy access to the internal components.

The PowerMate series is aimed at the corporate market and includes
a minimal software bundle, since most of its users prefer to
install their own applications. The Ready line is designed
to be sold by computer retailers and includes an impressive
software lineup.

At $3,299, the PowerMate P133 is the more expensive of the two
systems. The basic configuration includes a 6x CD-ROM drive
and a small software bundle. Getting inside the mini-tower
case is a snap: Just twirl two readily identifiable machine
screws, lift out a side panel and you're in. This is a much
more elegant and useful way of opening up a system than removing
an entire cover assembly.

The PowerMate P133 has two ISA and four PCI open slots so it
can grow with your needs. The 6x CD-ROM is wickedly fast, and
the speakers that ship with this unit have a rating of 8 watts.
Other goodies include a full complement of communications programs,
a TranXit infrared software front-end and support for voice
input.

The Ready 9542, geared more toward the home market, also has
two ISA and four PCI open slots, though one PCI slot can be
used only to replace the on-board video. It ships with a 4x
CD-ROM and nearly two dozen multimedia titles, including games
such as Descent. The system includes MPEG-1-software compatibility
for full-screen video playback, SRS 3-D surround sound, wavetable
audio and a telephone answering system with speakerphone.

Productivity titles include Microsoft Works, Publisher, Quicken
SE and Encarta. The Ready also ships with Bob-which you can
remove-and Midisoft's MediaWorks, a similar but less cutesy
Windows 95 front-end that resembles a home office. MediaWorks
includes utilities that let you capture and edit video and
audio or send a fax.

A 28.8Kb-per-second modem with DSVD (for simultaneous voice
and data transmission) is also part of the package, as is Netscape
Navigator and sign-up kits for the major online services.

The PowerMate offers you the option of installing Windows for
Workgroups or Windows 95 when you power up for the first time.
We installed the Workgroups edition, then used our own copy
of Win95 to upgrade, which took 24 minutes.

The Ready unit comes with a setup program that first examines
the installed equipment, then loads the installation program
for Win95. In all, it took 30 minutes to install the operating
system before we could use the machine, an annoyance that beginning
users-presumably the primary intended buyers for this desktop
shouldn't have to deal with.

The PowerMate P133 blew the doors off most of our Wintune 95
benchmarks. Its 133MHz processor cranked out 246MIPS and 74MFLOPS,
while its hard disk scored a 3.43MB-per-second uncached data
transfer rate. Due to a problem with the video driver, we could
not report a video score in our standard 800x600-pixel, 256
color mode.

The Ready 9542 was similarly impressive, yielding 244MIPS and
74MFLOPS. The Maxtor hard drive's uncached performance was
3.5MBps, and its video system pumped out 13.1Mpixels per second.

The results of our applications benchmarks were also good, but
not quite as startling. The PowerMate P133 took only 39.66
seconds to execute the 32-bit version of our WinWord macro
and a scant 17.33 seconds to run our 32-bit Excel macro. The
Ready unit took 19.7 seconds with Word and 40.3 seconds with
Excel.

If you're looking for Pentium 133 power at a reasonable price,
these units should be at the top of your shopping list.

--Info File--

NEC PowerMate P133 and Ready 9542

Price: PowerMate, $3,299 (without monitor); Ready, $2,999 (without
monitor)

In Brief: The NEC PowerMate P133 and Ready 9542 are both full
featured, PCI-bus, 133MHz Pentium systems in a mini-tower case.
The PowerMate is aimed at corporate buyers, while the Ready
is intended for the home user.

NEC Technologies

800-632-4636, 508-264-8000





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "88"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: FileMaker Pro 3.0 -- Old Friend with New Relations

By:
James E. Powell

Sometimes it takes a while to commit to a relationship. For
FileMaker Pro-long a favorite among flat-file fans-its long
awaited foray into the relational world is welcome.

FileMaker Pro 3.0, which I tested in beta, now lets you create
one-to-many and many-to-one relationships between two files,
including a minimal amount of referential integrity. The program
retains its look-up feature, which copies data from one file
to another-sometimes all the relational capability you need.
You can glimpse into another database to set up master/detail
reports and forms with a special object called a portal. Although
it's an effective process, it isn't as effortless or intuitive
as similar operations in Approach or Access.

FileMaker Pro is well designed, making it easy to use and navigate,
especially for database beginners. It still doesn't have a
traditional programming language, but its script builder is
among the simplest to learn, understand and use that I've ever
seen. You can build scripts with programming constructs such
as loops and if/then/else, and you can include custom messages
complete with OK and Cancel buttons. The program also supports
variables, which it calls global fields.

Database files are easily set up, and the tabbed dialog boxes
let you set options such as range checking and automatic serialization
for numeric fields. Vastly improved built-in functions, like
Future Value, IsEmpty and Length, make it possible to build
complex validation rules. You don't get a wide range of field
types to choose from, but the unique, repeating field type
lets you create multiple field values within a single record.

Forms are easy to create and can contain traditional GUI elements,
such as radio buttons and check boxes. You can also set the
order in which the cursor moves through fields when you press
the Tab key.

Although the reporting module is generally simple to use, setting
up totals and subtotals is cumbersome. You have to assign summary
fields to the database, specifying which calculation to perform
(sum, count, average) and upon which field to perform it. Then,
position the summary field on your report. In most other database
programs, you would define the calculation field on the report
itself.

You can quickly create forms for columnar reports, labels and
envelopes. But the program lacks wizards to help you through
creating more complex reports. You can, however, display actual
record data from a sample to facilitate setting field sizes,
with empty fields replaced by dummy text or numbers FileMaker
Pro generates.

Specify colors, fonts and object alignment for forms and reports.
You can lock objects so they don't get accidentally nudged,
draw your own lines and boxes, and use snap-to-grid for alignment
help. In this version, you can format paragraphs, including
custom indents and precise line spacing, but you still can't
format a numeric field as a telephone number.

Automatic phone dialing and mail merge are also new in this
version. And you can now have up to 50 files open simultaneously,
rather than the previous version's 16. Windows 95 features
include long filenames, uninstall and OLE Container support.
Field indexing is now optional, and you can let FileMaker Pro
create indexes when necessary to speed up searches and sorts.

Other features of the network-ready FileMaker Pro include a
spell checker, a converter that imports files created with
other programs and the ability to export a file's structure
without its data. Assign groups and passwords, and specify
security down to the field level. More unusual features include
the ability to find records containing illegal date and time
values or duplicate values.

For current FileMaker users, the look and feel of version 3.0
will be immediately comfortable. Database dilettantes will
find FileMaker Pro's ease of use and jargon-free manuals refreshing.

--Info File--

FileMaker Pro 3.0

Price: $199

In Brief: An easy-to-use FileMaker has entered the relational
database world.

Platforms: Windows 95, NT 3.51

Claris Corp.

800-544-8554, 408-727-8227





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "89"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: Windows Draw 4.0 -- Palatable Price for Paint App

By:
James Bell

For little more than the cost of a computer book, you can pick
up a great Windows 95 drawing program. Micrografx's Windows
Draw 4.0, which I tested in beta, includes both drawing and
image-editing modules, along with 250 fonts and over 10,000
pieces of clip art.

Although the bundle is marketed for home use, don't assume it's
a limited package. While the low-cost program doesn't include
all the features of Micrografx's high-end ABC Graphics Suite,
Windows Draw is a useful office addition.

Windows Draw makes good use of the Win95 interface. If you've
worked with Microsoft Office 95, you'll find Windows Draw especially
easy to learn as it mimics Office's menus, commands and toolbars.
You can also customize your screen layout and use tear-off
toolbars that can be docked or left to float in the drawing
window.

All the Windows Draw modules support OLE 2.0, drag-and-drop,
and in-place editing. You can drag clip art from ABC Media
Manager, the clip-art manager, into either the drawing or image
editing module and the program will automatically handle any
necessary format conversions. Windows Draw supports over 50
vector and bitmap graphics formats.

Nonartists will appreciate Windows Draw's 150 drawing templates.
They're organized into six categories-Celebrations, Diagrams,
Publishing, Fun, Games and Sports-and cover everything from
play money to floor plans and stationery. You have to master
some basic skills to use the templates effectively, since they
are predesigned documents that you modify manually. Each template
includes suggestions for where to start making changes, but
a few well-placed wizards would have been helpful for new users.

Windows Draw's drawing tools have been substantially updated
from version 3.0. Beyond the standard fare-lines, ovals, rectangles
and B zier curves-there are 11 new CoolShape tools for one
step polygons, stars, arrows and 3-D shapes. The program even
automatically shades the 3-D CoolShapes (too automatically
sometimes, as you can't control the light direction)

Among the new features are "sticky" connecting lines that make
it a snap to create organizational charts, flowcharts and annotations
for illustrations. Also new are multiple levels of undo, a
spell checker, a "format painter" for quickly copying object
formatting and multiple drawing layers.

Windows Draw's image editor, Photo Magic, now supports TWAIN
compatible scanners and includes options for cropping, rotating,
resizing, and modifying resolution and color depth. A Stitch
feature lets you recombine images that were scanned in separate
sections. Photo Magic's powerful masking tools can mask specific
color ranges and create freehand masks.

Photo Magic supports over 40 special effects, from basic picture
corrections-like sharpen, remove pattern, and adjust contrast
and brightness-to special effects such as add color noise,
wind, pop art, crystallize and charcoal. You can preview all
the effects.

It's also possible to draw images in Photo Magic, using the
dozen-plus painting tools that simulate chalk, pencils, markers,
crayons, pastels, oils and watercolors.

ABC Media Manager, also in the bundle, simplifies using the
package's clip art. You can also create your own clip-art libraries,
including thumbnails and searchable keywords and descriptions.

Windows Draw doesn't offer all the features of high-end drawing
packages. There are no color separations or sophisticated text
controls in Draw, or multiple object layers in Photo Magic.
For these capabilities, you'll have to turn to high-end graphics
packages from Micrografx, Adobe, Corel or Macromedia.

If you have professional needs and a larger budget, Windows
Draw may not be the program for you. But if you're looking
for a good entry-level drawing program for Windows 95 that
also works well with Office 95, this is it. Grab a copy before
Micrografx comes to its senses and raises the price.

--Info File--

Windows Draw 4.0

Price: $49.99 (street)

In Brief: Windows Draw 4.0 is an inexpensive Windows 95 drawing
and image-editing software bundle packed with fonts and clip
art.

Platforms: Windows 95, 3.x

Micrografx

800-653-2610, 214-234-1769





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "90"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: CA-SuperProject 4.0 -- The Best Laid Plans

By:
Sara G. Stephens

There's an ironic, dark truth shared by many project managers.
Behind their impeccable PERT charts' veneer of order lie frenzied
efforts to patch every leak with last-minute scheduling fixes.
But haste can lay waste to even the best-planned project scenarios.

The folks at Computer Associates know how the real world of
project management works, so they graced SuperProject 4.0 with
a number of practical tools, not the least of which is a multi
level undo feature.

Like some of its competitors-Primavera System's SureTrak Project
Manager being the closest match-SuperProject blends the features
of a heavy-duty project manager into a lightweight-looking
package. And, while graphical interfaces generally make easier
to-use programs, too many graphics and macros can restrict,
or at least obscure, the functionality of a more sophisticated
app that requires entering and manipulating a lot of details
in various formats. It's a fine line between easy and messy.

Fortunately, SuperProject is on the right side of this line.
Each project view is tabbed like a file folder. You can open
multiple projects, stacking these "file folders" on top of
one another, and clicking on the tabs switches from one open
project to another. Like Microsoft Project, another close competitor,
SuperProject puts similar tabs on its dialog boxes and pop
up forms.

Other MS Project similarities include Calendar views, Gantt
charts that let you display different start and end symbols
for each item, and gridlines between rows. You can also combine
project windows on a single outline, PERT chart or WBS chart
view. The program's ability to illustrate interproject relationships
with distinctive symbols is especially useful in this mode.
You can use the Auto-Open feature to instruct SuperProject
to open related projects whenever you open a particular project
file.

Large organizations with mixed-breed setups should find SuperProject
4.0's expanded export/import formats particularly useful. It
now includes the .MPX (MS Project) extension. Even more significant
is the program's LAN support installed via CA's Activate program.
It's compatible with IBM PC, 3Com, Novell NetWare, Banyan and
other networks. This feature, combined with the program's ODBC
support, means subproject managers can each update the server
residing relational database from their desktops, regardless
of the database program they're using.

SuperProject can create a work breakdown structure with forms
that flow more intuitively than those I've seen in competing
products. For example, task, resource and account names have
a generous length limit of 56 characters. The program also
lets you check your project schedule's progress by transferring
it to as many as three baselines, rather than the traditional
single-baseline option.

Because the fruits of a project manager's work eventually must
be printed and shared with staff or management, CA also improved
SuperProject's reporting capabilities. It now prints bitmaps
in a report's header and footer. It also lets you Print to
Fit, so you won't be tied to your desk with a roll of Scotch
tape, piecing together panels of a Gantt chart. Balloon help
is convenient for newcomers, while a configurable toolbar lets
the more fluent SuperProject user customize his desktop with
up to 50 different buttons.

SuperProject comes bundled with TimeSheet Professional, an electronic
time-sheet app that integrates nicely to form a full project
and resource-management solution.

While many "improved interfaces" actually intimidate rather
than invite users, SuperProject combines color, graphics and
solid features so they not only look cool on the desktop, but
also let you keep cool-headed control of your projects.

--Info File--

CA-SuperProject 4.0

Price: $649; upgrade, $149

In Brief: SuperProject combines the graphical with the functional,
resulting in a friendly package that also delivers to the more
sophisticated project manager.

Platforms: Windows 95, 3.x

Disk Space: 8MB

RAM: 4MB (8MB recommended)

Computer Associates International

800-225-5224, 516-DIAL-CAI





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "91"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: voysAccess for Visual Basic -- Dialing for Data

By:
James E. Powell

The term Interactive Voice Response (IVR) might seem cold, but
when you use the technology to phone and access up-to-the-minute
bank account information without talking to another person,
it's not just cool, but efficient, too. With voysAccess, a
toolkit that works with Visual Basic 3.0, you can build your
own custom IVR applications. The toolkit's designer is so simple
to use that your first IVR

VB-based application will be up and running in just a few hours.

VoysAccess, which I tested in beta, includes a custom VBX control
and voysDesigner, an application generator that lets you design
your voice response application in a spreadsheet-like grid.
You select actions from a toolbox or the main menu, then pick
action-specific options from dialog boxes. For example, your
logic can include commands to play a greeting, wait for digits
to be pressed, analyze the response and branch to a subroutine
based on the caller's keystrokes.

The Record command lets your customer leave a message, and you
have the option of limiting its length. You have to write the
logic that organizes these messages and plays them back. Because
the system supports variables, it's easy to create a "count"
field to tally the number of incoming calls. The system can
dial or transfer a call, too, and you can specify the number
of rings before your program terminates a call.

Using a caller's Touch-tone input, your application can retrieve
information from a database. The application can also respond
vocally, even formatting values such as adding the words "dollars"
and "cents" to currency fields and translating numerical dates
into their narrative equivalents.

To retrieve information you use the designer's Data Query Wizard
to map a schema of the data, including relationships between
tables and databases. The Query Wizard builds SQL statements
using Select, From, Where and Order By parameters, which can
be completed by picking field names and conditions from pop
up lists. The Query supports most popular database formats
dBASE, Paradox, Access and FoxPro-and ODBC.

The digits that a caller enters can also be captured as data
and stored in a database, so your application can receive information
as well as disseminate it.

Once you've designed your application, the designer generates
the entire application in Visual Basic code and can automatically
launch the application. The code-building process checks for
errors such as undefined branches. The resulting source code
is well commented and uses easy-to-understand function names,
such as voysAcces1.

Vspeak ="C:\MYAPP\HELLO" which "speaks" the HELLO voice file.

Programming purists may not like the way the voysDesigner worksheet
handles branching indentation because all actions are left
justified. However, the generated VB code is properly indented.

The toolkit includes a starter prompt library and a collection
of about 300 professionally recorded voice files. There is
also a sound processing and editing utility that supports .WAV, .VOX, .VOC 
and other sound file formats.

The package includes a two-line Dialogic voice card that is
required to run your completed application. Installing it is
relatively easy, though you'll need to manually set jumpers.

While there are a few alternatives available, voysAccess offers
the fastest, easiest route to custom VB-based IVR applications
that I've seen so far.

--Info File--

voysAccess for Visual Basic

Price: $595; with two-line Dialogic card (needed to run application),
$995

In Brief: Combined with Visual Basic 3.0, voysAccess provides
the easiest way to build Interactive Voice Response applications.

Platforms: Windows 3.x

Voysys Corp.

800-7VOYSYS, 510-252-1100





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "92"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: ClarisDraw 1.0 -- Drawing on Mac App-titude

By:
James Bell

A million Mac users can't be wrong. At least Claris hopes so,
as it tests the Windows waters with its popular ClarisDraw
graphics program. The company says the Mac version-along with
its predecessor, the MacDraw family-has an installed base of
almost a million users, and it has drawn heavily on that experience
to create ClarisDraw for Windows.

The beta version I tested is a 32-bit application that runs
under either Windows 95 or Windows 3.x. Designed for the general
business user, the program takes a simple, streamlined approach
to drawing, but also includes a handful of interesting surprises.

One of ClarisDraw's obvious advantages is its complete cross
platform compatibility with the Mac counterpart. You can even
convert MacDraw files after running them through a file "splitter"
utility (which ClarisDraw provides)

ClarisDraw's interface closely matches that of its Mac sibling.
While this would be helpful for someone using both platforms,
it's a real disadvantage for Windows users-especially Windows
95 users. There are no context menus, ribbon bars, tabbed dialog
boxes or even help balloons to describe program icons. Nor
does it support OLE or drag-and-drop between documents or with
other applications. None of these features are crucial to the
drawing process, but they would have made ClarisDraw easier
to learn and use.

To its credit, the program does provide some shortcuts, including
tear-off tool palettes that you can shrink down to just their
title bars when you're not using them.

ClarisDraw's real strength is the intelligence of its toolset.
Beyond the basic tools for drawing lines, curves, and standard
shapes like ovals and rectangles, you'll find several "smart"
features. These include 16 Shape tools for one-step creation
of polygons, stars, arrows, and 3-D boxes and cylinders. But
shading for 3-D shapes isn't provided, and you can't ungroup
them to add shading manually.

Other smart tools include SmartConnector lines that maintain
links between objects; SmartSize for scaling objects proportionally;
Guideliner and PointGuide for precisely positioning objects
and lines; and SmartAlign for keeping elements aligned or distributed,
even after being moved. ClarisDraw also provides quick format
tricks with SmartShadow and SmartEmbossing, and there's even
a search-and-replace feature called Replace Clones for substituting
one piece of clip art with another in a drawing.

ClarisDraw includes basic image-editing capabilities for imported
bitmaps and the ability to create black-and-white, 16-color
and 256-color images. If you can use the somewhat limited tools,
they can save you the trouble of having to switch to another
program. The software supports both HLS and RGB color palettes
but not CMYK-and bundles predesigned palettes of up to 256
colors.

Nonartists can import several PC and Mac graphic file formats,
including .EPS, .TIF, .CGM, .GIF, .WINF, PICT, PICT2, .BMP, .PCX, 
MacDraw, MacPaint and .AVI movie frames. Included, too,
are 60 TrueType fonts and 2,400 pieces of clip art. The clip
art is organized into drag-and-drop libraries, and you add
your own images by dragging them onto a library window.

It's also possible to import text and lay out ClarisDraw pages
by using linked text boxes. The program supports paragraph
formatting, text styles, a spell checker and thesaurus, and
both regular and irregular text wrapping around graphics. ClarisDraw
won't replace a true desktop publishing package but it should
satisfy most basic needs.

ClarisDraw's layering feature is a pleasant surprise. It's ideal
for floor plans, maps and diagrams, and can be used to create
slide shows, too. Slide shows can be augmented with fades,
bulleted text lists and simple sequence controls. Again, this
feature can't compete with dedicated presentation programs,
but it's adequate for simple projects.

Like the generalist users ClarisDraw was designed for, the program
doesn't aim to be the best in any particular category. Instead,
it focuses on providing simple, useful tools for the occasional
user. Limitations in its interface are offset by a bevy of
intelligent drawing options.

--Info File--

ClarisDraw 1.0

Price: $199 (street); competitive upgrade, $99

In Brief: ClarisDraw offers cross-platform compatibility with
its Mac version, intelligent tools, and drag-and-drop clip
art.

Platforms: Windows 95, 3.x

Claris Corp.

800-544-8554, 408-727-8227





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "93"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: Dabbler 2 and Wacom ArtZ II Tablet -- 
Take One Tablet and Paint

By:
Hailey Lynne McKeefry

Perhaps it's true that a poor master blames his tools, but having
great tools can't hurt. The dynamic duo of Dabbler 2 and the
Wacom ArtZ II graphics tablet helped me discover my well-hidden
artistic talents.

The ArtZ II Tablet, which measures 0.5 by 13 by 9.6 inches,
has a 6-by-8-inch drawing space with a resolution of 2,540
lines per inch. The unit plugs into a serial port and comes
with drivers for Windows 95, 3.x and NT. A menu strip at the
top of the ArtZ II provides five user-definable function buttons
and 11 predefined buttons (including Cut, Copy, Paste, Undo,
Delete, New, Open and Save), as well as controls to change
pressure sensitivity.

Wacom's Erasing UltraPen, included with the tablet, literally
turns the world of graphics tablets upside down. If you use
it with an eraser-enabled application, you can flip the pen
over and rub its top against the tablet to erase what you just
drew. Dabbler, Fractal Design's Painter, SmartSketch, QFX and
Adobe Photoshop all support the eraser technology, and Autodesk
Animator Studio, Fauve Matisse and Aldus Freehand will support
it soon.

With the tablet in place, I loaded Dabbler from its CD-ROM.
The CD holds both 16-bit and 32-bit versions of the program,
in addition to more than 300 stencils, 120 paper testers, 3
image font libraries and 100 stock photographs.

Dabbler is the definitive program for anyone who wants to learn
PC-based drawing and have fun doing it. The program uses a
desk-and-drawer scenario-to peruse the selection of brushes,
colors or paper textures, you slide open the appropriate drawer.
Your sketch pad sits atop the on-screen desk, and you can flip
through its pages by clicking on the arrow keys. Rotating the
sketch pad lets you draw at any angle. The program also allows
you to create multiple sketchbooks and open them one at a time.

Dabbler's Multimedia Art Tutors led me through some of the basics
of cartooning and cartoon animation, as well as the nuts-and
bolts operation of the program. Although the program won't
let you draw as you watch the lessons, you can switch easily
back and forth between the two modes. Once you've mastered
animation, the Flipbook Animation feature lets you create animations
and export them as QuickTime or AVI movies.

The software's stencils, clip art and stock photos give you
a running start and help you get by that first blank page.
Once I had a stencil in place, I used the Effects menu to customize
the color and texture of the shapes. Dabbler's Effects include
Fill, Auto Clone, Fade, Glass Distortion, Motion Blur, Negative,
Sharpen, Soften and Texturize.

Dabbler also provides several features to help you forge and
use art elements from the CD-ROM or other images in any of
several formats (including RIFF, TIFF, PICT, Targa, BMP, PCX
and Photoshop). The Tracing Paper feature lets you pick an
image and trace it onto your drawing. You can also manipulate
an existing image using natural media cloning; this feature
lets you select an image and render it using the medium of
your choice (such as ink, oil paint or chalk)

Even with these great tools, my artwork isn't likely to end
up on a museum wall, but within an hour or so I was able to
create drawings that were better than I could have ever imagined.
The Wacom ArtZ II felt as natural as using a pen and paper,
and the eraser came in handy. Dabbler, which can also be used
with a mouse, is fun to use, versatile and provides enough
help that you're bound to learn something each time you use
it.

--Info File--

Dabbler 2

Price: $69; upgrade, $29

Platforms: Windows 95, 3.x

Disk Space: 23.6 MB

RAM: 8MB

Fractal Design Corp.

800-297-COOL, 408-688-5300


Wacom ArtZ II Tablet

Price: $389.99

Platforms: Windows 95, 3.x, NT

Wacom Technology Corp.

800-922-6613, 360-750-8882





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "94"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: miroConnect 34 wave -- New Board Surfs Comm Waters

By:
Sara G. Stephens

It's time to stop watching others ride the currents of communications
technology while you wait for the easy-to-use, state-of-the
art solution. The miroConnect 34 wave packs all your messaging
and communications tools into one circuit board with a V.34
modem and a bounty of software.

The hardware consists of a single 16-bit card with IBM's Mwave
DSP (digital signal processor), audio connectors, MIDI or joystick
connector, and CD-ROM cable connectors. The miroConnect's V.34
modem transfers data up to 28.8Kbps and supports fax at a transfer
rate of up to 14.4Kbps.

Hardware setup was surprisingly easy. In fact, the miro manual
is about the best I've seen. Technical support comes in the
form of fax-on-demand, a bulletin board and a toll-free phone
number.

Included among miroConnect's software components are Multimedia
Connect, for telephony apps; Multimedia Blender, for mixing
sound; Multimedia Wave Editor; various Internet access tools,
including America Online, Netcom Web browser, Prodigy and CompuServe;
a pack of MIDI files; and the Intel ProShare conferencing app.

The primary application in this package is Multimedia Connect,
a full-featured comm app that combines voice mail, a fax and
a speakerphone into a single, easy-to-use system.

Multimedia Connect joins the ranks of Creative Labs Phone Blaster's
Ancilla, Boca Research's CallCenter and Spectrum's Office F
X by offering such advanced features as Caller ID, fax-on-demand
and call forwarding. With this tool, you can even be notified
via pager of any new voice or fax messages waiting in your
inbox.

All in all, the miroConnect 34 wave is an impressive product.
This package lets you ride the highest, fastest waves of communications
without wiping out during setup and customization.

--Info File--

miroConnect 34 wave

Price: $299

Platforms: Windows 95, 3.x, NT

Disk Space: 20MB

RAM: 4MB, 8MB recommended

miro Computer Products

800-549-MIRO, 415-855-0940





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "95"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: CleanSweep 95 -- Snappier App Zapper

By:
Rich Castagna

It's tough to say au revoir to ancient apps. Sure, parting with
old friends is hard, but it can get even harder if you accidentally
give the heave-ho to needed files along with those you really
want to deep-six. You can cross your fingers and whisper a
little prayer before clicking on Delete-or you can use CleanSweep
95.

The Windows 95 version of this uninstaller boasts big improvements
over its 16-bit predecessor. CleanSweep's tabbed interface
and step- by-step guidance not only make it easier to use,
but enable you to use the program with more confidence.

The tabs in the software's dialog divvy up its functions clearly.
From the Program tab, you can delete, archive, back up and
move files, or transport them to other computers. The Cleanup
tab scours your system by finding duplicate and orphan files,
redundant DLLs and infrequently used files. You can use Restore
to fetch files you've backed up, moved or transported, while
View lets you look at logs to see just what you've done. The
Options tab provides configuration settings to toggle the usage
monitor, set alerts for rarely accessed files and so forth.

Whatever you do, there's a wizard to lead the way. For example,
when you uninstall a program, you click your way through well
prompted steps that include suggestions for using CleanSweep
effectively-and safely. Just before your final click, CleanSweep
stops for confirmation and tells you how much space you'll
gain. You can also look at a list of program components if
you want to spare something from the purge.

If you don't want to shuffle a bunch of files into oblivion,
you can opt to keep them in compressed form; CleanSweep tucks
them away in a PKZIP-compatible format. When you find you do
need the app after all, a click on the Restore tab puts it
back in working condition.

The Master Log tracks almost everything CleanSweep does. You
can append each new activity to the printable file to keep
an audit trail, or you can clear it and start with a blank
slate. CleanSweep also outsmarts Win95's own uninstaller: It
will find programs that aren't in the Registry.

As you ring out your old apps and ring in new Win95 versions,
CleanSweep makes it easy to clear the clutter and keep your
system up-to-date.

--Info File--

CleanSweep 95

Price: $29.95 (street)

Platforms: Windows 95, 3.x, NT

Disk Space: 2MB

RAM: 4MB

Quarterdeck Corp.

310-309-3700, fax 310-309-4217





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "96"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: d-Time 95 -- Cache In for a Speedy CD

By:
James E. Powell

Even quad-speed CD-Rom drives get a performance boost with d
Time 95. The utility works like a system caching program, using
your hard disk to store data read from a CD-ROM. Your hard
disk's speed will affect performance gains, but in my tests
using a 30MB cache-I netted an average 50 percent pickup.

Many CD-ROM-based programs install a few files and then run
the program from the CD-ROM. Performance is sluggish, but with
d-Time, your patience will no longer be sorely tested.

D-Time's monitor shows you how it's working by displaying the
percentage of "hits"-reads from the hard disk rather than from
the CD-ROM. My tests yielded greater gains with large files,
especially multimedia files. A "learn" mode tracks how you
use a particular CD-ROM, then stores this information in a
Timelog. The next time you use that CD-ROM, load its Timelog
and performance is automatically optimized.

The speed gains are d-Time's good news; its setup is not. The
setup routine first called a DOS program to run an animated
logo, then froze my system. I got further with tech support's
help, but my system hung up again after running Scandisk. It
was supposed to run Disk Defragmenter next, as a safeguard
before d-Time installed its files.

Once you get over the rough spots-and if you have 30MB or more
available for the cache-d-Time can make your CD drive hum.

--Info File--

d-Time 95

Price: $54.95 (street)

Platforms: Windows 95

Disk Space: Varies

RAM: 4MB

Ballard Synergy Corp.

800-754-1204, 206-656-8070





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "97"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: Art-Scan Professional 3.95 -- Scant Effort for 
Swift Scans

By:
Hailey Lynne McKeefry

I've often wished that getting paper-based images into my PC
was as easy as getting them out. Art-Scan Professional simplifies
the document scanning process and, after I overcame some setup
difficulties, it provided me with a straightforward way of
moving images on paper off my desk and into my computer.

Art-Scan promises to work with more than 100 scanner engines,
including major manufacturers such as Hewlett-Packard, Microtek,
UMAX, Envisions, Epson and Relisys. But when I tried to use
it with an Agfa StudioScan flatbed scanner-which was on the
list of supported hardware-I ran into a jam because Agfa uses
a slightly different SCSI driver for this new model. Jetsoft
supplied replacement software with a bug fix, and I had no
problem loading the program. Art-Scan requires that you have
TWAIN-compatible image editing or graphics software such as
Adobe Photoshop or PageMaker, Corel Photo-Paint, Aldus PhotoStyler,
Fractal Design Painter or Caere OmniPage Professional.

The program's interface is simple and easy to use. In Auto-Mode,
all scanning options are set without user intervention; the
software determines the image type and configures the scanner
automatically. I just had to choose the type of original, either
film or photo. If you want to make your own setting adjustments,
you have a multitude of options, including scan mode, resolution,
size of the original and image range. You can scan color, gray
scale and line art, and you can choose to scan directly into .EPS 
or vector-based files without having to convert them separately
to PostScript. A Batch Scanning feature prompts for more pages
as each scan completes.

The simplicity and organized design of Art-Scan made scanning
simple enough that I quickly recovered from the stress caused
by my initial difficulties. In all, it was worth the work and
wait to get this program up and running.

--Info File--

Art-Scan Professional 3.95

Price: $149.99

Platforms: Windows 95

Disk Space: 90KB

RAM: 8MB

Jetsoft Development Co.

800-374-7401, 513-528-8668





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "98"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: Canon BJC-210 -- Bubbling with Color

By:
John Perry

Despite all the talk about the next generation's growing intimacy
with technology, I never realized there was a market for "cyber
Crayola" applications. The Canon BJC-210 color BubbleJet printer
brings color printing home to the family.

The BJC-210 is just about the smallest color printer I've seen,
measuring only 8.2 by 13.7 by 6.9 inches and weighing only
5.8 pounds.

Color output is quite good. The BJC-210 has a 360x360dpi resolution
and prints as fast as 0.27 pages per minute, at a cost per
page of 35 cents. For best printing results, coated paper is
a must. The vertical-feed paper tray holds 100 sheets. An application
bundled with the Canon Creative software allows you to make
heat transfers for T-shirts.

The BJC-210 ships with Canon Creative and Windows 3.x drivers,
and Win95 drivers will be available by the time you read this.
The Canon Creative package includes Sticker & Label Store,
Stationery Store by DogByte Development, Crayola Art by Micrografx
and Pattern Maker by HobbyWare. Swap out the color cartridge
for a black one, and you've got a black-and-white printer with
a printing resolution of 720x360dpi that's quite usable for
business.

As far as repairs go, a 2-year full warranty with InstantExchange
24-hour replacement offers you a new printer instantly should
yours break.

--Info File--

Canon BJC-210

Price $269 (street)

Canon Computer Systems

800-848-4123, 714-438-3000





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "99"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: PaperMaster 2.0 -- Master the Paper Monster

By:
Cheryl Dominianni

At a snail's pace, we creep along toward the paperless office.
But if your patience is wearing thin, you don't have to wait
to tame your paper monster. PaperMaster 2.0 is personal paper
management software that, when coupled with a scanner, provides
instant access to information that was previously paper-based.
The program lets you file, find, fax, copy, edit, e-mail, form
fill and annotate digital documents.

PaperMaster uses an intuitive file cabinet metaphor. The cabinet
on the opening screen has some drawers already named, but you
can easily create new drawers and folders. You can customize
your cabinet with graphics and font colors. Drag-and-drop makes
moving drawers, folders and documents a snap, and a lock option
lets you restrict drawers with passwords.

PaperMaster accepts documents via scanner, fax modems, e-mail
and other Windows applications. You can scan documents directly
into the file cabinet using any TWAIN- or ISIS-compliant scanner.
The program installs the PaperMaster File Cabinet as a printer
driver, which simplifies inputting documents from Windows applications.
You can directly import image files in .TIF, .PCX, .BMP, .GIF
or JPEG formats. It's also possible to set the software so
that all incoming faxes are routed directly into PaperMaster's
Inbox.

Once a document is in your cabinet, you are able to fill in
a form for the doc and annotate the file with sticky notes.
You can also search for specific text (after using the Read
and Index command), and fax and e-mail the file. PaperMaster's
fax/copy tool can replace a dedicated fax and copier-a feature
sure to interest small-office users.

Version 2.0 enhancements include the ability to share cabinets
or take them on the road; support for color and gray-scale
documents; and an Inbox where you can store documents for later
filing, straightening and autocropping features. The ability
to fill in forms with a type text tool, and MAPI- and VIM-enabled
e-mail are also new.

PaperMaster is a versatile program with an intuitive interface
that can help you master the paper chase.

--Info File--

PaperMaster 2.0

Price: $99 (street); upgrade from 1.x, $49 (street)

Platforms: Windows 95, 3.1

Disk Space: 7MB

RAM: 8MB

DocuMagix

800-DOCU-MAGIX, 408-434-1138





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "100"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: askSam 3.0 -- Play It Again, Sam

By:
Philip Albinus

Right when you thought you could come up for air in a sea of
information, along comes the Internet tidal wave. Before you
go under for the last time, give askSam 3.0 a look.

I tested a beta version of askSam and found its search engine
vastly improved. This fleet-footed application can search for
a word or text string in the blink of an eye. It also has new
features for working on the World Wide Web. HTML import and
export capabilities have been added to simplify organizing
Web information. Just find a Web page and save it to your hard
drive as an HTML file. AskSam 3.0 will open the file and preserve
the hyperlinks in bold-faced, colored type, and you can turn
the Web page into a searchable askSam database file. The Internet
Desktop section also offers predefined templates for managing
e-mail and newsgroup messages.

AskSam 3.0 ships with a set of clever applets called askSam
Office. The six apps include askSam files to track addresses,
notes, to-do items, faxes, memos and letters.

AskSam 3.0 is a 16-bit application that works well under Windows
95. The company says a 32-bit version will debut by mid-1996.
Until then, you won't be sacrificing anything with this powerful
and flexible program.

--Info File--

askSam 3.0

Price: $149.95

Platforms: Windows 95, 3.x

askSam Systems

800-800-1997, 904-584-6590





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "101"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: MyAdvancedBrochures 95 -- Biz Docs Made Simple

By:
Hailey Lynne McKeefry

Even if you're a little fish in a sea of big businesses, you
can still project the spit-and-polish image of the big boys
with MyAdvancedBrochures 95. The program lets you create professional
looking business publications that cost a lot less than a trip
to the printer.

This 32-bit version of MyAdvancedBrochures has been tuned to
take advantage of Windows 95, including features like long
filenames, right mouse-button menus, and OLE drag-and-drop.
The program, which I tested in beta, also runs under Windows
NT.

Other new features simplify printing and mailing. A Mail Merge
Wizard walks you through creating mailing labels from a dBASE
IV, MyMailList or delimited ASCII file. In a few easy steps,
the mail merge is done, including any filtering.

The program also supports an increased number of preprinted
papers from a variety of vendors, including Beaver Prints,
Image Plus, Image Street, Paper Direct and InstaColor. In all,
this CD-ROM version supports 650 paper designs, from dual-
and trifold brochures, flyers, and letterhead to business cards
and newsletters. In many cases, MyAdvancedBrochures supports
paper designs across several formats (brochures, letterhead,
business cards and so forth) so all your documents can have
a consistent look and feel. There are also 14 designs that
you can print yourself and an option for plain paper for creating
your own designs. The CD supports about 1,000 clip-art images,
or you can import art in 13 graphics formats.

The newsletter design templates now include about 40 different
dualfold brochure options as well as 28 designs for fourfold
brochures that print on legal-sized paper. The previous version
supported only trifold designs. You still have the option of
adding reply or rotary cards, as well as space for a "send
to" or return address label.

MyAdvancedBrochures has maintained its easy-to-use interface
and clear toolbars, while adding more design choices. This
modestly priced program will more than pay for itself even
if you only use it a few times a year for promotional mailers.

--Info File--

MyAdvanced-Brochures 95

Price: $79.95

Platforms: Windows 95, 3.1, NT

MySoftware Co.

800-325-3508, 415-473-3600





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "102"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: Sejin Wireless Keyboard Model SPR-8630WP -- 
Look, Ma, No Wires

By:
James E. Powell

Having worked with Logitech wireless mice for a number of years,
I appreciate the way these peripherals keep my desktop free
of wires. Now Sejin offers a compact wireless keyboard that
can remove yet another cord from my desk.

The unit's infrared receiver plugs into your computer just like
any keyboard (there's an adapter for both PS/AT- and PS/2-sized
plugs). There are no special drivers to load: Windows 95-and,
presumably, Windows 3.x-recognizes the unit as just another
keyboard.

The keyboard itself is powered by two AAA batteries and can
be used within 16 feet of the receiver. The keyboard doesn't
have to be in exact line of sight, either; the unit works within
a 45-degree range.

Though all the letter and number keys are full-size, the function
and navigation keys are tiny by comparison. There's a numeric
keypad layout, available on several letter keys, that's accessible
by pressing the Fn key, just as on most laptops.

I like the feel of this quiet, 86-key keyboard. The product's
size (1 by 11.5 by 5.5 inches) is ideal. It's incredibly lightweight,
and it has adjustable tilt legs and nonskid rubber feet for
desktop use. But its best feature is what it doesn't have:
a wire.

--Info File--

Sejin Wireless Keyboard Model

SPR-8630WP

Price: $99.95

Sejin America

408-980-7550, fax 408-980-7562





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "103"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: First Aid 95 -- Snafu Sniffer Suggests Solutions

By:
James E. Powell

When all's not well with your Windows system, there is a doctor
in the house if you have a copy of First Aid 95. The utility
diagnoses problems and suggests remedies and, despite having
"95" as its surname, First Aid works for Windows 3.1, too.

If your multimedia system is in trouble, for example, First
Aid's diagnostics may suggest fixes such as replacing missing
drivers. If the necessary driver is tucked in the wrong folder,
you can move it with just a click on the AutoFix button. If
the driver can't be located, First Aid opens the appropriate
Control Panel Wizard.

First Aid examines the error your application returns and describes
the hitch in plain English. Then the program checks to see
if the condition is among the 10,000 in its knowledge base.
If it is, it sets out to look for the file the application
requires.

Running under Windows 95, 16-bit applications can still crash.
But if First Aid's Crash Guard is running in the background,
it can monitor the app and intercede to save your data if it
detects a GPF.

First Aid's Trim feature is like a selective uninstall. It removes
files related to an application's features you no longer use.
On the flip side, it can check to ensure that all the files
needed for a particular feature are in place.

But First Aid can be confusing. The manual refers to Crash Guard
by another name (Problem Monitor). And when Crash Guard starts,
it's not represented by a taskbar icon as are the other background
utilities. The manual also mentions a feature called Windows
Guardian, but there is no such screen.

Most disappointing, though, is First Aid's limited list of supported
applications. Not supporting the very latest version of a program
is reasonable, but not including support for mature programs
isn't. For example, First Aid can check Access 1.0 and 1.1,
but not version 2.0, which is more than a year old. However,
you can use the programs' Support Exchange to get updates from
the company's BBS, the Internet, CompuServe, Prodigy, MSN or
AOL.

--Info File--

First Aid 95

Price: $49.95 (street)

Platforms: Windows 95, 3.1

Disk Space: 7MB

RAM: 4MB

CyberMedia

800-PC-1ST-AID, 310-843-0800





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "104"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: Hewlett-Packard LaserJet 5Si MX -- 
Workhorse Laser for Workgroup Printing

By:
Hailey Lynne McKeefry

Five thousand dollars may seem like a lot to pay for a laser
printer. However, the HP LaserJet 5Si MX packs in paper-handling,
output and networking features that make it worth the price.

This network powerhouse is built to handle the demands of a
large workgroup with ease and style. It is decked out with
two 500-sheet input paper trays and a 100-sheet multipurpose
tray that can handle 10 different sizes of printable media,
to make restocking paper a once-in-a-while job. You can also
add a whopping 2,000-sheet input tray (for $1,299) to bring
the total capacity to 3,100 sheets.

This speed demon whips out letter- and A4-sized documents at
24 pages per minute with a resolution of 600x600 dots per inch.
The unit weighs in at 99 pounds and measures 21.3 by 31.3 by
20.5 inches. It comes standard with 12MB of RAM, expandable
to 76MB. The LaserJet 5Si is rated for a duty cycle of 100,000
pages per month.

The printer's networking options are legion: They include 10Base2
and 10BaseT Ethernet and DIN-8 LocalTalk bi-directional interfaces,
as well as an HP MIO expansion slot. The unit supports just
about any network OS right out of the box. The included JetAdmin
software gives network managers real-time remote printer status
and diagnostic alerts. This is one printer you can share with
a large office and still not keep anyone waiting.

--Info File--

Hewlett-Packard LaserJet 5Si MX

Price: $4,899

Hewlett-Packard Co.

800-752-0900





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "105"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: PowerDesk 1.0 -- Roll Your Own Desktop

By:
Joel T. Patz

I'm always looking for ways to make my work easier, so PowerDesk
is my kind of utility. It organizes my work tools and puts
them on my desktop within easy reach of a mouse click.

You can integrate the PowerDesk toolbar with Windows 95's taskbar
or use it as a separate window on your desktop. You place launch
buttons for specific files, folders or applications on the
toolbar, or use the DOS command box if you like to do things
the old-fashioned way. System monitors watch CPU usage, threads,
available memory, available disk space, and system, user and
GDI resources. You can specify how often you want the monitors
updated and display them as bars or moving graphs.

PowerDesk's multiview feature lets you switch among up to 16
virtual screens, which you customize by adjusting their color
and size, hotkeys and applications. System shortcuts to shut
down or restart your computer, restart Windows, log on as another
user or change screen resolution can also be added to the toolbar.
It's even possible to display up to seven clocks set for different
time zones.

Installed printers can be represented by icons on the toolbar
which can be used as shortcuts. Any item in your Start/Programs
list will be identified by a start button by PowerDesk and,
like everything else in the program, can be modified.

PowerDesk provides one-click access to drives, files and folders.
Menu choices make managing zip files quick and simple. The
customizable toolbar's buttons make it easy to rename files,
change icon sizes, call up a detail view of the file list,
and arrange file lists by name, extension, size, date and type.
Other file operations, such as cut, copy, paste, undo and delete,
are just as straightforward. The DOS command line at the bottom
of the ExplorerPlus screen is a real timesaver.

PowerDesk's intuitive interface, seamless integration with Windows
95 and easy customization make it a timely addition to a busy
user's toolkit.

--Info File--

PowerDesk 1.0

Price: $79.95

Platforms: Windows 95

MicroHelp

800-777-3322, 770-516-0899





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "106"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: Dr. Solomon's Anti-Virus Toolkit for Windows 95 -- 
This Doctor Makes House Calls

By:
Rich Castagna

There is a doctor in the house, and he has his finger on your
PC's pulse. Dr. Solomon's Anti-Virus Toolkit is a healthy dose
of preventive medicine that will help keep your Windows 95
system free of crippling-or even just plain annoying-viruses.

I tested the beta version of this cure-all kit. It has several
components, including WinGuard, which you can set to run at
Win95's start-up. WinGuard lurks in the background and checks
the health of files as you access them. You can also manually
run a virus check from Dr. Solomon's dialog box and scan any
drive-including your floppy-for over 7,000 known malicious
critters.

The good doctor also provides an online encyclopedia of about
300 common viruses. It's interesting reading in itself, and
when Dr. Solomon nabs a nasty before it can put the hurt on
your hard disk, you can look it up and see what peril you just
escaped. Besides a description of each bug's evil intent, the
encyclopedia explains how it works and if there are any known
variations.

A Scheduler lets you set up regular scans that will kick off
without your intervention. And if your reading preferences
tend toward hexadecimal, you can select Inspect from the Advanced
menu and peer into the darkest recesses of a file or disk.

Dr. Solomon's past releases have been effective vaccinations
against destructive viruses. With the amount of downloading
and file swapping we do these days, the need for effective
detection is greater than ever.

--Info File--

Dr. Solomon'

Anti-Virus Toolkit for Windows 95

Price: $125

Platforms: Windows 95, 3.x

S&S Software International

800-701-9648, 617-273-7400





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "107"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: Mosaic in a Box for Windows 95 -- 
Sleek Intro to the Net Set

By:
Julie R. Blumenfield

Neophyte Netters, take note: Mosaic in a Box for Windows 95
is the perfect Internet browser for beginners.

Installing Mosaic in a Box creates a program group on the Start
menu with a dialer app, 32-bit browser, mail client, graphic
viewer, the program's help system and an account-creation utility.
Newcomers will also appreciate the World Wide Web 95 Tour,
an Internet introduction. CompuServe Wallet (an Internet payment
service that uses CheckFree) and an access-number phone book
round out the offerings.

This 32-bit version of Mosaic is considerably faster than its
predecessor. The browser is supposed to conform to the HTML
3.0 standard, but some 3.0 enhancements like tables and text
wraps around graphics weren't supported. It does, however,
support Win95 conventions such as context menus, and also provides
a configurable hotlist and viewing options such as the ability
to change the hyperlink display color.

Mosaic's newsgroup feature is anemic. Your only option is to
enter the name of a newsgroup-there's no master list or search
capability.

The mail function, on the other hand, is intuitive and quick.
And the file-viewer utility is so good that it alone might
be worth the price.

Mosaic's easy operation and detailed help screens make it perfect
for Internet newcomers.

--Info File--

Mosaic in a Box

for Windows 95

Price: $9.95 (street)

Platforms: Windows 95, 3.x

Disk Space: 9KB

RAM: 4MB

CompuServe Internet Division

800-557-9614





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "108"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: Virtus WalkThrough 2.5 -- 
The Shape of Things to Come 

By:
Lynn Ginsberg

As you travel about the virtual worlds in the Web's cyberspace,
you might begin to believe that Columbus was wrong: This world
is flat. But the Web is becoming a more inhabitable space,
thanks to programs such as Virtus WalkThrough, which supports
the latest Internet protocol of 3-D VRML modeling. VRML (virtual
reality modeling language) lets developers create 3-D models
for the Internet. These models can be navigated by multiple
participants and hyperlinked to other 3-D worlds or HTML documents.

Virtus WalkThrough is a natural for VRML development, with its
innovative approach to implementing navigable 3-D scenes and
environments. WalkThrough's strength is its straightforward
set of tools, which you use to create complex 3-D worlds for
the Internet using a relatively humble PC rather than a high
powered workstation.

The process for creating WalkThrough's VRML environments is
simple. First, you use the program to create your 3-D scene.
Next, you map out which objects within the scene will be "hot
spots" for linking to other HTML Web pages or another VRML
document. Once you've chosen these hot spots, you fill in a
dialog box to attach a VRML anchor to the object, which designates
the URL link. After assigning all of the anchors to objects,
you export your 3-D model to VRML using a File menu option.

That's all there is to it.

I found the hot-spot and linking process extremely easy to follow
considerably less challenging than creating the 3-D scene itself.
This WalkThrough version also supports stereoscopic viewing
hardware which, if you have virtual reality equipment, lets
you interact even more realistically within a 3-D scene.

While it's easy to convert 3-D environments to VRML with WalkThrough,
navigating a 3-D environment online is still a far cry from
reality given current modem, line and hardware limitations.
Unless, of course, that reality is really, really slow. Until
the supporting hardware and communications infrastructure is
in place, the worlds created in Virtus will demand as much
patience as vision from the virtual traveler.

--Info File--

Virtus

WalkThrough 2.5

Price: $495 (direct)

Platforms: Windows 95

Virtus Corp.

800-VIRTUS-1, 919-467-9700





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "109"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: EasyPhoto 2.0 -- Dress Up Docs with Digital Pics

By:
Jim Forbes

It's easy to be image-conscious with EasyPhoto 2.0, a graphics
and scanning application that makes it a snap to add photos
or pictures to reports, proposals and other documents.

EasyPhoto is available on a CD-ROM or bundled with a scanner
($249). This release incorporates features that improve its
versatility. It supports photos with enhanced resolutions of
up to 1200dpi. In addition, its ClearPrint technology has been
enhanced to optimize output for specific printers. The program
works with new color ink jet printers from such vendors as
Hewlett-Packard, Epson and Canon, and it supports OLE 2.0.

EasyPhoto is easier to use than its predecessor, and the photo
scanner is faster. These improvements help non-graphics professionals
create great-looking documents with text that wraps around
color photos. Another key benefit of EasyPhoto is the ability
to print the graphics-enhanced documents using a relatively
inexpensive color ink jet printer.

Other programs provide similar features, but EasyPhoto is-right
now-the best solution available for dressing up documents with
eye-catching graphics.

--Info File--

EasyPhoto 2.0

Price: $69; with scanner, $249

Platforms: Windows 3.x, 95

Disk Space: 12MB

RAM: 8MB

Storm Software

800-275-5734, 415-691-6600





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "110"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: ArtMedia Monitors TC1864 and TG1882 -- 
Practically Perfect Pictures

By:
Joel T. Patz

Perfection is rarely encountered in life, but two new monitors
from ArtMedia, the TC1864 and the TG1882, come close. They're
also competitively priced, considering their performance.

Both these Trinitron CRT monitors provide an approximate 16
inch diagonal, conductive silica-coated viewing area. The 42
pound TC1864 offers 1280x1024 maximum resolution, with an optimal
resolution of 1024x768 at 75Hz and 0.25mm grill pitch (Trinitron's
quasi-equivalent to dot pitch). Its horizontal scan frequency
falls within a 31kHz to 64kHz range, and the vertical scan
frequency lies between 50Hz and 120Hz. Hidden behind a flip
down panel on the monitor's front, the digital control buttons
for the TC1864 allow you to adjust brightness and contrast,
horizontal and vertical centering and size, and color temperature.
You can also correct for pincushioning and rotation.

The maximum resolution for the TG1882 is 1600x1280, the optimal
being 1280x1024 at 75Hz. It supports horizontal and vertical
scanning frequencies between 29kHz and 82kHz and 50Hz and150Hz,
respectively. Located on the monitor's lower edge, the TG1882's
controls include plus and minus contrast and brightness buttons,
and a Select button joined to a series of tiny indicators.
You can adjust centering, picture size, tilt and horizontal
pincushion, convergence and color temperature. The TG1882 weighs
in at 49 pounds and uses a BNC connector cable.

Both monitors, which measure no more than a space-saving 18
inches in height. width or depth, are automatically degaussed
on start-up and comply with MPR II standards. In compliance
with power-saving guidelines, each supports three levels of
operation with the appropriate video card.

I ran each monitor through its paces using DisplayMate for Windows
(Sonera Technologies, 800-932-6323) to check for focus, convergence,
color, resolution and other characteristics. The results were
excellent. I found no evidence of moir patterns and a complete
absence of distortion on both test screens, although the TG1882
did have a sharper picture. They were both, quite nearly, perfect.

--Info File--

ArtMedia Monitors TC1864 and TG1882

Price: TC1864, $899; TG1882, $1,099

ArtMedia

800-278-6334, 408-980-8988





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "111"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: AcerNote Light -- Bantamweight Book 
Won't Break Your Budget

By:
Jim Forbes

Value-class machines provide the basic functionality most of
us need for mobile computing. I recently saw a preproduction
version of one such machine, the AcerNote Light model 352.
It ships with a 10.4-inch dual-scan passive-matrix display,
a 75MHz 80486 DX4 processor, a 420MB hard disk, an internal
3.5-inch floppy disk drive, a single Type II PCMCIA socket,
one serial port, one parallel port, a self-contained infrared
transceiver and a touchpad pointing device.

The internal battery consistently powered the machine for 2.25
to 2.75 hours. Recharging the batteries takes about 3 hours
with the power off. Optional lithium ion batteries should be
available by the time you read this.

The notebook's dual-scan passive-matrix screen is bright, with
a diagonal width of 10.4 inches, but it has a narrow viewing
angle. The AcerNote Light is smaller than most notebooks. It's
1.7 by 11.7 by 8.2 inches and has a travel weight (including
its small recharger) of 5.6 pounds. Windows 95 is standard,
as is a card game, a personal organizer and software utilities.

The AcerNote Light's Wintune 95 benchmark results were good
for a 75MHz 486: CPU, 44.6MIPS; FPU, 15.5MFLOPS; video, 2.07Mpixels
per second; and 4.34MB per second data-transfer rate for the
hard disk.

I wouldn't hesitate to send one away with a college student,
or to carry it day in and day out in my book bag.

--Info File--

AcerNote Light

Price: As configured, $2,199

Acer America Corp.

800-733-2237, 408-432-6200





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "112"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: Visioneer PaperPort Vx -- Port in a Paper Storm

By:
Rich Castagna

Imagine a machine that sucks stacks of paper off your desk and
tucks them onto your hard disk. And imagine a program that
lets you do just about anything you want with those digitized
documents. Now turn off your imagination and turn on the PaperPort
Vx.

The new scanner/document manager combo offers a slightly revised
look and a slew of small but useful enhancements. On the outside,
the 3.75- by 12- by 2.5-inch scanner is a little sleeker than
its predecessor, but its beauty isn't only skin deep. A new
chip provides 8-bit scanning for up to 256 shades of gray.
And it's still quick-taking only a lickety-split 5 or 6 seconds
to scan a full page.

Depending on the material you plan to scan, you can switch among
PaperPort's six modes for scanning text or images. For each
setting, there's a description of the level of quality to expect
and the resulting file's relative size.

PaperPort wakes up when you slip a document into the scanner.
Once the scan is complete, the Page screen pops up, where you
can adjust the image or add annotations in the form of sticky
notes, arrows or freehand lines. For skewed images, you use
a new alignment tool to turn the image until it lines up.

The Desktop screen shows the scanned pages and lets you drop
them into folders or shuffle them into stacks. A slider bar
makes it easy to flip through the stack, and the Browse button
lists the items in the selected folder. You can also add a
descriptive header record to a scan, which-like the sticky
notes-is searchable.

PaperPort searches your disk for installed apps and for each
one it recognizes, it creates a link and a big button at the
bottom of the Desktop screen. You can drag scanned pages to
the buttons to launch the applications. When applicable, PaperPort
first runs the page through OmniPage Lite's OCR software before
starting the program.

There's no easier way to get from paper to pixels.

--Info File--

Visioneer PaperPort Vx

Price: $369 (street)

Platforms: Windows 95, 3.1

Disk Space: 8MB

RAM: 8MB

Visioneer

800-787-7007, 415-493-9599





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "113"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: Sharp PC-8800 -- Easy on the Eyes (and Ears)

By:
Michelle A. Tyrrell

With Pentiums now ubiquitous, great deals abound on systems
with slower processors. The Sharp PC-8800 notebook computer,
with its 486DX4/75 processor, is one example.

The PC-8800 ships with 8MB of RAM (expandable to 32MB) and a
320MB hard disk (upgradable to 500MB). It has 1MB of video
memory, 32-bit VESA local-bus video, and 16-bit sound with
built-in stereo speakers and microphone. The keyboard is comfortable,
and the 10.4-inch, 800x600 resolution dual-scan SVGA screen
is easy on the eyes. A GlidePoint Trackpad makes all the difference
for comfort and accuracy.

The PC-8800 comes with an infrared port, allowing the user to
communicate wirelessly with infrared-equipped systems, PDAs
and printers. It has a nickel metal hydride "Smart" battery
and dual-battery capability for extended travel.

The floppy disk drive is on the front of the unit, while the
back houses the usual complement of ports. The PCMCIA slot
holds two Type II cards or one Type III card.

The model I tested was running Windows 3.1. The Word 6.0 macro
executed in 110 seconds, while the Excel 5.0 macro finished
in 56 seconds. The CPU scored 39.5MIPS and 8.2MFLOPS, hard
disk access was 1.826MB per second, and the video system racked
up 3.068Mpixels per second. The battery delivered 2 hours usage.

The PC-8800 measures 2 by 11.6 by 8.8 inches and weighs 6.2
pounds. MS-DOS, Windows 3.1, America Online, CompuServe and
CheckFree were preinstalled.

--Info File--

Sharp PC-8800

Price: $2,399

Sharp Electronics Corp.

800-237-4277, 201-529-8200





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "114"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: Texas Instruments Extensa 455T -- 
Book Brings Value, Saves Bucks

By:
Jim Forbes

Texas Instruments has been known more for high-end notebook
computers than for value-class machines. The TI Extensa 455T
may change all that. It's a new 75MHz DX4 486-based notebook
that muscles into the notebook market's action area-systems
that cost less than $2,400.

The Extensa is manufactured for TI by Acer and is almost identical
to the AcerNote Light, also reviewed in First Impressions this
month. Standard equipment includes a single Type II PCMCIA
(PC Card) slot, one parallel, one serial and two PS/2 ports,
14MB of

RAM expandable to 32MB, a 3.5-inch (removable) floppy disk drive,
accelerated graphics and a full-sized palm rest with an integrated
GlidePoint pointing device.

The Extensa allows you to plug optional lithium ion batteries
or an optional Type III PC Card socket into a module that normally
holds the floppy disk drive. The unit includes a small, easily
connected port replicator, weighs under 6 pounds and measures
1.7 by 11.7 by 8.2 inches. Duracell makes the primary power
cell. I was able to get up to three hours' use between charges
with only moderate power conservation. The power supply is
small, measuring approximately 1 by 4 by 2 inches.

The 9.5-inch active-matrix color screen should be adequate for
most users' needs, although I wouldn't recommend the Extensa
455T for presentation graphics.

The Extensa 455T ships with Windows 95, Microsoft Works, Lotus
Organizer and other software. My test unit had less than 102MB
free on its 340MB hard disk.

The TI Extensa 455T's Win95 Wintune benchmark results were 45MIPS,
15MFLOPS, 1.56Mpixels per second for the video, and 4.36MB
per second data-transfer rate for the hard disk. These results
are slightly better than those of other 75MHz DX4 machines
I've tested, although the Cirrus Logic-based video is slow.
This machine took 72 seconds to complete our 32-bit Excel macro
and 154 seconds to run our 32-bit Word macro.

Texas Instruments has stuffed a lot of value in a small case
with the Extensa 455T. With the optional lithium ion battery,
it should compete well with much more expensive models.

--Info File--

Texas Instruments Extensa 455T

Price: $2,099 (street)

Texas Instruments

800-848-3927, 817-771-5856





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "115"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: Apple Color LaserWriter 12/600 PS -- 
Appetizing Apple Offers Crisp, Colorful Pages

By:
Hailey Lynne McKeefry

Apple has long been a desktop publishing leader, so it's no
surprise that the company's newest color laser printer is a
technological tour de force. What's surprising is how nicely
this Apple unit fit into my Windows setup.

The Apple Color LaserWriter 12/600 PS is for workgroups with
any combination of Macintosh, Power Macintosh, Windows and
UNIX computers. It comes standard with support for most network
protocols.

Setup was simple, although I did have to install a number of
pieces including four toner cartridges (cyan, magenta, yellow
and black), a photoconductor drum, an oil canister and an empty
toner collection box. The printer's control panel indicates
which toner cartridge is low, and which portions of the unit
need maintenance.

The LaserWriter 12/600 outputs at 600x600-dot-per-inch resolution.
It ships with 39 PostScript fonts, 64 TrueType fonts and 12MB
of RAM. The colors produced are bright and vibrant even on
plain, uncoated paper. It prints at 12 pages per minute in
black and white and 3ppm in color. You can also print color
transparencies at 1ppm.

The printer ships with one 250-sheet cassette, a 100-sheet multipurpose
tray; an additional 250-sheet tray is also available.

Toner cartridges for the unit cost $119 for black and $139 for
cyan, magenta and yellow. Apple estimates that the cost is
3 cents per page at 5 percent black coverage and 13 cents per
page at 20 percent color coverage.

--Info File--

Apple Color LaserWriter 12/600 PS

Price: $6,989

Apple Computer

800-538-9696, 408-996-1010





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "116"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: AppleVision 1710AV -- Multimedia MacMonitor

By:
Hailey Lynne McKeefry

The split between the Apple Macintosh and the Windows PC has
traditionally been as stringently observed as the separation
between church and state. The walls separating the two are
breaking down, but they aren't rubble yet. I found that while
the Apple Vision 1710AV multimedia monitor had the traditionally
high price tag of Macintosh products, it lacked the ease-of
use of a VGA monitor.

First, the unit requires an adapter (included) so that it can
plug into a Windows PC. Second, there is no Windows version
of the AppleVision utilities. On-screen controls allowed the
adjustment

of geometry, brightness, contrast and color temperature. However,
I was repeatedly unable to get the pincushioning and convergence
exactly right.

On the bright side, the AppleVision's flat screen, combined
with an antiglare coating, made it very easy on my eyes. The
17-inch Trinitron CRT provides a healthy 16.1-inch diagonal
viewable image and a 0.26mm stripe pitch. For PCs, it supports
resolutions from 640x480 to 1280x1024. You can use an ergonomic
75Hz refresh rate at any of those resolutions.

A set of stereo speakers mounted at the unit's bottom provides
good-quality sound, while a directional microphone sits embedded
at the top of the monitor. These features add some size to
the unit, which measures 19.7 by 15.8 by 17.6 inches and weighs
60 pounds.

--Info File--

AppleVision 1710AV

Price: $1,159

Apple Computer

800-538-9696, 408-996-1010





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "117"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: Robotech Cobra XLT P133 Multimedia System -- 
Jazzy 133 for After-5 Fun

By:
Philip Albinus

Now's your chance to get off the couch and become a bona fide
PC potato. The Robotech Cobra XLT is a fast and furious 133MHz
Pentium system that offers more video thrills than a Schwarzenegger
action flick.

The Robotech Cobra XLT isn't just a speedy PC; it's a home entertainment
system. Though it lacks a modem and network card, there's video
galore. The Robotech Cobra ships with the Jazz Multimedia Jakarta
MPEG Video Graphics Accelerator card with 2MB of DRAM. The
unit also features the Jazz Multimedia Port of Entry card,
a cable-ready tuner that puts your TV and Sega, Nintendo and
3DO games within Windows. You can also watch videotapes from
your VCR or camcorder. Unfortunately, Jazz Multimedia was still
finishing its 32-bit drivers at presstime, so portions of our
video testing were incomplete.

You will certainly need full-blown sound to accompany all this
flashy video. The Robotech Cobra ships with a Sound Blaster
compatible Cobra Wave Table audio card that delivers 16-bit
sound. The unit also offers a pair of Yamaha YST-M10 powered
monitor speakers.

The PC came installed with Windows for Workgroups 3.11 and MS
DOS 6.22, and was loaded with 16MB of RAM and a 1GB hard drive.
Installing Windows 95 was a breeze from the Panasonic quad
speed CD-ROM drive. A Robotech spokesman said the company will
be shipping Cobras with Win95 installed by the time you read
this.

The system's monitor is its only drawback. The 17-inch screen
has a 0.26mm dot pitch, but its performance was only adequate.
This PC has spectacular multimedia peripherals; it deserves
an equally impressive monitor.

The Cobra scored 243MIPS and 76MFLOPS on our WINDOWS Magazine
Wintune 95 benchmark tests, about average for a 133MHz Pentium.
Its video score of 2.4Mpixels per second and uncached hard
drive data transfer rate of 3.4MB were disappointing, however.
It posted equally lackluster times of 88 seconds to complete
our Word 7.0 macro and 62 seconds for the Excel macro. But
if it's wall-to-wall video goodies you want, the Robotech Cobra
can flex plenty of multimedia muscle.

--Info File--

Robotech Cobra XLT P133 Multimedia System

Price: $3,599

Robotech

800-533-0633, 801-565-0645





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "118"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: Packard Bell Multimedia Corner Computer -- 
Angular PC Is a Niche Product

By:
Cynthia Morgan

You know PCs have become household appliances when space-saving
designer models come along. The Packard Bell Multimedia Corner
PC is just that, with dual drive sections that split off at
90-degree angles to fit a desktop corner.

A 133MHz Pentium system with 16MB of EDO RAM, 1.6GB hard disk
and PCI video with 1MB of video RAM, the Corner PC is also
a home entertainment center. Packard Bell uses all three ISA
slots and fills them with a combo voice mail/14.4Kbps modem
sound card, an FM radio adapter and PBTV4, an integrated cable
TV card. An included remote control handily doubles as a mouse.
Packard Bell gets high marks for its user-friendly welcoming
tutorial, built around a family living room metaphor.

As with a TV, you don't ever want to remove the cover. Packard
Bell takes seven pages to explain how to remove it, and it's
not easy, especially since it's partially wired to the chassis.

Unfortunately, the Corner PC scores on the low end for a 133MHz
system. WINDOWS Magazine's Wintune benchmarks rated the processor
at 230MIPS, with on-target 77MFLOPS for floating point but
a disappointing video score at 4.3Mpixels per second. Uncached
disk operation transfers data at 3MB per second.

At $3,398, the Corner PC is a full-featured value for the casual
home user. For faster performance and do-it-yourself serviceability,
however, you might want to look elsewhere.

--Info File--

Packard Bell

Multimedia Corner Computer

Price: Including 15-inch monitor, $3,398 (street)

Packard Bell Electronics

800-733-5858, 818-865-1555





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "119"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: Zenith Z-Station GT 590MM -- Lots of Vroom, 
Little Room

By:
Cynthia Morgan

Zenith Data Systems is known for stuffing everything possible
onto its motherboards. So I was surprised to find that the
company's design philosophy had taken a different tack with
its new Z-Station GT 590MM. Instead of cramming the motherboard
to the gills, this multimedia desktop fills all three ISA slots
with network, sound and modem cards, so don't plan on adding
more.

The Hayes Accura 144B fax modem, Creative Labs Sound Blaster
16 and SMC network card leave just two PCI slots free. Of course,
with 16MB of RAM, a 256KB level 2 cache, a 1.2GB EIDE hard
drive, a quad-speed Toshiba IDE CD-ROM and built-in S3 Trio
32-bit PCI graphics adapter with 2MB of video memory, you won't
lack for much. Moving sound and communications off the motherboard
eases future upgrading.

However, tech support may call this desktop a service headache,
despite the fact that internal components are easy to find.
Although it's wider than most slimline desktop PCs-17 instead
of the usual 14 to 16 inches-there's not much room inside.
You'll probably need to remove cards and/or drives to make
hardware changes. The four filled SIMM sockets crowd out a
possible fourth ISA slot, and drive bays restrict one ISA and
one PCI slot to short-length cards.

WINDOWS Magazine's Wintune benchmarks clocked this CPU doing
164MIPS, while floating-point operations moved along at 52MFLOPS,
a little higher than average for a 90MHz Pentium. The unit
showed lackluster hard-drive performance, though with a 1.8MB
per-second uncached data-transfer rate. Video was also middling,
at 6.7Mpixels per second.

The GT 590MM's start-up screens offer extensive system and support
information, but the manual is sometimes confusing when it
comes to installing Windows 95 drivers. The price includes
sound, support and modem utilities, plus Internet software
and a copy of Symantec's Norton Navigator and Norton Antivirus
for Windows 95.

If you're more interested in using a PC than in tinkering inside
its case, you'll find the Z-Station GT 590MM is a solid performer.

--Info File--

Zenith Z-Station

GT 590MM

Price: $3,383; with 15-inch monitor, $3,822

Zenith Data Systems

800-533-0331, 708-808-5000





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "120"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab First Impressions: Maximus P-133 -- Mini Tower of Power

By:
David Gabel

Maybe I've just become a jaded New Yorker. I approach each review
I undertake with skepticism. I did not think, for example,
that I was going to like the Maximus P-133 desktop system.

I was wrong.

I tested this computer in my office, which is jam-packed with
review products, and was therefore happy for the space-saving
mini-tower construction. The included 15-inch MAG InnoVision
monitor is similarly space-efficient, while maintaining picture
clarity and good color. It took about 2 hours for me to get
the computer unpacked and set up.

The P-133 performs. The low-level Wintune 95 benchmarks gave
me 243MIPS, disk speed of 3.4MB per second (uncached) and video
speed (from an ATI PCI video card) of 7.5Mpixels per second.
You won't catch this PC napping. The Microsoft Word 7.0 macro
ran in 18 seconds, while the Excel 7.0 macro executed in 13
seconds.

I do have some minor quibbles with this system: The case is
secured by Phillips-head screws, which are less convenient
than the thumbscrews that some companies are using. I didn't
like the Chicony keyboard, which had little tactical or audible
feedback. In addition, printer and comm ports are supplied
on an expansion card, leaving only one ISA slot free. And if
you need to install more than a network interface card, it
has to be PCI.

But I can live with those. My initial misgivings proved unfounded;
this is a nice machine.

--Info File--

Maximus P-133

Price: $2,545

Maximus Computers

800-888-MAXI, 818-305-5925





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "121"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Connectivity: Collabra Share 2.0 -- Enterprise Wise

By:
Jeffrey Sloman

Groupware is a product category that has taken time to come
of age. The long maturation is due mostly to pioneer products
that were too big for all but the largest organizations. But
thanks to groupware applications like Collabra Share 2.0, you
don't have to be a Fortune 500 company to reap the productivity
benefits that enhanced communications promises.

Collabra offers two versions of Share, a workgroup edition that
makes files on a central server sharable and a full-fledged
client/server edition. The client/server version is more appropriate
for larger installations that require a multiple-site setup.

Installing Share is straightforward, but you should first read
the manual's excellent section on planning. For a multiple
site configuration, you designate one site as the initial installation
site before you add the other locations using the Setup program's
connect option. A network installation takes about 10 minutes.

Once that's done, workstation software is installed from the
server by network users or the system administrator. You can
install the client programs on local drives or run them from
the server. Installing the client software from the network
is a snap.

Share provides threaded discussions within forums-similar to
the participant areas offered by commercial online services.
Each forum focuses on a specific topic, and threading keeps
the topic's messages and replies logically connected.

Compared with simple mailing-list discussions, which tend to
be serial, the threaded-message approach can handle nonlinear
interchanges adeptly. If an interesting-but tangential-discussion
arises from the main topic, it can be continued without disrupting
the original direction. And because everyone in a forum can
see all of the messages, it's easier for participants to keep
track of what's going on.

Share's forums are, in turn, organized into libraries. This
hierarchical structure makes it easy to perform global actions
on large sets of topics and messages. For example, if you want
to search for items that contain a particular word or phrase,
you can apply the search to an entire library rather than having
to search each forum separately.

A Share forum can have a designated moderator, who reviews and
approves documents submitted to the forum before making them
available to the rest of the group. The moderator can thus
help keep discussions to the point or defuse potentially controversial
topics. Another option allows anonymous contributions, which
is ideal for encouraging people to engage freely in discussions
of sensitive topics.

For the system administrator, Share offers excellent enterprise
features. The program's user list-called the Registry-is based
on your e-mail system's user list, so it's easy to maintain.
Share works with MAPI or VIM mail systems such as Microsoft
Mail, Exchange, Novell Groupwise and Lotus cc:Mail. Mail Agent,
an add-on product, allows the transfer of forum traffic to
a simple e-mail address.

Share is also highly configurable. You can choose to let all
users have access to the administrator's tools, or you can
implement stringent security policies. The system administrator
can select the level of control appropriate to the organization.
The client/ server version offers full forum replication across
multiple sites. A scheduling function facilitates the process.

Collabra Share 2.0 is a great solution for e-mail users who
want to step up to groupware. It offers the advantages of solid
groupware features without the hassles of more complex systems,
and its scalability means that you're unlikely to outgrow it.

--Info File--

Collabra Share 2.0

Price: Server (NT), $995; Workgroup Edition100-user license,
$6,995; Client/Server Edition 100-user license, $9,995.

In Brief: Share uses your installed VIM or MAPI e-mail system
to create a groupware environment.

Platforms: Windows 95, 3.x, NT

Disk Space: Server, 7MB; Client, 780KB

RAM: Client, 1MB

Collabra

800-474-7427, 415-940-6400





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "122"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Connectivity: OnTime Enterprise for NetWare 3.0 -- Well-Appointed Scheduler

By:
Jeffery Sloman

OnTime has been around since the days DOS outdueled Windows
in the software wars. The newest version, which I tested in
beta, faces stiff competition from a much-improved Microsoft
Schedule+. But OnTime's maturity shows, and it could become
the standard against which other scheduling programs are measured.

OnTime's strength is its true client/server architecture, which
offers enterprise-worthy features that can't be matched by
peer-to-peer products. This architecture enhances OnTime's
performance, and the program's functionality-including single
point multiserver configuration-makes administration much easier.
OnTime Enterprise for NetWare 3.0 runs on a NetWare file server
and takes full advantage of the existing network user database
to make adding new users a snap.

The program uses Novell's industry-standard, high-performance
Btrieve record manager to maintain its database. The shipping
version of the server product will be NetWare 4.x-certified,
but my tests were conducted under NetWare 3.11.

Installation of the server software is complex but not particularly
difficult, thanks to the included installation checklist. If
you haven't run client/server applications on your NetWare
server before, you should pay particular attention to the section
in the manual that details file versions. It's important that
your NetWare system is up-to-date. The OnTime package includes
a NetWare Btrieve update disk.

Most of this version's enhancements are on the client side.
OnTime Enterprise manages to strike a balance between adding
new features and maintaining ease of use. For example, the
new client interface eliminates many dialog boxes by offering
in-place editing for appointments.

You can select time periods directly on the grids that are used
to show appointments. The dialog box for editing appointments
and tasks is now non-modal-that is, it no longer changes depending
upon whether you are the person who created the appointment
or a proposed attendee.

All appointment and task activities are in a single, tabbed
dialog, and you can open more than one calendar at a time.

OnTime Enterprise's interface was quite complete in the beta
software, although some of its underpinnings were still under
construction. The shipping product will offer Windows 95 support
for the client. Campbell Services says the final product will
let an administrator designate a resource-such as a conference
room-as an entity that can be scheduled. Also promised are
new security features that will, for example, allow certain
users to view the details of a calendar but not to modify anything.

OnTime's new interface makes it much easier to use. For example,
everything related to an appointment can be set in one place.
First, you set a date by picking it directly from a calendar.
VCR-like controls make finding a particular month quick and
easy. The time and duration of the appointment can be set using
a timeline control. You can then assign a priority to the appointment
and add a reminder alarm.

Appointments can be displayed in three views: daily, weekly
or monthly. You can edit an appointment from any of these views.
All three views have some nice components, including a status
bar that displays current date and time, and the number of
outstanding appointments that others have scheduled for you.
To the right, a three-month calendar provides easy access to
future or past dates. The daily and weekly views also have
to-do lists with prioritization and completion check boxes.

Current OnTime users will be pleased with this excellent upgrade.
If you're shopping for a true enterprisewide group-scheduling
package, OnTime Enterprise merits your attention.

--Info File--

OnTime Enterprise

for NetWare 3.0

Price: 3 users, $427; 10 users, $994; 100 users, $5,616

In Brief: The newest version of OnTime offers usability improvements
for this mature group scheduling product.

Platforms: Server, NetWare 4.x, 3.11; client, Windows 95, 3.1

Campbell Services

800-559-5955, 810-559-5955





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "123"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Cover Story: The Worst and Best of Win95 -- You've read interviews, 
experimented with previews and seen a million overviews. Now you're ready
to use Windows 95 in the real world. And we're here to help you. 

This month's package of Win95 stories takes a look at the worst and
best of your new operating system.

Start with the interface in "Eight Ways to Work in Windows 95,"
where you'll learn about eight typical work patterns of Windows
95 users and how to adapt them to your own style. "Lock Your
Windows" shows you how to plug several major security flaws
in Win95. We've also compiled a Top 10 list of the best the
OS has to offer, along with a Bottom 10 list of features that
could use a little help-which we provide in the form of tips
you can try right away. And finally, we'll take a look at the
ultimate tweaking machine, Win 95's PowerToys.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "124"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Cover Story: Eight Ways to Work in Windows 95 -- After studying the work
habits of dozens of Win95 users, we identified eight basic
PC personalities. Which best suits your computing style?

By:
Mike Elgan

Some say the best thing about Windows 95 is its 32-bit architecture.
Others claim Plug and Play is the operating system's hottest
feature. But it's the Win95 user interface that beats them
all. There are so many different ways to launch programs and
load applications-and switch from one to another-that you can
easily customize Win95 to suit your personal work style. We
did some field research to identify the myriad ways users work
with the new interface. We surveyed readers and staffers, and
secretly observed the habits of random Win95 point-and-clickers,
peering through office windows and over the shoulders of every
user we could find. Our findings helped us identify eight Win95
computing personalities. Each has a scientific name: Keyboard

Quickie, Mouse Maniac, Command Line Commander, Shortcut Showoff,
Start Menu Maven, Folder Fanatic, The Explorer and last (and
definitely least) The Minimalist.

But you probably know them as Carl, Mary, Colin-you may even
recognize yourself among our personalities. To give you a firsthand
look at how each works, we'll let the experts speak for themselves.
Then think about how you can adapt their on-the-job routines
to your own work style.

Take it away, Carl.

Carl the 'Keyboard Quickie'

We spend fortunes on Windows PCs that are so fast users can't
keep up with them. That's why the best way to work is the fastest
way to work, and the fastest way-hands down-is with a keyboard.
Nothing beats ripping through applications with eyes on the
monitor and hands on the keys. No fumbling for the mouse. Less
chance of carpal tunnel syndrome.

The downside, of course, is that we have to learn the keystrokes.
But this is easy, thanks to my one-step program: Unplug your
mouse for a month. At the end of that time, you'll know Win95's
keystrokes like the back of your CTS-free hand. (If you don't
want to go cold turkey, unplug the mouse from your laptop only.)

Here's the scoop on how to be a Win95 Keyboard Quickie.

Coolswitching in Windows 3.x was great, but in Win95 it's even
better. You probably already know how to coolswitch (hold down
the Alt key, then repeatedly press the Tab key).Win95 shows
you all the running icons as you coolswitch through them. Because
you can see your target application coming, you can get it
on the screen faster.

Here are a couple of neat coolswitching tricks you can try:
Press Alt+Shift+Tab to go backward (you can also do this in
the middle of a normal coolswitch). Or press Esc in the middle
of a coolswitch to bail out.

Here's a bonus tip for you Keyboard Quickies who want the fastest
possible task-switching. When you coolswitch, the first application
or folder selected is the last one you had open. If that's
the one you want, just press Alt+Tab and let go immediately.
The icons won't even come up-you'll instantly switch to the
app or folder you had open.

Then there's the Win95 power-user's coolswitch: Alt+Esc. This
keystroke instantly takes you from one open application or
folder to the next. Try it!

There are several other new or essential keystrokes in Win95.
Any Keyboard Quickie worth his or her salt should know the
important ones:

F2: Rename

F3: Launch Find

F4: Drop down the "Go to a different folder" menu on the folder
toolbar

F5: Refresh

Alt+F4: Close current application (if the desktop is the current
app, Win95 shuts down)

Ctrl+F4: Close current document but leave the application open

Alt+Enter: Bring up Properties dialog

Another great new Win95 keyboard enhancement is the application
of the Cut, Copy and Paste metaphors to files and folders.
You already know that in a word processor or other text-based
application, pressing Ctrl+X, Ctrl+C and Ctrl+V cuts, copies
and pastes, respectively. In Win95, these techniques can also
be applied to files and folders.

'Mouse Maniac' Mary

Ha! Get with it, Carl. This is 1996. Graphical computing isn't
about arcane keystrokes or commands that change with each application.
Haven't you heard? DOS is dead! Graphical computing is about
intuitively navigating the interface by pointing and clicking.
Using Windows without a mouse is like eating without utensils.
It's out of date and just isn't done in polite company.

Win95 is a Mouse Maniac's dream system. Unlike Windows 3.x and
previous versions, which used just one of your mouse buttons
(might as well use a Mac), Win95 makes good use of both mouse
buttons.

Every object on the desktop sports a Context menu that includes,
among other things, the all-important Properties dialog. You
can bring up the Context menu of any item by right-clicking
on it. Right-click on the Recycle Bin to empty it. Right-click
on the taskbar to configure it or minimize all open applications.
Right-click on the desktop or inside open folders to arrange
or view icons differently. Right-click on files to print them,
create shortcuts to them and mail them using the Send To command.
Right-click on everything.

When you drag and drop files or folders, get in the habit of
using the right mouse button. It'll give you the option to
move, copy or create a shortcut.

Win95 sports some drag-and-drop enhancements that all Mouse
Maniacs should know about. For example, if you're in the middle
of a drag and change your mind, just press the Esc key.

Mousing in Win95 is enhanced not only by the right mouse button,
but also by keystroke/mouse combinations. When you hold down
the Shift key while dumping something into the Recycle Bin,
Win95 deletes it. When you hold down the Ctrl key while double
clicking on a folder icon, Windows temporarily reverses your
settings for how folders should open. For instance, you can
set Win95 to open a new, separate folder each time you double
click on a folder (select View/Options from the folder menu,
then click on the Browsing Option of your choice). If you hold
down the Ctrl key, you'll open the folder in the same window.

You can also use keyboard/mouse combinations to enhance your
ability to select files and folders. In Explorer, you can select
all items from the top of a list down to your target folder
by holding down the Shift key, then clicking on the file or
folder at the bottom of the batch you want selected. Or click
on any file or folder, hold the Shift key and click on another
file or folder to select both items and everything between
them. To select any combination of items, hold down the Ctrl
key, then click on the files and folders you want.

Once you've made your selections, you can right-click on any
of them and choose an action from the Context menu that will
affect them all.

If you want to launch an application that needs switches or
other command-line parameters, you can use drag-and-drop to
get Win95 to type the path and filename for you. Click on the
Start button and select Run. Then drag the application and
drop it onto the Run command line. You can do the same thing
with the MS-DOS Prompt. Once the path and filename are there,
all you have to do is type in the parameters.

Colin the 'Command Line Commander'

DOS is dead, huh? Wanna race? I can type WORDPAD in the MS-DOS
Prompt, press the Enter key and type "The quick brown fox jumped
over the lazy dog" in WordPad before you even find the WordPad
applet on the Start menu or by navigating folders.

Instead of killing the command-line interface, Win95 gives it
new life. In older versions of Windows, you could launch only
DOS applications from the command line, but Win95 lets you
use the command line to launch Windows applications and open
folders in Windows. Just type the filename (don't worry about
the extension) and press Enter to launch applications.

In addition to its new ability to launch Win95 apps and its
old ability to act on DOS commands, the MS-DOS Prompt adds
a brand-new command: Start. To open a folder, just type START
followed by the folder path. For example, by typing START C
\WINDOWS, you'll open the Windows folder-not in DOS but in
Windows. You can also use the Start command to customize what
happens to apps and folders when you launch them. For a list
of options, just type START /? at the prompt.

If you're a true Command Line Commander, you'll want to make
the MS-DOS Prompt window as available as possible. Check out
my friends the Start Menu Maven and the Shortcut Showoff to
learn how to make the MS-DOS Prompt launch automatically at
startup and instantly when you press a shortcut key.

'Shortcut Showoff' Steve

The Keyboard Crazies and Command Line Kooks talk about speed,
and the Mickey Mouse Maniacs brag about computing intuitively.
But there's an easier and faster way to do all that. Win95's
new shortcut feature combines the speed of one with the intuitive
pointing and clicking of the other. And when you talk about
customization in Win95, you're talking about shortcuts. You
can use shortcuts to do other neat things as well-for instance,
you can e-mail a shortcut to a network document as an attachment
to a colleague, or you can send a shortcut to a Microsoft Network
site to a friend who also uses MSN.

You've heard of "information at your fingertips." Well, Win95
shortcuts can help you achieve that. Create shortcuts to all
the applications and documents on your system, as well as the
company network and the Internet. Then place them just a double
click away on your desktop.

Here's how to set up a desktop that puts everything at your
fingertips.

First, navigate My Computer to find any applications or documents
that you normally open more than once a week. Drag them onto
the desktop with the right mouse button and choose Create Shortcut(s)
Here. If you have folders with large numbers of documents that
you want to access, create shortcuts for those as well.

You may have already discovered Win95's cool Find utility. It
lets you search for any file, even if you don't know its name
or location. Using Find, you can set up a custom search that's
always on your desktop.

A good custom search acts as an instant dragnet for all documents
available to you on your desktop and the network. To set it
up, launch Find by pressing F3 or selecting it from the Start
menu. In the Named field, type in each of the extensions containing
documents you use, preceded by an asterisk and a period, and
separated by a space. Your list might look something like this
 *.doc *.txt *.xls *.wri *.hlp *.fin *.msg. In the Look In
field, list all the drive letters available to you over the
network, each followed by a colon and separated from one another
by semicolons. For example, you might want to type c:;s:;u
;j:;k: (your drive letters may differ). Click on the Find Now
button, then on the Stop button. Finally, select Save Search
from the File menu to put a copy of your search on the desktop.
You can rename it if you want.

To use your new saved search, double-click on its icon, select
the Advanced tab and type in words the document contains in
the Containing Text field. Note that you can modify the parameters
for each search any way you choose without permanently changing
the saved search. And you can set up as many unique saved searches
as you like.

Shortcuts are also great for launching batch files. Create batch
files that open several folders or documents at once, move
files around or otherwise get them to do whatever you need
them to do. Then create shortcuts for your batch files and
put them on the desktop (naturally, you should give 'em distinctive
icons and names)

Make sure you tell your batch file shortcuts to clean up after
themselves. Open the Properties dialog of each batch file shortcut,
select the Program tab and click on the Close on Exit box.
This tells Win95 to close the MS-DOS Prompt box when the batch
file has run its course.

Of course, batch files are just DOS programs. You can use shortcuts
to launch any DOS program or command from the desktop with
a simple double-click. In Win95, shortcuts replace the old
Win 3.x PIF.

Shortcuts can also help organize your forays online. If you
have the Microsoft Network or a Web browser that supports shortcuts,
you can simply drag your favorite sites from the online service
or Web window and drop them onto your desktop for quick access.

But wait! There's more! Shortcuts let you take advantage of
the slick Win95 Send To feature. Right-click on any item and
notice the cascading Send To item in the Context menu. All
those items in the Send To folder are just shortcuts in the
Send To folder, which you'll find in the Windows folder. Create
shortcuts-using the same method: Drag and drop with the right
mouse button and select Create Shortcut(s) Here-to your mail
application, the desktop, the Recycle Bin, the network, your
favorite application or anywhere else you'd like to be able
to send files instantly. Experiment and see what works best
for you.

Shortcuts are highly customizable. Most of this customization
takes place in the Properties dialog under the Shortcut tab.
First thing you'll want to do is give your shortcuts unique
icons. Just click on the Change Icon button and pick an icon
that suits your purpose. You might want to check out Win95's
"secret" icons, which you'll find in a file called PIFMGR.DLL
in the System folder. And, of course, the old Windows 3.x icons
in the files PROGMAN.EXE and MORICONS.DLL are likely still
living in your Windows folder.

Your next step is to change the names of your shortcuts. Get
rid of all those "Shortcut to" labels that Win95 put there.
Then decide if you want each shortcut to open the item full
screen, normal window or as an icon. To do so, select an option
from the Run box.

There are two advantages to putting shortcuts on your desktop
rather than scattering them all over your hard drive. The first
is ease of access; they're right there when you need them.
But what happens when they're all covered by open folders and
applications? Enter the second advantage: You can launch shortcuts
on the desktop with shortcut keys. Click once in the Shortcut
Key box of the Properties/Shortcut dialog and type a key combination
you'd like to use to launch the shortcut (don't spell it out,
just do the keystrokes). If the shortcut key is already taken,
Win95 won't let you use it. Once you've assigned keys to your
desktop shortcuts, you can launch them instantly, anytime,
regardless of what's on your screen. (Shortcut keys not on
the desktop or Start menu work only if the item is already
open.)

Simon the 'Start Menu Maven'

Been there. Done that. All that stuff is old. The taskbar, along
with its Start button and menus, is the only real interface
innovation in Win95. It's also the best. You just need to know
how to use it.

The default size of Start menu items is too large, and you can't
fit enough stuff in there. We'll fix that. Just right-click
on the taskbar and choose Properties. Then select the Show
Small Icons box and click on OK.

It's important to understand the Start menu and how it works.
Items on the Start menu are just shortcuts in a folder: the
Start Menu folder within the Windows folder. Removing and adding
Start menu items is as simple as removing and adding files
in a folder.

A great way to give yourself quick access to your most-used
apps, documents and folders is simply to drag them from wherever
they are and drop them onto the Start button. Doing this will
place them on the first level of the Start menu.

When you installed Win95, it made all your program groups cascading
menus under the Programs item. When you install new Windows
programs, they'll likely add things to your Start menu. Make
sure you remove all unwanted items to make room for those you
do want.

The Start menu itself is a cascading menu, meaning it opens
up into a hierarchy of menu items. Some pundits say that to
create a cascading Start menu item, you need to enter a bizarre
and complicated series of letters and numbers. But it ain't
so! It's the easiest thing in the world.

For example, here's how to create a cascading Control Panel
item. Right-click on the Start button and select Open. Now
open My Computer, double-click on the Control Panel item and
put the Start menu folder and Control Panel folders side-by
side. Right-click on the white part of the Start menu and select
New/Folder. Name it Control Panel. Now select all the Control
Panel items and drag and drop them onto the new Control Panel
folder. (You might want to open the new folder and get rid
of all the "Shortcut to" text that Win95 puts in front of all
your new shortcuts.) That's all there is to it. You can create
as many custom cascading Start menu items as you want.

Keystrokes can launch Start menu items as well. In fact, you
can navigate to any Start menu item using just the keyboard.
Ctrl+Esc brings up the Start menu. Pressing an underscored
letter (such as "D" for Documents) brings you to that item.
Navigate the cascading menus with the arrow keys (note that
if you're at the top of a menu, pressing the up arrow brings
you to the bottom, and vice versa). And here's a secret technique
my friend Carl taught me: You know those most-used items you
placed on the first level of the Start menu? Right-click on
the Start button, select Open, select each item in turn and
give it a unique number from 1 to 10 (for example, change "WordPerfect"
to "1 WordPerfect"). By pressing Ctrl+Esc and then a number,
you can quickly open the item associated with that number.

'Folder Fanatic' Frank

Sure, keystrokes are fast, mice are intuitive, shortcuts are
cool and the Start menu is innovative. But the important thing
is how you organize and think about your work. The Win95 interface
lets us think about our work by projects-it's all based on
nested folders. Combine that with shortcuts, and we're no longer
limited by the old DOS directory structure.

Here's what I mean. I mentally divide my work into three major
categories: projects I'm working on; management responsibilities;
and regular tasks like meetings, business trips and budget
management that aren't really projects and aren't really about
people management. Win95 folders let me organize my computer
to mirror the organized way I think about my work. As you've
probably already guessed, I have three folders. One is called
"Projects," the second is called "People" and the last is called
"Other Stuff I Gotta Do" (what the heck, it's my desktop)

In my Projects folder, I've got a folder for each project I'm
working on. Each has e-mail messages about the project (just
drag and drop from Exchange), links to budget information,
links to documents listing my goals, lists of people involved
and a shortcut to my contact manager.

In my People folder, I've got one folder for each person who
reports to me. In each of those folders, I've placed key e
mail I want to keep, confidential information on each person,
links to the projects we're collaborating on and more links
to my contact manager. Some of the people on my staff have
staffs of their own. In their folders, I have one folder for
each person who reports to that manager.

My third folder contains everything else.

That's how I've arranged my system. But you might want to set
yours up differently. For example, you could create a folder
called Backup, where you place all your documents and other
things you'd like to back up. In fact, you can put entire folders
there. When you want to back up your system (highly recommended,
by the way), you just have to back up that folder and everything
in it.

I like to give my folders unique icons. The way to do this is
to create a folder called, er, Folders anywhere on the C: drive.
Put all the folders for which you want unique icons inside
this folder. Create shortcuts to the folders and place the
shortcuts wherever you want them. Then, using the instructions
above, give each shortcut a unique icon.

I'm also using a fake Recycle Bin. That's where I put items
I think I want to throw away. The fake Bin sits on my desktop
in the lower right-hand corner next to my real Recycle Bin.
When I'm sure I want to dump something, I put it into the genuine
Recycle Bin; when I'm not sure, I put it into the fake one.
Once every couple of months, I open the fake Bin and trash
or save the items in it.

'Explorer' Ed

Computing is an adventure. And the best way to conquer your
computer is with the Win95 Explorer. It's File Manager, Program
Manager, Win95 folders, shortcuts and all the rest rolled into
one awesome, intuitive and powerful interface.

What's so great about Explorer? Well, it gives you a familiar
DOS-style hierarchical view of every resource available to
you (everything on your desktop, peripheral drives such as
your CD-ROM drive, network resources, printers and more). It's
all in one expandable list on the left side of your screen.
At the same time, Explorer shows the contents of the currently
selected item on the right. If you want to look at the contents
of two folders at once, just launch another instance of Explorer
(launch as many as you like!). The interface looks simple,
but you can use it as a command-and-control center to do all
your file management and other tasks.

You can quickly slice and dice the on-screen folder view by
clicking on one of the View buttons on the toolbar. If you
select the Details button, you'll get heading bars above your
list of files. By clicking on each, you'll toggle between the
"most" and the "least" properties for each bar (for example,
if you click on the Modified bar, you'll toggle between the
most recent files on the top or the oldest on the top). If
you're viewing a folder full of files and select Tools/Find
Files or Folders, the Find utility will open and default to
the current folder. That'll help you find what you need without
searching your entire hard drive.

Enough about how great Explorer is-let's get this incredible
utility onto the desktop. Right-click on the Start button,
select Explore and double-click on the Programs folder in the
right pane. Drag the Windows Explorer icon from the window
using the right mouse button and drop it onto the desktop,
then select Copy Here.

If you're not in an Explorer view for a particular folder, you
can get there by clicking once on the folder you want to open,
then pressing and holding the Shift key while you double-click
on the folder (you have to click once to select it; otherwise
you'll select and open that folder plus all the others between
it and the top of the list)

You can customize folders using a Win95 convention called "Explorer
switches." Give the folders on your desktop an Explorer view
by bringing up the Properties menu, selecting Shortcut and
typing Explorer /e, in front of the path in the Target line
(make sure you include the comma and a space after the comma)

You can also use an Explorer switch to select a file without
launching it. Right-click on a shortcut and select Properties
from the Context menu. Click on the Shortcut tab. Type Explorer
/Select, in front of the path in the Target line (make sure
you include the comma and a space after the comma) and add
the full filename to the end of the path. Then click on OK.
Now, whenever you double-click on that shortcut, the file will
be selected but not opened.

If you want to keep things simple, create shortcuts that open
into "rooted Explorer" views. Right-click on the desktop and
select New/Shortcut. In the command line of the New Shortcuts
dialog, type Explorer /e, /root, c:

This will make the folder the root-in other words, it will
sit at the top of the hierarchy and you won't see anything
in that view except the folder and its contents.

Carl told me how to rip through Explorer with keystrokes: The
spacebar moves down the drives in Explorer. The Backspace key
moves up the Explorer tree. The left arrow key shrinks the
Explorer tree. The right arrow key expands the Explorer tree.
The up and down arrow keys move up and down one folder at a
time. The Home and End keys move you to the top and bottom,
respectively. Pressing a letter moves you to the nearest folder
that starts with that letter. Press F6 to switch between panes.
And you can select all the files in the right pane by making
sure at least one of the files in the pane is selected or that
the directory in the left pane is selected, then pressing Ctrl+A.

Michael the 'Minimalist'

I'll keep this short.

I need to stay organized. All the methods above are fine, as
long as these techniques are used to impose order and not clutter.
You can create a desktop that's free of debris, and still have
all the power of keystrokes, mouse navigation, the command
line, shortcuts, the Start menu, folders and Explorer--all
lurking just beneath the surface, out of sight and out of mind.

I'll show you how to combine many of the techniques and approaches
used by my seven counterparts, and still sport a clutter-free
screen. But first, let's clean up that desktop!

Right-click on the taskbar, then select Properties/Auto Hide
from the Context menu. This will keep the taskbar invisible
until your mouse pointer gets near the bottom of the screen.

Okay, let's create a workspace. Open My Computer, then the C
 drive. Create a folder called Workspace (or whatever you'd
like to call it). Now drag and drop it with the right mouse
button onto the desktop and select Create Shortcut(s) Here.
Give the new shortcut the name and icon of your choice (using
instructions above)

Now use Ed's Explorer switch to make this new shortcut open
into an Explorer view. In the Workspace folder, use Frank's
folder-centric approach to create folders that open to broad
categories such as Info, People, Projects-whatever makes sense
for the way you like to work. And, of course, you'll want to
populate these folders with the appropriate shortcuts and files.

Get rid of all the icons on your desktop that you don't need.
Bury them. The end result should be a desktop that contains
My Computer, Network Neighborhood, the Recycle Bin, your Workspace
shortcut icon and perhaps an Inbox.

It's an uncluttered desktop, but all the power is there. Check
out Carl's keystrokes. Learn Mary's mouse tricks. Bring up
the command line with one of Steve's shortcuts and fire off
some of Colin's MS-DOS Prompt commands. Finally, master Simon's
Start menu tips-but whatever you do, keep it simple! You'll
be as productive as you can be with Win95.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "125"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Cover Story: Lock Your Windows -- Here's how to plug seven common Windows
security holes.

By:
Fred Langa

If you're like me, the most important parts of your computing
life hinge on Windows. At work, there's Windows-based e-mail,
general communications and information sharing via Windows,
and Windows word processing, database activity and spreadsheets.

At home, Windows probably handles your tax information, family
budget and home-office data. In fact, all my critical computer
based information depends on Windows-and I'll bet yours does,
too. Unfortunately, with the exception of NT (which does have
good safeguards), Windows' overall security has not kept up
with the increasing value of the data we entrust to it. All
the other versions of Windows, including Win95, have one or
more gaping security flaws that can put your data at risk from
both intentional snooping and accidental access. Nothing can
completely secure anyone's data against a determined attack
by skilled computer criminals. But there are steps you can
take to provide reasonable basic protection against some of
the most notorious security flaws in Windows and in key Windows
apps:

1. The Boot Bypass. Even if you know only a little about computers,
you can make a boot floppy disk and use it to get your system
running. If your computer security depends on safeguards that
load and run after the initial boot (such as a password-protected
screen saver), you're vulnerable. Solution: Prevent unauthorized
physical access to your machine (lock the room it's in); use
the keyboard lock and remove the key; use the BIOS settings
on newer machines to prevent booting from a floppy or to enable
a power-on password.

2. The Password Is 'Cancel.' Most people don't realize this,
but by default Win95's log-on password offers absolutely no
security. (If you have a log-on password, try pressing Cancel
or Escape the next time you start Windows-the password dialog
will close, and you'll be placed on the default desktop just
as if you'd typed the correct, secret password you set up.)
Solution: In Control Panel's Passwords applet, click on the
User Profiles tab, and then click on the "Users can customize
their preferences" item. This will allow you to give your log
on settings and access privileges that are different from those
of the default Win95 log-on. Next, use Win95's Policy Editor
to define what each user of your system can and cannot do.
Each log-on can have its own set of privileges, access to different
files and so on. You can severely limit what a default log
on can do. You'll find the Policy Editor and the complete Win95
Resource Kit (which can answer almost any security-related
question) on the CD version of Win95 in the ADMIN/APPTOOL/POLEDIT
directory, or you can download the files from Microsoft's World
Wide Web site at http://www.windows.microsoft.com/windows/software.htm.
You can also find more complete instructions for enabling the
log-on password in my December editorial (Start, December 1995)

3. Private E-Mails Are Really Open Letters. In Windows 95, by
default, anyone can walk up to your system, use his or her
own log-on and potentially gain full access to all your supposedly
private e-mail stored in Exchange, the "universal inbox" that
comes with Win95. (It looks like the programming team that
wrote Exchange expected Win95 to provide basic security, while
the Win95 team expected Exchange to provide security for itself.)
Even if you entered a password to convert your old e-mail to
Exchange, you're still vulnerable. Solution: Enable Win95's
base security as described in item 2. Then go to Exchange's
Tools/Services menu, select the Personal Folder file (or whatever
it's named on your system) and click on Properties. Then click
on Change Password and enter a password different from your
system password. Now both your e-mail and your basic desktop
are safe from at least casual snooping.

4. Take My Files, Please. When you installed Windows 95, you
may have enabled the "I want to be able to give others access
to my files" option, as well as the TCP/IP networking protocol
to access the Internet. If you did, you may inadvertently be
sharing your files with people all over the world. (To Microsoft's
credit, its own Internet Explorer Web browser looks for this
condition when you install it, and offers to turn off Print
and File Sharing for the TCP/IP protocol.) Solution: Examine
the TCP/IP properties via Control Panel's Network applet, and
make sure Print and File Sharing is unchecked in the Bindings
tab dialog. In Explorer, right-click on each drive and use
the Sharing menu to set up passwords for each.

5.  While You're At It, Take a Few More Files.  There's a flaw in Win95's
Print and File Sharing software that, in relatively limited circumstances,
also can result in a wider sharing of files than you intended.  (The lengthy
full details are available on the Web at
http://www.microsoft.com/windows/software/w95fpup.htm.)  Solution:  Download
the free, updated version of Print and File Sharing services from Microsoft's
Web site at http://www.microsoft.com/windows/download/vservupd.exe.

6. Word's Extra Baggage. Starting with Word 6.0 for Windows,
Microsoft set Word's default Save behavior to "Allow Fast Saves."
This saves some time because only the changes from one version
of a document get written to disk. But it also means some or
all of your original drafts ride along with the final version.
Anyone viewing the final .DOC file with a plain-vanilla file
viewer-Notepad, for instance-can see this original draft material
in all its glory. At the least, it's embarrassing. At worst,
if your early drafts contained intemperate, sensitive or confidential
information you didn't want in the final draft, it could be
disastrous. Relatedly, by default, Word chooses the first few
words of your first draft as the description on each document's
Properties Sheet. Solution: In the Tools/Options menu, turn
off Allow Fast Saves and turn on Prompt for Document Properties.

7. "OLE" or "Oh, No"? A flaw in Microsoft's OLE (Object Linking
and Embedding) technology can result in similar behavior to
item 6, but for a completely different reason: Parts of files
you thought were deleted can reappear in later document files,
where they can be viewed via programs like Notepad. Solution
 Watch for bug-fix updates, which should be available when
you read this.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "126"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Cover Story: The Win95 Top 10 List -- Explorer, folders, drag and drop: Here's
a list of our 10 favorite Windows 95 features, and tips on
how to take advantage of them.

By:
Mike Elgan

10. Right-mouse-button support. Finally, we get to use that
right mouse button. Right-click on any item to bring up a Context
menu, where you'll find the all-important Properties item.
Empty the Recycle Bin in a flash by right-clicking and selecting
Empty Recycle Bin. And to open a document in an app other than
the one it's associated with, press Shift+Right-click to add
the Open With command to your Context menu.

9. Folders. Win95 transformed Windows from the least flexible
OS to the most. Folders are a great example. You can set up
deeply nested folders and make Windows look like a Mac, or
you can imitate Program Manager by creating a few folders on
your desktop and putting shortcuts in them. Other operating
systems have had nested folders for years. Now Win95 has 'em!

8. The MS-DOS Prompt. Some say DOS is dead, but what they mean
is that many of the annoying qualities of DOS are extinct.
The Win95 implementation of DOS is actually pretty cool. Win95
runs DOS apps natively, rather than in emulation, which maximizes
performance. Win95's DOS sports new features (such as the ability
to launch Windows apps) without losing any of the old ones.
And unlike the DOS of yore, PIFs have been killed. Good riddance
to them!

7. The Find utility. Here's a quiet little gem. If you know
how to use it, the Find utility can retrieve files across your
network and the Microsoft Network, even if you don't know the
filename or location. Bring up Find by pressing F3 or by selecting
Find/File or Folders from the Start menu. The Win95 Find utility
supports wild-card capabilities beyond the standard asterisk.
For example, a question mark before a character or string finds
the character or string anywhere in the filename (except at
the beginning). Find will also search for folders and files
that contain characters in the order you typed them. Find's
most powerful features are in the Advanced tab. Here you can
type in a text string that you know is in the file, select
the type of file you're looking for and narrow your search
by file size.

6. Drag-and-drop support. Drag and drop in Windows 3.x was pretty
good, but it's even better in Win95. If you have an application
or folder minimized or hidden behind other windows, for example,
you can drag a file over the button on the taskbar, hold it
there for a second, and the app opens on top, allowing you
to drop the file there. Create shortcuts on your desktop to
your floppy drive, printers and folders on the network so you
can easily drag and drop files to any of these. In addition,
you can drag and drop pieces of documents, known as scraps,
as well as entire files.

5. The taskbar. The taskbar is deceptively simple. This thin
gray rectangle lets you open and configure the Start menu,
view everything that's running, see and change the time and
date, switch between applications and folders, adjust the volume
of your sound, and minimize, restore, tile or cascade open
apps and folders. You can drag and drop the taskbar anywhere
on your screen, keep it visible at all times or hide it automatically.

4. Disk compression. Out-of-the-box disk compression in Win95
is stable, safe and useful. But take our advice and buy Microsoft
Plus for Windows 95-if for nothing else than the Compression
Agent and DriveSpace 3. You'll be able to UltraPack files you
rarely use, HiPack those you use occasionally and leave files
you don't want to squeeze alone.

3. The System Agent. Here's another must-have Microsoft Plus
item. The System Agent lurks silently in memory, waiting to
do your bidding. Tell it to perform hard-disk maintenance,
alert you with pop-up reminders, run batch files at scheduled
times, or do backups in the background. The kicker is that
this utility is super-easy to use; you can set up a custom
scheduled event in less than a minute.

2. The Send To menu. With a click of your mouse, the Send To
command lets you blast any file to any location on your system
or on the network-or to any application. Right-click on any
file, select Send To and the location, and the file is as good
as there.

1. Explorer. And the number-one Win95 feature ... Explorer!
Actually, Explorer is a mixed bag (it's also on the Bottom
10 list). But its good features are really good. It shows your
computing universe in the left pane, and the currently selected
folder in the right. Slice and dice the view to sort by size
or date last modified, and use the toolbar to map network drives.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "127"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Cover Story: The Win95 Bottom 10 List -- Nothing is perfect, and that includes
Windows 95. So, we compiled a Bottom 10 List as a counterpoint
to our Top 10 List. But instead of just griping, we came up
with a few solutions that you can work into Win95 on your own.

By:
Jim Boyce

10. Technical support. Windows 95 technical support is geared
primarily toward hand-holding to help users overcome setup
problems and difficulties with various features. If you're
a power user with a tough technical question, you'll sometimes
have trouble just explaining the problem to the technician
on the other end of the line. Solution: There are alternatives
to telephone support. Explore the wide variety of online forums
devoted to the subject, starting with Microsoft's Win95 World
Wide Web site at http://www.microsoft.com. In addition, all
the major online services have Windows areas where other users
have most likely posted similar questions that were answered
by people in the know. You should also get and use the Win95
Resource Kit. It's available free on the CD version of Win95
in the ADMIN/APPTOOL/POLEDIT directory, or you can download
the files from Microsoft's Web site at http://www.windows.microsoft.com
windows/software.htm. If you're completely on your own for
tech support, or if others rely on you for guidance, consider
a subscription to Microsoft's CD-based TechNet service (800
344-2121), which contains most of the same information available
to Microsoft's own support technicians.

9. The Recycle Bin. Recycle Bin is a safety net you could drive
a truck through. If you delete a file from an application or
the command line, it's gone. The Recycle Bin also needs better
overflow support. You can specify the amount of disk space
to allocate for the Recycle Bin on each drive, but when that
limit is reached, those deleted files go to binary heaven with
no warning. And if you push the Recycle Bin capacity slider
to zero by accident, everything in the Bin is history. Solution
 You can partially overcome these shortcomings with a third
party product like Norton Utilities, which adds extra goodies
such as chronological emptying of the wastebasket. But even
with these add-ons, your best line of defense is abundant backups
and careful work.

8. Shortcuts. Shortcuts are actually one of the best features
in Win95, but many users see room for improvement in their
appearance. Solution: Do you find the arrows in shortcut icons
annoying? Check out the Tweak UI tools in the sidebar "In a
Word, Wow!" on the next page.

7. Microsoft Backup. We're glad Microsoft included a backup
utility with Win95. Unfortunately, it doesn't support a very
wide range of tape drives. It also doesn't reset the archive
bit by default, so incremental backup doesn't work unless you
wade through menus and read the instructions very, very carefully.
Solution: Check out the Colorado Memory Systems BBS (970-635
0650) for updates to Win95's Backup. (CMS wrote the original
applet for Microsoft, and should be releasing an updated version
soon.) Also, all the major tape backup vendors have promised
Win95 versions "any minute."

6. My Computer and Network

Neighborhood. The problem with My Computer is its lack of all
but the most basic customization capability. For example, My
Computer always opens folders using the Open view rather than
an Explorer view. Network Neighborhood also needs better features
for customization. Solution: If you don't like My Computer
or Network Neighborhood, ignore them and create a custom viewer
that gives you the capabilities of both. Create a folder on
your hard disk, then drag it to the desktop with your right
mouse button. Select Create Shortcut(s) Here. Right-click on
the new shortcut and bring up the Properties dialog. Change
the icon by clicking on the Change Icon button, selecting an
icon and clicking on OK. Now type Explorer /e, in front of
the path in the Target line (make sure you include the comma
and a space after the comma). Click on OK. Whenever you double
click on that shortcut, you'll get the full Explorer view.

5. Help. The new Help looks good, but we need much more content,
especially since Microsoft did away with all but the most basic
paper documentation. Solution: Try the Resource Kit and the
TechNet CD mentioned in item 10.

4. The Microsoft Network. MSN is the not-ready-for-prime-time
network. Although the content is improving, the service is
still weak overall. MSN lacks an off-line forum reader and
is generally slow. Solution: Just say no to MSN for a while.
Keep your eye on WINDOWS Magazine, and we'll tell you when
it gets better.

3. Explorer. Some of the better features of File Manager are
missing from Explorer, which cannot display file attributes
and the "last accessed" property. Support for multiple Content
panes would also be a plus. Solution: If you don't like Explorer,
keep your eye out for a replacement package that supports the
features you need. Don't be afraid to pop open File Manager
when you need to (Run: Winfile)

2. Plug and Play. Plug and Play works well even on legacy systems,
assuming your hardware is relatively common. But the hardware
detection seems to take forever, and Windows 95 sometimes forgets
to tell you that the device you're installing is already installed.
Solution: Don't buy any hardware that isn't PnP-compatible.
If PnP isn't working well on your system, consider a BIOS upgrade.
And make sure your next system is fully PnP-compatible.

1. Exchange and Microsoft Fax. The idea of an integrated message
store is great in theory, but so far Exchange falls flat. You
can't create a single address entry for multiple address types
(Microsoft Mail and Fax, for example), there's a noticeable
lack of security, and the address book integrates poorly with
applications. Microsoft Fax takes most of the heat for its
lack of features, its bugs and an inability to live in the
same profile with Microsoft's own Internet Mail provider. Another
glaring shortcoming is the Microsoft Mail provider's inability
to work with Microsoft Mail Remote, forcing system administrators
to add a remote access server to support remote Exchange users.
Solution: If you want, you can stick with your current e-mail
and messaging system until Exchange is ready for prime time,
or embrace a third-party solution that meets your needs. But
Exchange won't go away anytime soon, so it's worth exploring.
Keep your eyes open for pitfalls. If you're ready to give it
a try, see this month's article "Kill Your Fax Machine!"

Serdar Yegulalp and Robert Lauriston contributed to this story.
Contributing Editor Jim Boyce is the author of Inside Windows
95 (New Riders Publishing, 1995). Contact Jim in the "Getting
Started" topic of WINDOWS Magazine's areas on America Online
and CompuServe, or care of the editor at the addresses on page
18.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "128"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Cover Story: In a Word, "Wow!"

By:
Fred Langa

Want to get rid of shortcut arrows? Or permanently ditch the
"Shortcut to ..." phrase that keeps getting added to the names
of shortcuts you create? Want to adjust menu pop-up speed?
Change resolutions on the fly? Painlessly browse and extract
files from within .CAB files? Or make any CD play automatically?

All that and much more is available in the free PowerToys utility
collection from Microsoft. The PowerToys were written by the
Windows 95 UI team to solve many of the annoying little glitches
and inadequacies of Win95's interface, but the utilities were
developed too late to be part of the official software release.
As a result, these are unsupported applets: They seem to work
just fine, but you can't call tech support for help if you
run into a snag. We use them here at WINDOWS Magazine and feel
they're a must-have addition for any power user.

Browse to http://www.windows.microsoft.com/windows/software
powertoy.htm on the World Wide Web and download one or more
of the following little gems:

Tweak UI: The crown jewel of PowerToys, this is an addition
to the Control Panel that lets you change menu speed, mouse
sensitivity, window animation and sound, shortcut appearance
and default names, and much more. A definite thumbs-up.

CabView: Lets you examine .CAB files as if they were ordinary
folders-you can see the contents and easily drag files in and
out.

CD AutoPlay Extender: Makes autoplay work even on non-audio
CDs so you can gain faster access to your CD-based programs.

Contents Menu: Lets you examine the contents of folders without
even opening them.

Explore From Here: Open a "rooted" Explorer from anywhere, even
on remote network resources.

FlexiCD : An instant-access, taskbar-window audio CD control.

QuickRes: If your video card and drivers allow it, this tool
lets you change your screen's dots-per-inch setting and bit
depth from the taskbar without having to reboot.

Round Clock: This is simply a round analog clock sans the usual
square window.

Shortcut Target Menu: Examine the properties of a shortcut's
target by right-clicking on the shortcut itself.

XMouse: X Windows users will like this utility, which makes
the active window focus follow the mouse cursor without clicking.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "129"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Kill Your Fax Machine -- Dump the office fax machine for the
superior combination of your fax modem and Microsoft Exchange.

By:
Rich Levin

I'm sitting at my desk, sipping some day-old java and checking
out the racing form, when the door swings open. A guy in an
out-of-date getup shuffles in. Boy, is he past his prime, I
think as I reach for a Camel. He just looks at me while I light
up and take a deep drag. Neither of us says a word. Finally,
my new client clears his throat. "Mister Narlowe, they're out
to get me."

Somehow I'm not surprised. He has the look of someone on the
skids. "Well, why don't you tell me about it, Mister "

"Call me Fax," he says, in a rusty voice. "Fax Machine."

An alarm bell goes off in my head. I'd read about him in the
tabloids. Sad case. Nothing I could do for him.

"Sorry, I can't help you," I reply, with some regret. It kills
me to turn down any business. "You're history, pal. Windows
95 is gonna punch your ticket. Exchange is the new game in
town, and it's making hay with fax modems."

Fax slumps against the wall, muttering something that sounds
like, "I knew I was a goner."

I don't say a word. What is there to say? He's right. Him and
his breed are old news. Gonzo. Kaput. Windows 95 has seen to
that.

The Fax on the Case

Fax modems and software have been around for several years.
But Windows 95's integral support of the new TAPI (Telephony
Application Programming Interface) standard for communications
hardware greatly simplifies the way you exchange information,
including the way you send a fax.

Before TAPI, every fax modem was an island. There was no off
the-shelf fax software that allowed users to share fax modems,
address books or data files. It was every faxer for himself,
and every file for itself. Fax documents, like e-mail messages,
were a unique data type, married to the programs that managed
them. E-mail was e-mail, documents were documents, faxes were
faxes, and never the three would meet. Worst of all, for corporations
seeking to achieve proper desktop fax capabilities, each computer
required a fax modem, fax software and an extra telephone line.

Lack of workgroup functionality, harsh economic realities and
unfriendly side effects limited the growth of desktop faxing.
It was cheaper and easier to stick with conventional fax machines,
or to deploy dedicated network fax servers to provide workgroup
fax services to the enterprise.

Insufficient standards, along with a single-user focus, also
prevented mass-market fax software from integrating tightly
within the enterprise. Users had to deal with separate address
books for mail messages, fax documents and external e-mail
services like CompuServe. With no published standards to follow,
software developers had a free hand in designing fax programs.
The result: One fax program couldn't use another's address
books, cover sheets or fax files. While a few de facto standards
(such as Intel's DCX file format) emerged, the situation was
similar to the chaos that accompanied electronic mail before
the advent of the Mail Application Programming Interface (MAPI)

Today, we take it for granted that virtually any two PC e-mail
systems can exchange mail, but it wasn't long ago that many
Windows-based e-mail systems were segregated. This changed
with the introduction of MAPI, which dictates how e-mail programs
talk to each other. And what MAPI does for e-mail, TAPI does
for faxing.

Tap into TAPI

MAPI has been around since 1993, but TAPI is a new-and evolving
standard. Only one fax program designed for Windows 95 currently
supports TAPI. The good news: The program is Microsoft Fax,
and it's bundled with Windows 95.

TAPI lives at the operating system level, so any program can
use it. That's why, under Win95, you need only configure your
modem, telephone numbers and other setup data once. TAPI-compliant
programs retrieve setup information through TAPI, which takes
care of all the configuration details formerly handled by individual
programs. This means you can drop in a new TAPI-compliant telecom
app and it will automatically recognize your COM ports, modem
commands and telephone numbers.

TAPI also manages access to your COM ports and attached devices.
As a result, you can have multiple comm apps running at the
same time without worrying about port conflicts. TAPI-compliant
apps know when a COM port is in use and simply wait their turn,
which means no more system lockups or error messages like "COM
port X is in use." When a call is received, TAPI directs the
connection to the appropriate communications software.

Microsoft Fax and TAPI allow Windows 95 to see faxes as another
form of e-mail. That's why Microsoft Fax is tightly coupled
to (and dependent on) Microsoft Exchange, Win95's universal
e-mail client.

The Times, They Are Ex-Changin'

Microsoft Exchange is not exactly new. Remember Microsoft Mail?
How about Microsoft At Work Fax? Exchange is the offspring
of these two applets. Double-click on your Desktop's Inbox
icon, and behold MS Mail and At Work Fax, dressed in new 32
bit duds complete with a TAPI makeover and a new name for Win95.
(For installation instructions, see the sidebar "The Right
Way to Set Up Microsoft Fax.")

The philosophy behind Exchange is simple: Everything that enters
or leaves your computer is part of the "media stream." MAPI
and TAPI direct media traffic in and out of your computer.
The software simply dumps information into and out of the media
stream, using unchanging API calls. The APIs handle all the
dirty work that was previously delegated to discrete programs.
This explains why every major Microsoft app features a Send
command on the File menu after you've installed Exchange. That
one button allows you to reach many destinations.

It shouldn't matter whether the person to whom you're sending
a document is using e-mail, an online service or a fax. With
Microsoft Exchange, you simply look up the person's name and
send the document. The recipient's address tells Exchange the
nature of the transmission: e-mail, binary data or fax.

Suppose you're sending a document to five people: one on interoffice
e-mail, one on CompuServe, one on the Microsoft Network, one
on the Internet and one using a fax. Exchange packages the
document and dispatches it to all five destinations. The interoffice
address is routed to the network post office, while the CompuServe,
MS Network and Internet mail are sent to their service providers.

With faxes, however, things get really interesting. When Exchange
dials the fax user, it queries the recipient to see if it's
running Windows 95 and Microsoft Exchange. If it is, Exchange
sends the mail as a binary file, which can be opened and edited
without using OCR (optical character recognition) to first
convert the file to text.

If the fax recipient isn't running Windows 95, Exchange sends
the mail as a standard 200-dot-per-inch fax. So, with a single
mouse click you can send one document to several addresses,
each using a different form of electronic document transport.

In other words, faxing under Win95 is essentially a point-to
point form of e-mail-with attachments!-unless there's a fax
machine at the other end. The sender doesn't have to worry
about the recipient's setup. For the first time, the receiver
of electronic messages using the fax protocol doesn't need
a third-party e-mail account or a fax machine. Your faxes effectively
become a form of binary data transfer. You can send a single
e-mail message (again, with attachments) to a whole bunch of
people at once; some of them can have various types of e-mail
addresses, and some fax machines, but all can receive your
missive. Without Microsoft Exchange and MS Fax, you'd have
to send the document five times, using five different programs.
You'd also have to check five times for replies.

Even more importantly, you can use Windows 95's built-in networking
to share a single fax modem with every computer in the enterprise.
Open up Control Panel's Mail and Fax applet, then activate
Sharing; your fax modem becomes a network resource. Other users
can then connect to it through the Network Neighborhood and
use it to send and receive faxes. You don't need any additional
hardware or software.

Think of the possibilities. You can use a single line for enterprisewide
or workgroup faxing. You can forward received faxes to the
appropriate parties, including outside e-mail and fax addresses,
and attach notes and comments. Also, the single interface allows
for simple procedures to be made even simpler without automation.
You can create libraries of commonly faxed materials-such as
spec sheets, literature and credit references-to fax-on-demand
in a few short steps. Received faxes can be stored in organized
folder hierarchies, either locally or on the server, for fast
shared access by all employees.

The fax is no longer merely a way to deliver documents quickly.
Rather, it's become an exciting form of point-to-point electronic
mail, inheriting the same handling, routing and communications
strengths that e-mail has provided for years.

The only kink in Exchange's otherwise graceful interface is
installation. Getting Exchange running takes too many steps
and can involve up to four different programs. If you install
from the wrong entry point (for example, launching Inbox instead
of Control Panel's Add/Remove Programs applet), the setup process
may end with a resounding thud.

Microsoft would do well to integrate Exchange Setup under a
single Setup Wizard. Users should have to do nothing more than
double-click on the Desktop's Inbox icon. Exchange should control
the rest.

That's not the case, unfortunately. Depending upon how you installed
Windows 95, Exchange may not be there. Even though every copy
of Win95 features an Inbox icon on the Desktop, key Exchange
components may be missing.

It's a good idea to check the status of your Exchange installation
before trying to fax. Once you've confirmed that your Exchange
station is ready for use, it's not much farther to fax city.
Simply select Microsoft Fax as your printer in any program's
Print dialog, and the Microsoft Fax Wizard will hold your hand
until the fax is sent.

Don't worry if the recipient's e-mail address isn't a fax number.
Exchange automatically sends your documents using the correct
transport protocol, provided you have the appropriate services
installed in your Exchange Profile (a list of Exchange's transport
services)

For example, fax, the Internet and CompuServe are all transport
services. Each of these can be assigned to your Exchange profile,
found through the Inbox under Tools/Services. You can also
add intracompany mail or any other supported service. That
way, when you send a document, every listed service is available.

If you're using Exchange for fax only, you don't have to deal
with Profile; just set up Microsoft Fax and be on your merry
way. But if you plan to send documents to both fax and e-mail
recipients, you'll have to make sure the appropriate services
appear in Microsoft Exchange.

Microsoft has evolved PC faxing from a monolithic, cantankerous
tool to an elegant e-mail derivative. The ease with which users
can integrate Microsoft Fax into their overall communications
strategy is impressive. As software becomes easier to use,
however, its underlying technologies become proportionately
denser and more complex.

Within Microsoft's own applications, ease of use is represented
by a humble Send command on your applications' File menu. Click
on it, and the most advanced communications processes ever
to grace a PC operating system steam into action. MAPI, TAPI
and other exceptional operating system features are the complex
structures that make this ease of use possible. Set aside some
time and explore the new frontiers available with Exchange.
You'll never return to your old faxing ways.

You can go ahead and kill your fax machine now-with Exchange's
advanced capabilities, there's not a court in the land that
would find you guilty.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "130"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

The Right Way to Set Up Microsoft's Fax

By:
Rich Levin

 
Step 1

See if Microsoft Exchange and MS Fax are installed Double-click
on My Computer, then Control Panel, then Add/Remove Programs.
Click on Windows Setup. Scroll down the list and see if Exchange
and Fax are checked. If they are, you're ready to go-skip to
Step 3. If not, proceed to Step 2.

Step 2

Install Microsoft Exchange and MS Fax Check the boxes beside
Exchange and Fax. Click on OK. Setup will copy the required
files and start the Inbox Setup Wizard. After you complete
a few forms, the Wizard will ask you to select the information
services you want to use with Microsoft Exchange. When Setup
is done, it will have automatically identified and initialized
your modem, installed Exchange's default phone book and Inbox
databases, configured Microsoft Fax and installed shortcuts.

The information you entered will be available to all MAPI- and
TAPI-compliant programs, so you'll never have to key it in
again. Click the Start button, select Shut Down and restart
your computer.

Step 3

Send a test fax Click on the Start button, then on Programs.
Select Accessories and activate WordPad. After WordPad loads,
type some text and click on File, then Print. Click on the
Name drop-down list and select Microsoft Fax. Click on OK.
The Microsoft Fax Wizard will activate and help you prepare
the outbound fax.

Step 4

Finishing touches and notes To fax a document from any Windows
program, simply select Microsoft Fax from the program's Print
dialog, and the Microsoft Fax Wizard will appear. If you want
Microsoft Fax to answer your phone and handle faxes automatically,
double-click on the Inbox icon on your Desktop and minimize
the window. When you use File+Send, or the Microsoft Fax printer
driver, to send a document, you'll have an opportunity to choose
addresses from your address book. Feel free to mix and match
addresses for fax, e-mail and binary-data recipients; they're
all the same to Exchange.

To view received faxes, double-click on the Inbox icon. New
faxes will appear in the Inbox. If you want to share your fax
modem with other users, run Control Panel's Mail and Fax program,
go into Microsoft Fax Properties and click on the check box
 Let other people on the network use my modem to send faxes.

If you make a mistake while adding a service or completing its
setup screen, click on Cancel to undo your errors. To update
service settings, run Control Panel's Mail and Fax program
again, select a service and click on Properties.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "131"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

The Fax on the Competition

By:
Rich Levin

Microsoft Fax may be the only 32-bit, TAPI-compliant faxware
for Windows 95, but it won't remain so for long. Every major
fax software developer is providing 32-bit upgrades. See the
"Fax Features" chart for an overview of the next generation
of Windows faxware.

We anticipate the major desktop players will pack their Windows
95 offerings with features you won't find in Microsoft Fax,
such as 

Database import and export -- Every major fax program provides
a way to import names and numbers from other programs. Most
support data translation to and from dBASE and ASCII-delimited
formats. Import/export makes it easy to share address books
with other users. Export your current address book to a dBASE
file, import the information within your fax program and you're
ready to go.

Microsoft committed a major oversight when it neglected to add
import/export functions to MS Fax. Unless you manually enter
every name and number, it's impossible to import contact information.

Integrated telecommunications apps -- Dedicated fax software
is quickly becoming a thing of the past. The trend is toward
TAPI-compliant suite packages that bundle basic communications
capability, terminal emulation, remote access, Internet connection,
fax handling and even pager support into a single mega-app.
The component applications can share data and provide a single
communications interface.

Integrated telephony -- Some communications suites now deliver
voice mail, autodial, speakerphone and, in some cases, personal
pager support. Computer voice mail, in particular, was once
the domain of telecom experts peddling high-end dedicated workstations
and expensive add-on hardware. Now these features can be yours
for little more than the cost of a modem. PC voice mail performs
well and interacts with your other telephony apps, including
fax.

"Three-dimensional" fax -- New data-representation technologies
let you send a fax that contains program and data files. 3D
Fax, a fax-software enhancement from InfoImaging Technologies
(800-966-1140), converts file data to a high-density bar-code
like image. It uses your existing fax software and hardware
to send the image to any standard fax machine or PC fax modem.
When the resulting document is decoded by the receiving computer
using the 3D Fax software, the document's binary contents emerge.
You can send virtually any type of on-disk data to any type
of fax machine.

While Microsoft Fax can send documents as editable text and
binary data as embedded OLE objects, it's limited to communicating
with other MS Fax users. Through bar-code scanning, 3D Fax
can transmit binary files using PC fax modems or old-fashioned
fax machines.

You can download 3D Fax from America Online or the World Wide
Web (or InfoImaging will send you a copy for $6.95 shipping).
The program is designed to work with any fax software compatible
with Windows 3.x or Windows 95.

Fax annotation -- Kind of a Post-it note for received faxes,
fax annotation lets you mark 'em up and send 'em back. It's
better than an e-mail message or MAPI fax message because it
allows comments to be affixed directly to the fax image.

Automatic printing -- You're out to lunch, and your computer's
password-protected. Unfortunately, your PC is also the fax
server, and the big cheese is waiting for a fax. When automatic
printing is activated, the problem ends. The phone rings, the
fax arrives, the fax prints out and the boss never notices
you're an hour late.

Fax preview -- This can be a lifesaver. How many times have
you sent a fax, only to realize you clicked the wrong person's
name in your address book? Fax preview lets you see the document
before it's sent. This prevents embarrassing misfires and gives
you a glimpse of how well (or badly) a scanned document will
reproduce by fax.

Improved cover-page editors -- MS Fax's cover-page editor barely
does the job. Delrina's cover-page editor is still the best,
with Hayes a close second.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "132"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Features We'd Like to See

By:
Rich Levin

MAPI and TAPI support in every Windows 95 fax program The days
of the standalone fax machine, and standalone fax software,
are over. If it doesn't support MAPI and TAPI, don't buy it.

The ability to reject faxes from certain telephone numbers Most
faxes contain the sender's telephone number in the fax data
header.

It would be easy for fax software developers to add a feature
that captures this number and adds it to a "Rejection List"
on request. Whenever a call comes in from a number on the list,
the fax software would simply disconnect the call.

Standards for cover-page file formats Right now, if you change
fax software, you'll have to re-create all your cover pages.
If fax software vendors were to standardize on a single file
format, users could easily share cover pages.

True mail-merge broadcast fax capability Almost every popular
fax package can replicate a document to a list of names, but
only Microsoft Word and Exchange allow you to customize each
document with merged information.

Color faxes Need I say more?

Automatic printer selection It's about time fax software automatically
returned the "real" printer to the Windows default after sending
a fax.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "133"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

How To Buy a ... Pointing Device


 
Type

It used to be that mice were the only game in town. But now
you're confronted with myriad choices, including trackballs,
touchpads and more esoteric designs like pointing sticks. Trackballs
and touchpads are the two most popular mouse alternatives.
Trackballs offer a high level of precision and take up less
desktop space than a mousepad. Touchpads provide a flat input
mechanism similar to those on many notebook PCs. However, mice
remain at the top of the list-they still account for about
80 percent of all pointing devices sold.

Buttons

The average mouse has two buttons. However you can buy mice
with up to four buttons that can be programmed as shortcuts
for more complex functions like double-click or Alt+Tab. Consider
a mouse with extra programmable buttons if you work with programs
that go heavy on complicated keyboard commands (such as desktop
publishing or CAD)

Price

A high-quality mouse costs anywhere from $39 to $69, though
you can get lower-resolution units with less-sturdy mechanisms
for as little as $10. Trackballs cost more, from about $65
to $110, while touchpads are priced at about $79 to $99.

Connectors

You can hook your pointing device to your PC using either a
PS/2 or a serial connector. Older computers use a serial connection,
notebook computers need a PS/2 connector, and newer desktop
PCs allow both PS/2 and serial connections. Ideally, your device
should have a converter that's compatible with either type
of port.

Perhaps the trusty mouse you've been using for years has finally
given up the ghost. Or your new system came with a mouse you
just don't like. Whatever sent you searching for a new pointing
device, you'll find dozens of replacement options on store
shelves. You're sure to find a device to suit your needs and
style-some manufacturers are even offering designer hues that
let your true colors shine.

Once upon a time, you had to be concerned about your mouse's
resolution. But today's better rodents offer resolutions of
about 200 counts per inch (cpi), and most good-quality trackballs
have resolutions of between 200 and 400cpi. Touchpad resolutions
often meet or exceed 1,000cpi. You probably won't notice a
significant dip in precision unless you buy a device that features
a resolution of less than 200cpi. You may also see resolution
quoted in the more familiar dots per inch (dpi), but these
numbers mean the same thing as cpi.

Before you commit to a particular model, visit a store with
a demonstration section where you can try each pointing device.
Ask about warranties; some companies offer only a year or two
of coverage, while others offer five years or more.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "134"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Tracking Input Trends



The touchpad has already become a familiar item in many notebook
computers, and it looks as if these devices will continue to
storm the market. BIS Strategic Decisions predicts that touchpads
will account for 70 percent of all integrated pointing devices
by 1998. Manufacturers like Alps and Cirque are introducing
desktop touchpads, and are integrating touchpads into all-in
one desktop keyboard units.

These flat pads have a variety of advantages over other pointing
device technologies. The pad is a sealed unit that keeps dirt
out. Touchpads have become popular in notebooks because of
their extremely light weight. They also take up less desktop
space than mice or trackballs. For example, Cirque estimates
that its GlidePoint Desktop, which measures 4.4 by 0.4 by 4
inches, takes up about 70 percent less space than a mousepad.

Touchpad technology is based on electrical capacitance rather
than pressure. The pad contains two layers of electrodes (one
vertical and one horizontal) that are connected to an integrated
circuit within the unit. When you touch the pad, you change
the capacitance of the layers. By coordinating the intersection
of the two layers, the unit moves the cursor precisely. This
technology is extremely intuitive-instead of clicking on a
mouse button, you merely tap on the pad. For those who find
old habits hard to break, most touchpads now on the market
come with two clickable buttons.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "135"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab Product Comparisons: The Sound & the Fury: Multimedia Upgrades -- 
Is Installation Easier with Win95? It Can Be-If You Get the Right Hardware

By:
Marc Spiwak

If you bought your PC a couple of years ago, you're probably
multimedia-challenged-sans sound card and CD-ROM drive, but
longing to run the terrific CD-ROMs coming on the market. So
you hike to the computer store, and there they are: brand-new
multimedia upgrade kits with everything you need. Do they work?
Are they easy to get up and running? Good questions.

Installing multimedia hardware under Windows 3.1 used to be
an adventure fraught with conflict and peril. Then vendors
got the kinks ironed out, and upgrading was a comparatively
straightforward affair. Now, with Windows 95, things should
be even easier, right? Well, not always.

In theory, Plug and Play and Win95's installation wizard should
make installation a snap. In practice, we found that some upgrades
are indeed smooth as silk under Windows 95. But other multimedia
kits-Plug and Play or not-are difficult to install. Apparently,
some vendors don't have Plug-and-Play multimedia upgrades ready
just yet, and others rushed to put Plug-and-Play hardware on
store shelves without thoroughly testing it.

It's clearly worthwhile to make sure you upgrade the easy way.
To save you from a downer of an upgrade experience, Windows
Magazine took seven upgrade kits for a test run to see which
live up to the promise of easy installation and great multimedia
performance in Win95. Our review criteria called for a minimum
quad-speed CD-ROM-the de facto standard today. Most of the
kits had 4X drives, although one had a 6X and one-which is
covered in the sidebar on the next page-had an 8X.

The good news is that once they were running, all the kits worked
fine. Even better, two of the kits worked like a charm from
the outset. But, as you'll see, it took some trial and error
to arrive at that point with the other products.

The sample here includes upgrades that will at least support
Windows 95: Some are Plug-and-Play systems, while others are
not. As is often the case, some upgrades support Windows 95
better than others.

All of the cards we tested had built-in IDE ports. On all but
two of the cards, they proved to be useless, because our test
computer system could not recognize the CD-ROM connected to
them.

The majority of multimedia upgrades today come with IDE CD-ROM
drives, and the sound card will usually have an IDE controller
built into it. This makes more sense than proprietary systems,
where the CD-ROM drive must use a particular controller. Such
a drive could not be installed in another machine without using
the original (or a compatible) controller. On the other hand,
an IDE CD-ROM drive can be installed in nearly any computer
and use the motherboard's IDE controller(s). I was very fortunate
that this was the case, because otherwise I would not have
been able to test the majority of these upgrades.

One additional note: If you have an older video card (with perhaps
1MB of DRAM for the video memory or an early SVGA type), you
may want to get an updated card to play videos without dropping
frames. The card in the Gateway 2000 test bed was an ATI mach32,
which played all the videos we tried with no frames dropped.
Similarly, the sound cards in the upgrade kits played video
clip sound without breaks.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "136"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab Product Comparisons: Aztech Labs Stellar 6X

By:
Marc Spiwak

Aztech Labs provided the one 6X package in this review. A 6X
drive spins the disc 50 percent faster than a 4X drive. Although
this speed improvement is noticeable, it is not necessary.

After installing the Aztech upgrade in our Gateway 2000 DX2
66, powering up the system and running the Install software
from within Windows 95, I found that I still had no sound and
no D: drive (the IDE CD-ROM). I manually installed the hardware
within Win95 and had it load default software. The sound card
worked-but there was still no D: drive. Connecting the CD-ROM
drive to the motherboard IDE controller solved that problem.

Aztech's upgrade exhibited very ordinary sound quality. Audio
contained static at times, and the speakers had a shrill quality
with the treble boost turned on and somewhat flat sound with
it off. The speakers didn't have much oomph even with batteries
installed.

The Aztech upgrade is an average package, and even its helping
of bundled software leaves a bit to be desired. With only two
multimedia titles included, it had the least software of any
kit tested. But if the 6X speed is more important to you than
having a wealth of software titles, you might like this upgrade.

The speed of the drive tends to place this upgrade kit at the
high end of the spectrum, but its nonwavetable sound card,
unimpressive speakers and small software selection puts it
at the low end. A 6X drive should be strapped to a much better
sound card and speakers. If you're buying only a CD-ROM drive,
then by all means go for a 6X drive. But if you're buying a
complete upgrade package, a better sound card and speakers
contribute much more to overall performance than a speedier
CD-ROM drive.

--Info File--

Aztech Labs Stellar 6X

Price: $379

In Brief: This kit has a slight performance edge with the only
6X drive in the bunch, but is short on accessories and bundled
software.

Aztech Labs

800-886-8859, 510-623-8988





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "137"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab Product Comparisons: Creative Labs Sound Blaster Discovery CD 4x

By:
Marc Spiwak

One advantage of a Sound Blaster sound card is that most software,
including Windows 95, recognizes it. This package includes
the Sound Blaster 16 PnP, and Plug and Play it does. This kit
was a breeze to install. Both the sound card and its secondary
IDE controller worked without a hitch in the test-bed Gateway
2000 DX2/66 computer

Once I had the Discovery CD 4x upgrade working, I installed
its handy assortment of utility software, which can be loaded
from included disks or a CD-ROM. Choose the latter: It's easier,
and it gives you a chance to do something productive with your
new CD-ROM drive.

The speakers included with this Discovery CD 4x upgrade are
of average quality. They can be connected to the line output
on the sound card with batteries installed or to the amplified
output with or without batteries. An AC adapter is optional.
General sound from these speakers is fairly full, but audio
CDs sound flat unless you install batteries in the speakers.

These speakers can be used with or without batteries. If batteries
are not used, the speakers must be connected to an amplified
sound-card output or else nothing will be heard. With batteries
installed, they can be connected to either an amplified output
or a line-level output. They sounded much better and more powerful
with batteries installed and connected to the amplified output,
although the sound tended to break up at higher levels. Treble
and bass boost controls on the speakers worked, but both controls
should always be turned on, as the sound was missing some quality
without them.

While this kit's sound quality and amplification power are not
going to knock anyone's socks off, a setup like this is certainly
adequate for most multimedia applications, especially if it's
your first multimedia setup. On the other hand, the easy time
I had installing this kit more than made up for any sonic shortcomings.
And for the multimedia newcomer, nothing is more important
than getting the equipment to work.

--Info File--

Creative Labs Sound Blaster Discovery CD 4x

Price: $369.99(street)

In Brief: The Sound Blaster Discovery CD 4x is a good entry
level upgrade with lots of bundled software. It's one of only
two Plug-and-Play systems that worked as advertised.

Creative Labs

800-998-LABS, 408-428-6600





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "138"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab Product Comparisons: Creative Labs Sound Blaster Performance 4x

By:
Marc Spiwak

Of all the kits tested, the Performance 4x is the one that I
would most like to have in my computer because of its superior
32-bit wavetable Sound Blaster sound card. It gave no installation
trouble at all, even to the point that I was able to use the
IDE controller on the sound card. This was the case only with
the Creative Labs upgrade kits.

While the speakers that come with this upgrade were not the
best of the lot, they were certainly adequate, and the better
sound card more than makes up for them. (If you are looking
to save a few dollars, you would probably be just as happy
with the Creative Labs Discovery CD 4x.)

The Performance 4x lacks Plug-and-Play capabilities, so

first I tried running an installation program from DOS. After
this program ran, the computer could access the CD-ROM drive
through the sound card, but there was still no sound. I had
Windows 95 do an auto search for new hardware. The OS "found"
the sound card and its game port, and configured both properly
with default drivers. The reward I got was beautiful sound.

The Performance 4x is the only upgrade tested that includes
a 32-bit sound card, a Sound Blaster 32 to be exact. This wavetable
card is hands down the best sound card in this review. And
while the speakers are not the most powerful in the group,
they are much better than the low-end ones packaged with some
of the other kits. An AC adapter is included. In general, any
speakers powered by an AC adapter will sound better than battery
powered speakers, and you'll never have to buy batteries. An
audio purist might want speakers with a little more power and
perhaps even a subwoofer. That aside, anyone should be very
happy with this kit. A very complete utility software collection
rounds out the package.

--Info File--

Creative Labs Sound Blaster Performance 4X

Price: $429(street)

In Brief: This is the upgrade I'd buy with my own money. It
comes loaded with software and has a 32-bit wavetable sound
card.

Creative Labs

800-998-LABS, 408-428-6600





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "139"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab Product Comparisons: Diamond Multimedia Kit 4400

By:
Marc Spiwak

Diamond Multimedia is perhaps best known for high-end products.
We can't argue with that, especially since it was the only
company to submit an 8X upgrade "Speed Demon").  But both the 4X
and 8X Diamond upgrades were the fussiest in terms of getting
them to work in Windows 95.

When I first powered up the Gateway 2000 with the 4400 upgrade
installed, I had no D: drive, which was the normal situation
with these upgrades, and there was no sound.

Eventually the 4400's sound card worked, but only when it was
set for non-Plug-and-Play operation and after running Diamond's
install program from DOS. And that wasn't all. Back in Windows
95, an automatic search failed to detect any of the new hardware.
Manually installing the drivers from within Win95 brought the
sound card to life, but I still couldn't control the CD-ROM
drive from the IDE controller on the sound card. Thankfully,
the controller on the motherboard worked, which generally proved
to be the rule in this review.

The Diamond 4400 produced average sound quality. The sound card
is a 16-bit, non-wavetable type, and the speakers are probably
the least expensive in the lot we tested. These speakers must
be connected to an amplified output on a sound card because
they are not amplified at all. There's no way to use batteries
or an AC adapter, so all of the amplification must come from
the sound card. Although the sound they produce is clear, there's
just not enough of it. Most people would not be happy owning
these speakers, and would probably replace them with something
better soon after installing the upgrade. For the person who
wants to hear only an occasional sound effect or warning beep,
they would suffice, but there's a lot more to multimedia.

--Info File--

Diamond Multimedia Kit 4400

Price: $299(street)

In Brief: The kit has plenty of goodies for a very reasonable
price. It had one of the fussiest installations, though.

Diamond Multimedia Systems

800-468-5846, 408-325-7000





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "140"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab Product Comparisons: Kiss Technology Super Edition

By:
Marc Spiwak

The Kiss Technology Super Edition multimedia upgrade includes
a Pioneer 4X IDE CD-ROM drive, a Plug-and-Play sound card,
a pair of very basic speakers, some generic utility software
and eight assorted CD-ROM titles. You set a jumper on the sound
card to Plug and Play if the system is being installed under
Windows 95 or to Disable Plug and Play if it's being installed
under DOS or Windows 3.11. The sound card also has a built
in secondary IDE controller for the CD-ROM drive.

Documentation for this package was somewhat sparse. Parts of
it pertain to installing under Windows 95 and others don't.
When I installed this upgrade in the Gateway 2000 DX2/66, the
sound card would not play immediately. I had to have Windows
95 search for the new hardware, which it found and set up properly.
I could not get the sound card's IDE controller to work in
the Gateway 2000, so I had to plug the drive into the IDE controller
on the motherboard, which worked.

The speakers can be used without batteries if they are connected
to the sound card's amplified output. In this configuration
they sounded fine, though somewhat "hollow." With six C batteries
installed and the speakers connected to the line output on
the sound card, they sounded about the same, but now I could
use the speakers' volume and bass-boost controls. With batteries
installed and the speakers connected to the sound card's amplified
output, the sound was much fuller and louder. You can plug
in a 9-volt AC adapter, but none is included with this kit.

This upgrade's utility software bundle is generic. In addition,
it does not have an applet that will play audio CDs, so I had
to install the CD-player option as part of Windows 95's Media
Player. That worked just fine, but you have to wonder why this
package lacked a CD player.

In addition, this would be one more hitch for the Win 95 novice,
and perhaps one more reason to call technical support.

--Info File--

Kiss Technology Super Edition

Price: $289 (street)

In Brief: The Super Edition is a basic package with price and
features in the mainstream.

Kiss Technology

301-216-1300, fax 301-216-1212





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "141"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab Product Comparisons: Reveal Quad Elite XL

By:
Marc Spiwak

The Quad Elite XL is the upscale version of the two Reveal kits
submitted for review. It has essentially the same hardware
as the lower-end kit, except that it has much better speakers,
a joystick and tons of multimedia software.

After I installed the Elite hardware, I ran the Win95 Install
program. This provided sound, but, of course, the old "no D
 drive" problem cropped up once again. Not being too quick
to abandon the sound card's IDE controller, I tried to have
Windows 95 autodetect the new hardware. Supposedly, the OS
found and configured the new IDE controller, but the machine
was then very slow to reboot and, alas, still no D: drive.

As usual, I had to connect the CD-ROM drive to the motherboard
IDE controller before we could spin any discs. An unexpected
wrinkle appeared with this upgrade kit, too. All the other
drives in this review were set as slaves, but this one was
set as a master, which meant that I had to move the jumper
to the slave position. Then it worked like all the others.
Although this was not something to worry about, had I not made
the switch, I would have spent a lot of time wondering why
the drive wasn't responding.

As far as sound quality goes, this upgrade kit can really put
out the sound. The AC-powered speakers pack quite a punch with
40 watts per channel. Only a subwoofer would make the sound
any fuller. The trade-off for that power is space: The speakers
take up a lot more room on your desktop than the others reviewed.
This was the only upgrade I tested that can transform your
PC into a home stereo (for CDs at least), and it's also the
only one that might cause coworkers to yell, "Turn down that
computer!" The wavetable sound card, while not 32-bit, produces
clear, realistic MIDI sound and good FM synthesis. The powerful
speakers coupled with the wavetable sound card make for a very
pleasing multimedia setup that you could live with for a long
time.

--Info File--

Reveal Quad Elite XL

Price: $549(street)

In Brief: The Elite XL is the most feature-filled package we
tested, loaded with software, accessories, wavetable sound
and the most powerful speakers of the lot.

Reveal Computer Products

800-REVEAL-1, 818-704-6300





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "142"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab Product Comparisons: Reveal Quad Ultra

By:
Marc Spiwak

The Reveal Quad Ultra upgrade is loaded with accessories, including
many software titles, a how-to-install videotape, a microphone
and headphones. The speakers included with the Quad Ultra could
easily find a long-term home on your desk. They're not high
end, but they look nice, sound very good and come with an AC
adapter.

The Reveal upgrades include some of the best documentation of
any of the kits I examined. For example, a neat little supplement
explaining IDE controllers was thrown in. The supplement shows
how IDE conflicts can occur, how to test for IDE controllers
on your motherboard and so on. It provided substantial background
material on what might cause problems with an IDE installation.

But even with its excellent documentation, the Reveal Quad Ultra
upgrade presented the most bizarre installation problem of
all. After I installed the hardware and connected the CD-ROM
to the sound card, the Gateway 2000 DX2/66 wouldn't even boot.
After much experimentation, I found that the machine would
boot if I first entered the CMOS setup and then simply exited
it. Then the computer booted just fine but, as usual, gave
no indication of a D: drive connected to the sound card.

The computer also failed to boot after shutting down Windows
95 and turning off the power; it needed the little CMOS setup
trick. Strangely, if I merely had Win95 restart itself (no
power down), it would boot up again just fine. This dilemma
continued as long as I left the CD-ROM drive connected to the
sound card's IDE controller. Disconnecting the CD-ROM drive
solved the problem, as did using the motherboard IDE controller.
(Apparently, the Gateway 2000's BIOS strongly disliked something
about this upgrade!)

Once the hardware problems were straightened out, the Quad Ultra
upgrade was trouble-free. The Install disks worked properly
from within Windows 95, and I soon had sound. Overall, this
upgrade's sound quality was good compared to some of the other
kits tested, due to the better speakers and the wavetable sound
card. The card produces realistic sound, and the speakers reproduce
that sound clearly. The speakers, while not earthshaking, are
more than adequate for most business multimedia applications.
But again, audio purists will want more power.

You'll be happy with any of these multimedia upgrades once you
get them working properly in your computer. And it's quite
possible that you would have no trouble installing any one
of them in your computer. It's also possible that you might
have trouble with one of the ones we liked. It depends greatly
on your computer setup, and at this point anything could happen.
Whatever you do, don't let our cautions ruin your appetite
for multimedia. There's an exciting new world of software out
there, and it's just waiting for you to get the right hardware
to run it.

--Info File--

Reveal Quad Ultra

Price: $449(street)

In Brief: The slightly higher price of this 4X package reflects
the abundance of software and accessories, better speakers
than most upgrades, and a wavetable sound card.

Reveal Computer Products

800-REVEAL-1, 818-704-6300





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "143"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab Product Comparisons: Speed Demon -- Fast is great, but easy is better.

By:
Marc Spiwak

Speed-people can never get enough of it. Not in amusement parks,
not in cars and certainly not in CD-ROM drives. The first CD
ROM drives would spin a disc at the same speed as an audio
CD player, which was unbearably slow. Next came double-speed
drives that transferred data at double the speed of ordinary
drives. You could buy triple-speed drives briefly, but they
vanished soon after quad speed drives became available-which
seemed like only days after the 3X drives came out.

Quad-speed drives are fairly standard today, as they are quite
fast (at least compared to 2X) and very reasonable in price.
It should come as no surprise that 6X and even 8X drives are
now available. While a 6X drive spins a disc 50 percent faster
than a 4X, an 8X is twice as fast! That would make for a really
slick multimedia upgrade. We reviewed one 6X kit (an Aztech),
and an 8X kit almost made it.

The Diamond Multimedia Kit 8000, with an 8X drive included,
is a rather expensive upgrade (about $599 street), but it's
also probably the fastest one around. Although I spent the
better part of a day trying to make it work, it never operated
completely on the test-bed system. Diamond said it was busy
working on new drivers and Install disks that should clear
up the problems I experienced.

While awaiting the new software's arrival, I tested the 8X IDE
drive by itself connected to the motherboard's IDE controller.
By CD-ROM standards the drive cooks, transferring data at 1.2Mb
per second. I copied a huge file from the 8X drive to the hard
drive in about half the time of the 4X drives tested, which
was pretty much what we expected.

The new drivers didn't make installing the upgrade in the Gateway
2000 DX2/66 test-bed machine any easier. While the 8X upgrade
never worked in that machine, all the other kits eventually
did. The 8X upgrade kit did work in a brand-new Pentium 133
with a working Plug-and-Play BIOS, installing in this machine
with no problems at all. That was very satisfying, but it's
highly unlikely that anyone would be installing new multimedia
hardware in a new computer.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "144"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab Product Comparisons: Installation Tips -- First, you have to 
make it work.

By:
Marc Spiwak

I ran into many problems getting these multimedia upgrades to
work, apparently because installation software has not yet
been thoroughly tested under Windows 95, and Plug-and-Play
drivers often aren't available. But there are a few tricks
that can be helpful in getting new multimedia hardware to work
in Windows 95.

IDE Problems

The upgrade kits all include IDE CD-ROM drives and have secondary
IDE controllers on their sound cards. IDE controllers are easy
to use, except when they conflict with another IDE controller,
or the BIOS thinks there's another controller or the Install
software fails to configure the new controller properly. Mostly,
the sound-card function worked correctly, but the CD-ROM drives
were unresponsive.

Controlling the CD-ROM drive as a slave from the motherboard's
IDE controller solved the problem. Tech support suggested this.

Disabling the sound card's IDE controller leaves the computer
in its original configuration. You can't do this if the motherboard
has only one IDE controller installed with two hard drives
connected to it. But if you need only one hard drive, it's
better to have only one controller operating. Unnecessary controllers
eat up memory.

The ribbon cable connecting the hard drive to the motherboard's
IDE controller had a spare connector. If this is not the case,
you'll need a new ribbon cable with two connectors, not a big
deal, but certainly a hassle. Had the Gateway 2000 test computer
already had a slave drive connected to the primary IDE controller,
I would have had to connect the new drive to the motherboard's
secondary IDE controller.

Try, Try Again

The instruction manuals mostly discussed installation in Windows
3.11; the same procedure often doesn't work in Windows 95.
Check your documentation for specific Win95 installation instructions,
and follow them. Sometimes you just have to boot Windows 95,
and it will automatically detect and configure your new hardware
with its own default software. This ideal situation did not
occur often.

If the instructions tell you to start the Install procedure
in DOS, then you should start your computer in Win95's DOS
mode and try running Install from there. If that doesn't work,
try using the Run command line in Windows 95. When you have
run all the install procedures available and the new hardware
still isn't responding, try having Windows 95 automatically
detect the new hardware.

Should Windows detect the hardware, it might configure it automatically.
Or it might ask you to insert a manufacturer's disk containing
drivers or information about the new hardware. First insert
any disk that might be an obvious choice. Or, you could try
having Windows look at each disk one at a time.

Your new hardware must be configured manually if Windows fails
to detect it. At this point, you must notify the Add New Hardware
Wizard that you will tell it what to look for.

Last Resort

If you have tried everything you can think of but still cannot
get the hardware to work, you can uninstall Windows 95, go
back to 3.11, install the hardware from there, and then reinstall
Win95. The new OS sometimes sets up hardware better while it
is installing itself. It simply copies the earlier, workable
installation setup.

Finally, Windows 95 can install properly and have all hardware
working, only to reconfigure some device automatically later
on so that it no longer works. So, if you upgrade to Windows
95 and all your hardware is working correctly, disable the
"Make settings automatically" box for all system hardware.
This means Windows won't be able to juggle around those "locked"
resources in the future, but as long as they are properly doled
out today, you're okay! Should problems persist, try disabling
each statement in your CONFIG.SYS file, and then reenabling
only what you need to get everything to work reliably.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "145"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

How We Tested: The Multimedia Microscope -- It's a question of installation
ease, sound quality and drive speed.

By:
Marc Spiwak

We decided to test the Plug and Play upgrades in an older machine
without a Plug and Play BIOS, so that we would duplicate the
situation that most readers would have. We first tried an old
AST 33MHz 486. After experiencing various CD-ROM install problems
with the first three upgrades, we decided to try a slightly
newer Gateway 2000 DX2/66. Ironically, the first three Plug
and Play sound cards all worked fine in the AST, but not in
the Gateway 2000. We had no better luck with the sound card
IDE controllers in the Gateway 2000, either. By this time we
realized that the problems were caused mostly by the upgrades,
and not by our computers. So we decided to stick with the Gateway
2000.

To ensure that the upgrade kits started on level ground, we
tested each in a clean installation of Windows 95. That way,
nothing remaining from a previous test would interfere. To
do this, we ran a batch file that renamed the old Windows subdirectory
and then completely reinstalled Windows in a new subdirectory.
That left us with a fresh, bare-bones installation of Windows
95 every time.

After we had an upgrade working properly (the main focus of
this article), we simply loaded the included software and listened
to what it could do. Our opinions on the overall sound quality
of these upgrades are purely objective. Although you might
not agree with them, you can use them as starting points. For
the performance aspects, we did identical tests for each upgrade
and measured the time it took for each one to complete.

We ran a program that played an AVI file from the CD-ROM drive
included with the upgrade kit and counted the number of frames
dropped while the video played. Our tests indicated that if
you have a 486 or better computer and are installing at least
a 4X CD-ROM drive (our minimum speed requirement for this review),
you will have no video frames dropped from AVI files. None
of our test systems dropped frames.

We also tested CD-ROM drive speed while searching and transferring
data to another drive. For each upgrade kit, we searched for
the same information (Open GL and Windows NT) on the Microsoft
Developer Network CD-ROM and timed the operation. In addition,
we copied the Weezer video on the Windows 95 CD-ROM to the
hard drive. On a 4X drive, the copy time averaged about a minute.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "146"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Report Card: Recommendations

By:
Marc Spiwak

The Creative Labs' upgrade kits are the only way to go at this
time for painless compatibility. This is the primary reason
that they garnered the WINDOWS Magazine Recommended seal. These
were the only upgrades that worked as advertised right out
of the box, and contained the only CD-ROM drives that could
be driven from the sound card's built-in IDE controller. Either
of them would be fine. However, if you want wavetable synthesis,
which can deliver more realistic sound depending on the source
material, opt for the Creative Labs Sound Blaster Performance
4x upgrade. The Performance 4x package includes the Sound Blaster
32 which, in addition to being a wavetable synthesis card,
delivers better overall sound quality with its 32-bit operation.
One minor complaint with this upgrade is that we would have
liked more powerful speakers, or perhaps a subwoofer, attached
to the Sound Blaster 32. That sound card is certainly worthy
of high-end speakers. If we could have mixed and matched components,
we probably would have used the Reveal Quad Elite speakers
with the Performance 4x upgrade.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "147"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab Product Comparisons: A Gaggle of Gigs That Won't Break the Bank -- Add 
Big Storage for Only a Few Bucks

By:
Serdar Yegulalp and Philip Albinus

"A gig for a grand" was a catch phrase for PC buyers as little
as a year and a half ago. Now a gigabyte drive is de rigueur
for new PCs. And users looking to upgrade their current systems
are gravitating toward these drives as well, drawn by retail
prices that have dropped into the $350 range.

In this review, we examine four 1GB EIDE hard drives from the
bigger players in the field: Seagate Technology, Western Digital,
Quantum and Fujitsu Computer Products of America. Conner Peripherals
also sent us a drive, but we didn't include it because Conner
provided us with only volume OEM pricing information.

Each drive was tested on a 100MHz 486 Pentium equipped with
an Award Plug-and-Play BIOS. We used WINDOWS Magazine's brand
new Wintune 95 to test the drive's cached and uncached performance.
We also placed approximately 300MB worth of text files onto
the drive and indexed them with Microsoft Office 95's Find
Fast Indexer. We then used Microsoft Word 7.0 to perform a
context search for the word "and." Since the index itself took
up several megabytes, the drive's own hardware-level caching
and retrieval speed got a thorough testing.

You may wonder why, with costs dropping the way they are, we
didn't review even larger drives than 1.2GB. We could have,
but users who opt for such monster drives running under Windows
95 could wind up having too much of a good thing.

Virtual File Allocation Table (VFAT), Windows 95's souped-up
version of the old DOS FAT file system, limits the maximum
size of individual drive volumes to 2GB.

The problem isn't fatal. If you buy a 4GB drive, for instance,
you can use all of it properly under Windows 95 by partitioning
it into at least two drives, each of them 2GB or less in size.

By comparison, NTFS, the file system incorporated into Windows
NT, has a maximum individual volume size of 16 billion gigabytes.
(Yes, 16 billion!) That's surely large enough for most Windows
applications.

So if you find yourself routinely working with volumes larger
than 2GB, and you are dealing with data that requires a fair
degree of fault tolerance (mirroring, striping and extended
partition data), you're better off switching to Windows NT.
NTFS has many safety, redundancy and large-volume handling
features that may make it the OS of choice in that situation.

Also note that EIDE drives larger than 528MB may not be recognized
by a computer with an old BIOS. Some of them require software
drivers to handle this problem, such as Ontrack's Disk Manager.
(See sidebar "Enhancing Your Hard Drive" for more on this.)
Other computers may simply need a BIOS upgrade. Contact your
machine's manufacturer to get the straight dope. And know your
system's limitations before spending money for something you
can't use.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "148"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab Product Comparisons: Fujitsu M1614



If a hard drive can be called sexy, then the Fujitsu M1614 deserves
the description. Housed in a sleek black case that dramatically
complements the chrome-finished hard-drive mechanism, the Fujitsu
M1614 was the least expensive hard drive we tested. However,
this low-priced drive is still a worthy performer.

Fujitsu has apparently not paid as much attention to the drive's
insides as it has to its "come hither" exterior. It's true
that the unit finished last in the Microsoft Word search, with
an average time of almost 9 minutes, but in the Wintune 95
tests, the Fujitsu M1614 scored a 6.8MB per second in the cached
test and a flat 2MB per second in the uncached test, which
were average numbers in this review. All told, the M1614 finished
second in the Wintune testing, bested only by Quantum. It earned
a "B" for performance.

The Fujitsu M1614 has screw holes on the side and bottom portions
for easy side- and flat-mounting.

Because Fujitsu did not send a manual with the unit, we were
unable to review the documentation.

--Info File--

Fujitsu M1614

Price: $235

In Brief: Fujitsu's drive is the least expensive in this review,
putting a speedy gigabyte within the grasp of most users.

Fujitsu Computer Products of America

800-626-4686, 408-432-6333





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "149"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab Product Comparisons: Quantum Fireball 1080



Quantum's excellent Fireball line of drives is well represented
by the 1080, which features stellar performance and solid support.
It was the only drive in the bunch rated for a 500,000-hour
mean time between failures. Jumper settings are printed on
the drive's faceplate, although the jumper itself is on the
drive controller board (and consequently a little hard to find
at first glance). The drive design has the controller placed
entirely outside the chassis, connected to the drive mechanism
via a detachable ribbon cable. This allows easy removal and
replacement of the controller in the event it fails. Both horizontal
and vertical mounting are supported.

Quantum's spiral-bound manual is excellent and thorough, although
it desperately needs to be updated: The revision we received
was dated November 1994 and didn't have specific data for the
Fireball 1080. It was easy enough to get the drive installed
and running, however, and the manual is still full of useful
information, right down to the part numbers for the correct
screws to use when mounting the drive horizontally or vertically.

The Fireball's performance scores were consistently high when
it came to cached performance (6.7MB per second); when dealing
with uncached data it only delivered 2.1MB per second on the
average. It performed spectacularly well in the word-search
test, raking through the data on the disk in an average of
7 minutes flat.

--Info File--

Quantum Fireball 1080

Price: $265

In Brief: Quantum provides a good, solid performer all around,
with easy configuration and detailed, complete instructions.

Quantum Corp.

800-624-5545, 408-894-4000





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "150"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab Product Comparisons: Seagate Medalist 1080sl



Slimmer and lighter than the other drives we reviewed, the Seagate
Medalist stands out in many ways.

The full itinerary of jumper settings is spelled out on the
drive's faceplate, making it easy to get the drive hooked up
and talking to your system. Screw holes on the drive's sides
and underside facilitate side- and flat-mounting. The gasket
around the drive's edge is sealed tightly with tape as an extra
precaution against contamination. Apparently, this also has
some noise-abatement value: The drive's noise rating is a very
acceptable 30dB.

The manual contains a wealth of illustrations that spell out
drive installation and configuration in plain terms. Despite
the simple language, the manual is also quite technical. The
back is chock-full of tables on such esoterica as low-level
PIO mode programming, but the overly technical information
doesn't hamper learning how to hook up and prepare the drive.

In Wintune 95, Seagate's uncached performance registered a 2MB
per second, and it scored a respectable 7.1MB per second in
cached performance. However, it came in third in the word-search
test, with an 8-minute, 42-second average.

--Info File--

Seagate Medalist 1080sl

Price: $345

In Brief: This is the smallest, lightest, least noisy and most
power-efficient of the bunch.

Seagate Technology

800-468-3472, 408-438-8111





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "151"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab Product Comparisons: Western Digital Caviar AC21000



Accept only the finest," reads the slogan on the faceplate.
Western Digital's Caviar certainly lives up to that motto by
being one of the finest hard drives on the market today.

Open the box for Western Digital's hard drive kit, and you're
greeted with goodies that simplify the chore of installing
a new hard drive. Along with the instructions, a wall chart
spells out every stage of the installation procedure with clean,
straightforward, captioned illustrations. The manual itself
is every bit as good, written in clear English and also illustrated
(and the chart's not simply a rehash of the manual's illustrations).
Troubleshooting, variable hardware setups and multiple operating
systems are all covered.

The jumper settings aren't spelled out explicitly, but the exposed
circuit board traces for the jumpers have the letters CS, MA
and SL (for cable select, master and slave) etched on them.
The drive's gasket is also sealed with tape all the way around
(and emblazoned with the stern warning "Warranty Void If Removed").
Screw holes in the chassis allow the drive to be mounted horizontally
or vertically, depending on the computer's case.

The Caviar's cached and uncached performance were both average
for this review: 6.7MB per second and 3MB per second, respectively.
The Caviar's handling of the word-search test was second best,
rating 8 minutes, 30 seconds, slightly ahead of the Seagate.

Also included are Ontrack Computer Systems' Disk Manager and
DriveRocket utilities. Disk Manager provides compatibility
for 1GB drives with older system BIOSes, and Drive Rocket enhances
drive performance through caching. Windows 95 users should
not use Drive Rocket, since it interferes with Windows 95's
own disk caching.

--Info File--

Western Digital Caviar AC21000

Price: $300 (street)

In Brief: The Caviar drive comes with a poster that details
every step of the installation. It also is equipped with Ontrack's
Disk Manager (for those of us with older, less compatible systems)

Western Digital Corp.

800-832-4778, 714-932-5000





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "152"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab Product Comparisons: The Easy Way to Install a Hard Drive -- 
A step-by-step approach to upgrading

By:
Serdar Yegulalp

1. Check your system. Check your machine's manual to find out
where internal drives get mounted and make sure there's room.
If there isn't, consider temporarily removing one of the other
drives, especially if you can consolidate your data. For instance,
the data on a pair of 250MB drives could fit comfortably into
a 1GB drive with room to spare.

The power supply should have at least one free four-wire lead.
If it doesn't, your local computer store sells splitters which,
like extension cords for wall outlets, can be used to make
two power leads out of one. Also, make sure you're not overloading
your supply. Each device connected to the power supply, and
the supply itself, should have a wattage rating printed on
it. For safety's sake, the connected devices' power ratings
should not be more than about 90 percent of the supply's rating.
It's not likely that you'll even get close unless you have
an older machine with a small power supply (less than 200W)
and lots of peripherals installed.

2. Take precautions. Static electricity, which builds up in
your body constantly, can destroy computer equipment. Hard
drives are among the most static-sensitive devices. You can
defeat static buildup by running a humidifier, wearing antistatic
gloves or working on an antistatic computer mat. Or simply
touch a piece of exposed metal on the computer's case every
few minutes during the installation. This will ground you out
and drain static away.

3. have the right hardware. Mounting rails and/or brackets should
be shipped with the drives, but are needed only if you're putting
a 3.5-inch hard drive into a 5.25-inch bay. If your drive didn't
ship with the necessary hardware, contact the manufacturer
or call a computer parts warehouse, most of which stock hardware
for various drive brands. Also, make sure you use the correct
sized screws. A screw that's too large will go too deep and
may damage the drive.

4. Get connected. Power cables plug in only one way, but some
hard drive data cables (multiconductor ribbon cables) are not
indexed. Fortunately, the cable always has a red stripe indicating
where to match the first pin on the drive's connector.

If you're attaching a drive to an IDE chain that already has
a drive on it (there are two connectors per cable), make sure
you set one drive as a master and the other as a slave. Consult
your drive's instructions about how to do this; usually, it
requires a jumper setting. If there's only one drive on a chain,
it should be set to a neutral setting (often called "cable
select" or "jumper storage"). Setting it wrong may cause your
machine to fail to boot or to give inaccurate drive readings.
Leave the cover off the first time you power up again, in case
there's a problem.

5. Configure it right. Each computer has a different method
for identifying a new hard drive. Some machines require you
to force detection in BIOS setup; some handle it automatically.
Any machine that can accept an IDE drive off the motherboard
should have some kind of autoconfiguration.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "153"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winlab Product Comparisons: Enhancing Your Hard Drive -- 
You may need more stuff to make it all work.

By:
John Gartner

If you've got an old PC, adding a fast, spacious hard drive
may require some additional hardware and software. Unfortunately,
trial and error is the only sure way to find out if your PC
is ready for one of these Enhanced IDE drives. If after formatting
it and updating your BIOS, your new drive works as expected,
great. If not, then your system was probably manufactured before
the summer of '94, when new drivers and controllers became
available.

EIDE, or Fast-ATA drives as they are also called, should have
an EIDE disk controller. EIDE extends the original IDE interface
by supporting drives larger than 528MB (an old DOS and BIOS
limitation), and faster data transfers of up to 16.6MB per
second, in what are known as PIO Modes 3 and 4.

The 528MB limitation (see Power Windows, February 1995) is a
result of the way the operating system (DOS) and the hardware
(through the system BIOS) store and communicate data based
on the sector, head and cylinder location. New systems that
include an updated BIOS and EIDE drive controllers no longer
have this limitation. To work with legacy systems, drive manufacturers
bundle driver software (such as EZ-Drive or Disk Manager) that
translates the larger drive capacities into a format that DOS
and older BIOSes can understand.

To get the faster speed on a non-EIDE system, you'll need some
new hardware. An ISA-bus EIDE card will let you attach larger
hard drives and ATAPI CD-ROM drives, but data transfers are
limited to IDE speeds of 3.3MBps, which is really a limitation
of the ISA bus. For the best performance, look for a PCI or
VL-Bus EIDE controller (depending on the type of slots in your
system). If your PC doesn't have local bus slots, it might
be time to consider upgrading.

One note about adding a second hard drive under Windows 95:
New hard drives must still be partitioned and formatted before
they can be used. You partition the drive by running Fdisk
from a DOS window; this sets the size of the logical volume(s)
that you want on the drive. After Fdisk finishes, you must
format the drive, either by running Format from the command
line or right-clicking on the drive icon and selecting it.
Hard drives are not listed in Add New Hardware (under Control
Panel)

This sounds complicated, but take heart. Some drive manufacturers
bundle these functions into a utility that handles all the
steps automatically.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "154"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Report Card: Recommendations 


The race was tight all around, but the clear performance winner
is the Quantum Fireball. With both its performance and its
500,0000-hour MTBF rating, it's no surprise more and more OEMs
are bundling it with their systems. And at $265, its price
is comparable to just about any other drive out there.

The other drives had a lot going for them, too. We especially
liked Western Digital's step-by-step installation poster. Seagate's
light, compact, efficient and noise-reducing design should
appeal to those who need a utilitarian system design. Fujitsu's
drive is a great buy for someone who needs a gig for under
$250.

Performance: How well does the drive perform against the others
reviewed here?

Construction/design: Is the drive well constructed? Are the
jumper settings difficult to change? Is the drive configuration
only explained in the manual, or is it also on other installation
aids?

Support: Is the documentation clear and precise? Does the drive
come with all the necessary materials (rails, brackets, screws,
jumpers and so forth)? Does the manufacturer stand behind its
product (toll-free support, BBSes, Web or ftp sites, information
service forums?




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "155"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Optimizing Windows: Explorer Gives You the Big Picture

By:
John Woram

STILL NOT SATISFIED with Explorer? Here are a few more ways
to coax it into doing what you want.

In last month's explanation of the Explorer /n command, I noted
the /n switch opens a new window each time you execute the
command via the Start menu's Run option. (If you don't see
the subsequent windows opening, drag the top window around.
The others are hiding underneath it.) You may or may not see
a similar effect if you open an Explorer window by double-clicking
on the My Computer icon and opening additional folders within
it depends on how you've configured the Folder tab. Open Explorer's
View menu and select

Options to view the tab, which appears ahead of View and File
Types. When you execute Explorer via the Run command without
the /n switch, you'll see only the View and File Types tabs.

The Folder tab offers multiple- and single-window browse options.
The former opens a new window each time you open a new folder;
the latter shows a single window whose panes change as you
open each new folder.

I'll use the multiple-window option to present an overview of
some Explorer features, and show how they compare with the
old File Manager and the still-older DOS directory tree. For
comparison, I'll use the Start menu's Run option. If you want
to follow along, open the following Explorer view window:

explorer /e, /root,

With no object following the /root switch (but don't overlook
that comma), the All Folders pane shows the Desktop as its
root. Click on the plus sign next to My Computer to see the
beginnings of a "directory tree" that shows all your disk drives.
Click on the plus sign next to any drive letter and the tree
expands by one level. Then click on the plus sign next to any
folder on the selected drive, and the tree expands by one more
level, and so on. As you open more folders, the highest level
of the tree disappears off the top of the pane, so that you
can see each new folder as it's opened.

The All Folders pane in the sidebar "A Tree Grows in Explorer
Land" shows a seven-level tree, with some folders removed so
you can see the entire tree. The Contents pane shows the seventh
level-the half-dozen shortcut icons in the highlighted open
folder you see in the All Folders pane. The title bar at the
top of the window shows the equivalent DOS prompt that would
take you to the same level of the tree.

Explorer /n, /root,

If you remove the /e switch, Explorer opens in single-pane Open
view mode. Now open Explorer with /n, /root, and select the
Separate Window radio button from the folder tab in the View
Options menu. From there, double-click on the My Computer icon.
From this window double-click on the drive C: icon, and from
within that window double-click on the Windows folder. From
there double-click on Start Menu, then Programs, then any folder.
Resize/reposition each window so that when you're done, you
can see all seven windows.

Now, with all these Explorer windows open, let's navigate from
one to another. Assuming you can see parts of all seven windows,
the fastest way to get to the desired one is to move your mouse
pointer into that window and click once. Or, to go window browsing,
use the Backspace and Enter keys to work your way in either
direction through all the open windows. Note, however, that
the Backspace key won't take you all the way to the top. If
you press this key while the My Computer window is highlighted,
a message warns you: You Are at the Top Level and Cannot Go
Up Another Level. To See the Desktop, Minimize Any Open Windows.

Well, if you're at the top level, what's that Desktop window
doing one level above the top? No explanation comes to mind,
but if you want that Desktop window, move the mouse pointer
into it, click once and you're there. You won't see this highest
level Desktop window at all if you start the sequence by double
clicking on the My Computer icon. In this case, My Computer
is the highest-level Explorer window on the desktop, so the
message makes more sense. In either case, if you want to get
back to a clean desktop screen, minimize or close all open
windows.

To minimize all windows, right-click on an empty area on the
taskbar and select the Minimize All Windows option on the pop
up menu. You'll probably wind up with a taskbar filled with
uninformative C:\WIN ... buttons. If so, expand the taskbar
so the buttons take up two or more rows, with a bit more information
in each one. Or, move it to either side of the screen and expand
it horizontally so you can see the entire button text. Both
alternatives are space-wasters, though, so you may prefer to
leave the taskbar at its default size. Then, just move the
mouse pointer over the taskbar's button and the full text pops
up immediately above it.

To restore all open windows, again right-click on any empty
area of the taskbar, and this time you'll find an Undo Minimize
All option on the menu.

You can, of course, close selected windows by clicking on the
close button in the upper right corner of the appropriate window(s).
Or, you can close any window and all higher-level windows by
holding down the Shift key when you click.

Explorer /n, /select,\\

My Computer, C:

This Explorer window should look familiar. It's what you see
when you double-click on the desktop's My Computer icon, except
in this example the drive C: icon is highlighted. If you've
already opened My Computer, execute this command to open a
second copy of that window. If you execute this command first,
opening My Computer doesn't open a new window. This is because
the /n switch used here applies to this command line only.
To verify this, try opening My Computer more than once. You'll
find that only one window with that name appears, but a new
window opens each time you use the Run option to execute the
Explorer command. Again, each new window opens on top of the
previous one. If you drag one to the side, though, you'll see
the previous window hiding beneath it.

Once you're reasonably familiar with all these Explorer switches,
you can drag a few Explorer icons onto the desktop and customize
each one to suit your needs. For example, if you regularly
work within the Windows folder, and especially in the Start
menu area, Alt+click on any Explorer shortcut icon, select
Properties and click on the Shortcut tab. Now type the following
string on the Target line:

Explorer /e, /root,C:\Windows,Start Menu\Programs

For further customization, click on the Change Icon button and
select the open-folder icon, or whatever icon suits you. Then
click on the OK button, on the Apply button and again on the
OK button to close the dialog box. As a final touch, rename
the shortcut as Windows Folder.

The next time you double-click on this customized shortcut icon,
the Explorer Folders pane will show an open Programs folder.
If you scroll to the top of the pane you'll see that its root
object is the Windows folder. In this case, the All Folders
legend at the top of the Folders pane is misleading, because
all folders are not available in the pane. You can access only
the C:\Windows folder and its subfolders. If you try to backspace
your way to a higher level, nothing will happen.

In doing these experiments, you need only type the word Explorer
followed by whatever switches you want. When you press the
Apply button, Windows 95 rewrites the line as C:\WINDOWS\EXPLORER.EXE
but leaves your switches intact. Note that the first switch
is separated from EXPLORER.EXE by only a space, and that a
comma follows each switch. In some cases, you can omit the
comma after the final switch. If you encounter a meaningless
error message while experimenting, it's probably the result
of a punctuation error. Also remember that an object and subobject
are separated by a comma, not a backslash.

Once you get the hang of it, you'll find it's reasonably easy
to create one or more Explorer windows that open to show just
what you want to see. After you find the right switch combination,
just create a shortcut and enter the desired command string
in its Target line area.

If you miss the good old days when File Manager could show multiple
directories within its window, open multiple Explorer windows
and tile them horizontally or vertically. You'll find these
tiling options on the taskbar's Shortcut menu. This isn't as
handy as the old File Manager technique, but it's not necessary
once you get used to the Explorer way of doing things.

Remember too, that File Manager is not dead; it's just sleeping.
To wake it up, just execute winfile via the Start menu's Run
option. And you may want to do just that from time to time,
because the older applet has a few nice features that didn't
make it into Explorer. For example, File Manager gives every
file's actual size, while Explorer reports file size by rounding
up to the nearest 1KB boundary. Thus, Explorer reports files
from 1 to 1,024 bytes as 1KB and a 1,025-byte file as 2KB.
Also, Explorer doesn't reveal file attributes. If you highlight
a single file, Explorer reports its actual size on the status
bar. But if you want to see file attributes, you need to highlight
the file and right-click to display its Properties dialog box.
It's all very elegant, but in this case I think the older style
was more user-friendly.

Spend a little time flipping Explorer's switches, and you may
find less and less need to sneak back to File Manager.

Senior Contributing Editor John Woram is the author of Windows
Configuration Handbook (Random House, 1993). Contact John in
the "Optimizing Windows" topic of WINDOWS Magazine's areas
on America Online and CompuServe, or care of the editor at
the addresses on page 18.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "156"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Getting Started: Whither Goeth, Oh Nobel File?

By:
Jim Boyce

AH, THE GOOD OL' DAYS! Pardon me as I reminisce about the days
of yore when DOS was king and the usurper, Windows 1.x, was
little more than a fumbling court jester. Long dead are the
days when noble, nerdly knights stout of heart and long in
the tooth did battle against the demons of Lost Data and File
Corruption. Oh, to return to those days of magic and wonder
when only the most cryptic of commands would unlock the mysteries
of your computer's hard drive and let you sift through the
file treasures buried within.

Okay, maybe those good ol' days are best left in the Dark Ages
from whence they came. Once I cast off that shroud of fond
remembrance, I recall that using DIR, COPY and SORT to manage
a load of files was as much fun as riding a tired nag into
battle with a broadax and pike, sans the titanium long johns.

In today's battle of the files, Explorer and File Manager are
the only weapons you need. Each makes quick work of copying,
moving and deleting groups of files. For the uninitiated, they
transform file management from an incomprehensible task into
a point-and-click breeze. This month, I'll explain a few ways
you can make File Manager and Explorer easier to use.

Q: I was able to customize the toolbar in Windows for Workgroups'
File Manager, with buttons for displaying files in Size, Date,
Type and Name order. I miss that feature in Windows 95's Explorer.
Although I can do the same thing from Explorer's View menu,
it seems like so many unnecessary steps. Is there another way
to do this?

A: It's certainly helpful to be able to sort files based on
those properties. If you need to free up some space on your
hard drive, for instance, it makes sense to sort files by size.
With the biggest files on top, you can find and delete the
fattest ones first. Unfortunately, Explorer doesn't include
buttons for each option in its toolbar. But there is a quick
way to sort.

First, set Explorer to display a detailed list by choosing View
Details. The Contents pane changes to show a column for each
of the four fields. To sort by a particular characteristic,
click on that field's header. To switch between ascending and
descending order, just click on the header again. If you're
still longing for File Manager, click on the Start button,
choose Run, enter winfile in the Run dialog box and click on
OK.

Q:I'm not sure I understand how Explorer and File Manager decide
whether to copy a file or move it. If I drag a file from the
C: drive to the D: drive, for instance, I've copied the file.
How can I control how the file is handled?

A: In File Manager and Explorer, you can copy and drag files
within the same drive or from one drive to another. In File
Manager, you can drag a file onto a directory in the tree (from
the right pane to the left pane) or onto a drive icon in the
toolbar. In Explorer, you can drag files from the contents
pane to the same drive or a different drive in the tree. Both
programs use the same criteria to determine whether to copy
or move the file. If you drag the file from one place to another
within the same drive, Windows moves the file. Drag the file
to a different drive, and Windows copies the file.

It's easy to control the files you drag in both File Manager
and Explorer. Hold down Shift while you drag files if you want
to move them. Hold down Ctrl as you drag files if you want
to copy them. The same principles apply when you're working
with single-pane windows (folder windows) in Windows 95. For
example, if you hold down Shift and left-drag an object from
a folder to the Desktop, you move rather than copy the item
to the Desktop.

Q:How can I select more than one file at a time? Each time I
click on a different file, the one I previously selected becomes
deselected.

A: This is one of those basic Windows techniques Microsoft tends
to assume you know, but which isn't obvious. To select a single
object (such as a file), just click on it. To select multiple
objects, hold down Ctrl and click on the objects one at a time.
To deselect an object, hold down Ctrl and click on the object
again. To select a range of objects, select the first one in
the range, hold down Shift, and select the last one. All the
objects in between the selections will then be highlighted.

Now the tricky part: What if you have multiple items selected
and also want to choose a range? Just hold down Ctrl and click
on the first object in the range. Then, while still holding
down Ctrl, hold down Shift and click on the last object in
the range. The original set of objects will remain selected,
and the new range will also be selected.

After you've highlighted the items you want to work with, release
Ctrl and Shift, click on any one of the selected objects and
drag it to its destination. The other selected objects will
follow.

Q: I've noticed that in Explorer and in file dialog boxes (like
the Open dialog box), filenames are sometimes spaced widely
apart. The spacing seems to change from one folder to another.
Why is that?

A: When you use the Small Icons or List view in a folder or
in Explorer, the spacing between one column of filenames and
the next is defined by the longest file or subfolder name in
the folder. Windows 95 allocates enough space in each column
to hold the longest name in the folder. So, if the filenames
are short, the columns are close together. But name a file
with a long filename, and the columns get further apart. Unfortunately,
there really isn't anything you can do to bring the columns
closer together other than shorten the longest filenames.

Q: When I open File Manager, most of the directories appear
empty. I know the files are there, because my programs are
still working. What's wrong?

A: File Manager probably is trying to display files only with
a particular file name or extension. Choose View/By File Type
to open the By File Type dialog box. Type *.* in the Name text
box, then place a check in each of the check boxes in the File
Type group. Choose OK or press Enter, and the files should
reappear.

Contributing Editor Jim Boyce is the author of Inside Windows
95 (New Riders Publishing, 1995). Contact Jim in the "Getting
Started" topic of WINDOWS Magazine's areas on America Online
and CompuServe, or care of the editor at the addresses on page
18.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "157"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Power Windows: Data Backups to Make Mom Proud

By:
Karen Kenworthy

Most Moms Today won't let their kids watch TV until they back
up their computer data. As grown-ups, we have to be careful
not to ignore this lesson ourselves.

Hardware failures are rare, but when hardware goes, it often
takes computer data with it. Everyone knows software is fallible,
too. I'm sure at some point you've watched helplessly as an
errant program consumed several days' hard work. And don't
forget fire, theft and computer viruses. You may even have
heard the rumor about the hapless user who made a mistake and
destroyed data all by himself. It's probably an urban legend,
but it's scary just the same.

Fortunately, storing a recent copy of your computer data safely
away from your computer enables you to recover from all these
disasters with minimal inconvenience and only a slight elevation
in blood pressure. Backing up also has other benefits. When
you copy your data at specific times and save it permanently,
you have an accounting audit trail. Also, copying backups to
tape (or another high-capacity medium) provides a fast, convenient
way to move large amounts of data between computers. A single
6 gigabyte tape sent via overnight mail transfers data as quickly
as a 1 million-baud data link, and is probably more reliable.

Mind your media

As a mom, you may have taught your kids to make backups, but
when it comes to picking a backup medium, you're on your own.
To decide which is best for you, remember your four Cs: compatibility,
cost, convenience and capacity. For most of us, there's no
single right medium, because our backup decisions usually involve
a set of subjective trade-offs that vary from one situation
to another.

Diskettes are no longer the medium of choice. Compared to other
media, they're slow and expensive. Their only remaining advantage
is the near-universal availability of drives that can read
and write them.

Companies like Iomega and SyQuest Technology offer several types
of high-capacity, removable disks that are cheaper and faster
than diskettes, but slower and more expensive than tape. Magneto
optical disks are now entering their second generation. The
first round of products were mostly 128MB or less, but now
256MB and larger disks and drives are appearing.

Removable disks have one big advantage: Most programs can read
data directly from a removable disk.

Once far too expensive, hard disks are now surprisingly affordable.
Plummeting prices have made backup hard disks reasonable choices.
Backing up to a second hard disk has drawbacks, though. First,
most hard disks aren't removable. This makes it tough to protect
backup hard disks from fire, theft and other hazards that threaten
the original data. In addition, hard disk controller failures
and other hardware problems may also corrupt backup, as well
as original, data.

DAT's great

Tape is currently the most convenient and affordable backup
medium. QIC (Quarter Inch Cartridge) drives and tapes are inexpensive
and store fairly large amounts of data. QIC tape drives typically
attach to your computer's diskette controller or to a parallel
port.

If you have lots of data, DAT (digital audio tape) may be your
best choice. These drives are fast, and the tapes hold a lot
of data (4GB or more) at a modest cost (1 to 2 cents per megabyte).
Almost all DAT drives are SCSI devices, so if you don't already
own a SCSI adapter, it'll add $100 to $200 to the cost of the
drive.

Finally, we come to CD-R (Compact Disc-Recordable) discs. Although
you can't write to a standard CD-ROM disc, you can write to
a CD-R disc-once. (Some CD-R devices permit multiple recording
sessions until the disc is full.) After that, you can read
from it using any standard CD-ROM drive. This option is expensive,
though. Several vendors are reportedly working on drives that
will sell for about half the price of current models, but that
still won't close the cost gap between CD-R and tape.

By the way, don't forget that convenience and capacity work
hand in hand. A backup medium with a capacity at least as large
as your biggest hard disk partition makes backing up your data
more convenient. It also makes possible entirely unattended,
timed backups.

If you're using Windows or Windows for Workgroups 3.x, you have
lots of software choices. MS-DOS versions through 6.22 include
a simple program that allows you to store data on diskettes
or other devices that behave like hard disks (such as removable
disks). The most recent versions of this software include advanced
features such as cataloging and compression, and even run under
Windows.

You have lots of third-party choices, too. Almost all tape drives
come bundled with custom backup software designed to work with
a particular drive.

If those programs don't suit you, Symantec offers Norton Backup
3.0. This supports a variety of QIC and DAT drives, as well
as diskettes and other drive-like media. Even some SCSI adapter
board driver software kits, such as Adaptec's EZ-SCSI and Corel
Systems Corel SCSI, include useful Windows-based backup software.

But if you've already made the jump to Windows 95, your backup
software choices are more limited. If you're backing up to
diskette or another disk-like device, the backup software shipping
with Windows 95 may do the job. That software also supports
several popular QIC tape drives connected via a diskette drive
controller. But Windows 95's built-in software doesn't support
SCSI or IDE tape drives. If you're using either of those devices,
you have only two choices as of this writing.

Hewlett-Packard recently released Colorado Backup for Windows
95, which supports all current Hewlett-Packard and Colorado
Memory Systems tape drives. If you're currently using Colorado
Backup software, you're eligible for a free upgrade to the
Windows 95 version through April 1st. You can download it from
HP's BBS (970-635-0650) or its ftp site (col.hp.com/dist/hp
colorado; on the BBS and ftp site, download file CBW95.exe).
The company will also ship you the upgrade for $7.95 (800-469
5150)

The third-party tape backup software on the market is Arcada's
Backup for Windows 95. This program marks the company's first
appearance in the small-network and standalone PC markets.
In addition to supporting almost all SCSI tape drives, Arcada's
Windows 95 software supports most QIC drives (connected via
a diskette controller or parallel port) and IDE tape drives.

You may be wondering why Win95 users need their own backup software.
Why not continue using your trusty DOS and Windows 3.x software?

Most older software appears to work under Windows 95. The program
will run, write data to tape or disk, even compare the data
on tape to the original data on disk, and report success. But
when the time comes to restore that data to your hard disk,
you'll discover that two pieces of vital information are missing
or corrupt.

First, older software can't see or store Win95's long filenames.
So, when you restore a file, you lose the original long filename.
Even if you personally don't use the long filename feature,
Windows 95 itself does. Many important system files and directories
bear long names that older software can't preserve.

The Windows 95 Registry poses another problem for Windows 3.x
based backup software. While Windows 95 is running, this file
is a bit exotic. As you probably know, Windows 95, and applications
developed for it, treat the Registry as a central information
depository. What you may not have heard is that some of that
information is kept in RAM, while other information is generated
on the fly in response to requests.

Programs that aren't aware of the Registry's special nature
will copy the portion of the Registry currently on disk. This
will appear to work, but will result in a file that corrupts
the real Registry when you restore it. By using special Windows
95 API calls to read and write the Registry, backup software
designed for Windows 95 is able to avoid this mistake.

Old backup utilities aren't the only programs that can't see
or preserve Windows 95's new long filenames. Pre-Windows 95
defragging, directory sorting and other low-level disk utilities
have this blind spot, too. Fortunately, the utilities that
ship with Windows 95 make most of this older software unnecessary.

However, in a few cases, the new utilities may not do the job.
The current Windows 95 backup utilities may not support your
backup device. Or you may be using a mass storage device that's
incompatible with Windows 95's standard disk utilities.

If you find yourself in one of these rare situations, take a
look at Windows 95's LFNBK.EXE. This utility allows you to
use your old software and still preserve long filename information.

Contributing Editor Karen Kenworthy is the author of Visual
Basic for Applications, Revealed! (Prima Publishing, 1994)
and the manager of WINDOWS Magazine forums on America Online
and CompuServe. Contact Karen in the "Power Windows" topic
of these areas, or care of the editor at the addresses on page
18.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "158"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Power Windows: The Best of Both Worlds -- Have your old software and 
long filenames, too.

By:
Karen Kenworthy

If you must use an old disk utility that doesn't see or preserve
Windows 95's long filenames, don't despair. LFNBK.EXE allows
those programs to run safely.

It works its magic by stripping all long filename information
from your disk. It also converts a filename's lowercase letters
into uppercase. Once that's done, the disk will look exactly
as all disks looked before Windows 95-every filename will conform
to the familiar DOS 8.3 filename convention. It's now safe
to run your old software because there's no long filename information
for it to lose.

When the old utility is finished, you'll need to restore the
original filename information. Fortunately, LFNBK.EXE tucked
away the needed information in a file (LFNBK.DAT) in the disk's
root directory before stripping it. On request, LFNBK.EXE will
put those original filenames back where it found them, making
the disk ready for Windows 95 again.

To save long filename information in order to make it safe for
a pre-Windows 95 disk utility, follow these steps:

Disable Long Name Preservation for Old Programs "Build a Tunnel
to Long Filenames")

Close all running applications (LFNBK can't process open files)

Open a Windows 95 DOS box, and enter this command: LFNBK /B
 
Restart your computer. If your old disk utility is a DOS program,
restart your computer in MS-DOS mode.

To restore long filename information, once your pre-Windows
95 disk utility has finished, follow these steps:

If necessary, restart your computer to load Windows 95.

Open a Windows 95 DOS box and enter this command: LFNBK /R
Reenable Long Name Preservation for Old Programs.

Restart your computer.

For more information about LFNBK.EXE, read the accompanying
LFNBK.TXT file. You'll find both files on the Windows 95 CD
in the \ADMIN\APPTOOLS\LFNBACK directory. To install it, copy
the LFNBK.EXE to your \WINDOWS\COMMAND directory.

If you have the diskette version of Windows 95, you'll need
to download a copy of the program. You'll find it in the WinMag
forums on America Online and CompuServe, and on the Web at
http://download.windows.microsoft.com/windows/download/lfnb.exe.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "159"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Power Windows: Build a Tunnel to Long Filenames

By:
Karen Kenworthy

Tunneling, a remarkable quantum mechanics phenomenon, occurs
when a particle passes from one quantum state to another without
possessing the energy to leave its current potential energy
well. In effect, the particle tunnels through the potential
energy barrier rather than climbing over it.

What does this have to do with Windows? Tunneling is also a
remarkable trick from Windows 95's developers. This trick allows
old DOS and Windows programs to update files with long names,
without losing the original long filename information.

When applications software updates an existing file, it usually
performs three steps:

1. It gives the old file a new, temporary name.

2. It creates a new file with the old file's original name.

3. It removes the old file, which now sports a temporary name.

If the application program understands and maintains Windows
95's long filenames, all is well. The new file it created in
step 2 will bear the same long filename as the original.

But if an application program doesn't know about Windows 95's
long filenames, something could go awry in step 2. Instead
of long filenames, older programs only see the substitute,
truncated 8.3 filename that Windows 95 assigns. When creating
the new file, the older application will specify the truncated
name instead of the longer version.

But Windows 95 is not so easily fooled. It knows how application
programs behave, and watches for the rename/create/remove sequence.
When it detects this pattern it automatically transfers the
old file's long filename to the new file.

The long filename appears to "tunnel" from one version of the
file to the next.This feature is useful most of the time. But
it can defeat the operation of LFNBK.EXE, which tries to remove
long filename information. That's one reason Windows 95 lets
you disable and reenable tunneling.

To disable tunneling, follow these steps:

1 Double-click on Control Panel's System icon.

2 When the System Properties dialog appears, select its Performance
tab, then click on the File System button.

3 When the File System Properties dialog appears, select its
Troubleshooting tab, then select the Disable Long Name Preservation
for Old Programs check box.

4 Click on OK and restart your computer when asked.

To enable tunneling, follow the same steps but in step 3, remove
the check in the box labeled Disable Long Name Preservation
for Old Programs.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "160"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Networking Windows: System Policies Keep Users in Line

By:
Eric Carr

I KNOW YOU. You think User Profiles are great for keeping novice
users out of trouble, and for preventing more experienced users
from getting in and mucking things up. But you want a more
fundamental level of control-say, at the system level.

You want System Policies. Think of System Policies as overrides
to the local machine's Registry. Stored on the server, System
Policies are downloaded into the local machine's Registry during
log-in. They overwrite the local machine's settings, enforcing
a consistent set of rules for every user who logs into the
network. Whereas User Profiles can make changes to the desktop
settings in the Registry, System Policy settings can alter
the desktop's properties (USER.DAT) as well as the log-in and
network-access properties stored in SYSTEM.DAT. In essence,
System Policies define what properties the user can set.

You create System Policies with the System Policy Editor (SPE),
a graphical tool that presents system settings in a tree format,
much like the hardware components in Control Panel's system
folder. The Editor uses a template file to display (and change,
when necessary) the contents of the Registry. (Mastering template
programming is complex enough to be a university-level course.
See the sidebar "So You Wanna Be a Systems Programmer.")

What price power?

The SPE provides some powerful facilities for controlling what
you can accomplish on a Windows 95 desktop. But this power
doesn't come cheap: You can inadvertently destroy the user's
current configuration if you're not careful about what you
change and what you leave alone. For example, if you suddenly
decide to put a bitmap on users' desktops without warning,
I guarantee you'll get feedback-and it won't all be positive.

Although some power is good to keep chaos in check, you've heard
the saying about absolute power. It's probably not a good idea
to destroy users' efforts to customize desktops unless you
have considerable management backup.

The check boxes in the Policy Editor (in Policy File mode) operate
a little differently than normal. If they're checked, the policy
will be implemented; if they're empty, the policy won't be
implemented. If they're shaded, the setting won't be changed
from the current setting, and Windows 95 won't make any changes
to the existing policy.

For instance, if you suddenly decide everyone should be using
the Microsoft Client for NetWare to connect to your NetWare
server, be sure to select the options to use the Client for
NetWare, as shown in the left-hand screenshot in the sidebar
"Make It Your Policy to Be Shady." That would ensure that everyone
was using the client. Later on during the session, when you
realize not everyone is set up to use this method of network
attachment, your first instinct may be to go back and clear
the check marks, as shown in the center screenshot.

Don't do it. When you clear the check marks, you indicate that
Client for NetWare shouldn't be used; therefore, all the users
who already employ this method of attachment will have their
configurations destroyed the next time they log in and download
the policy into their Registries. Whoops!

The correct response is to click on the boxes until they become
shaded, as shown in the right-hand screenshot. This indicates
the policy remains unchanged from the current setting (the
setting in force when you invoked the Policy Editor)

The moral of the story is: When you have to decide whether to
implement or remove a policy, tread carefully and think about
the ramifications of your actions.

You'll find many more goodies like the SPE on the CD version
of Win95. If you're serious about getting and using all the
features I discuss here, get the CD. You install the Policy
Editor via Windows 95's Add/Remove Programs applet in the Control
Panel. Run the applet, select the Windows Setup tab and click
on the Have Disk button. In the dialog box, choose Browse and
then enter the path to the \ADMIN\APPTOOLS\POLEDIT directory
on the Win95 CD. Click on OK and then on OK again. In the Have
Disk dialog box, check the System Policy Editor option. It
wouldn't hurt to install the Group Policy capability at this
point, so you may as well check that box, too. Group Policies
are applied to Windows 95 users and machines included in one
or more network groups-either NetWare or Windows NT. Later,
you can install Group Policies using these same instructions.

Restrict access

Finally, click on the Install button. Microsoft recommends you
restrict SPE installation to a small number of users. It's
powerful and could be potentially damaging if used by a lot
of people. Think carefully about who should have access to
this application.

Fire up the Policy Editor to see what's going on by running
the POLEDIT application. The editor operates on each part of
the Registry-the user portion and the computer component-but
not both simultaneously. I don't have the space here to detail
all of these settings, so I encourage you to do some exploring.
Start by selecting File/New. When the default user and computer
icons appear, double-click on either to see the categories
of policies.

You can use the Policy Editor in one of two ways. In Registry
mode, the editor operates directly on the local computer's
Registry. When you open the Registry, you'll note the editor
initially shows only the local user and the local computer.
(I'll deal with remotely connected computers in a future installment.
If you can't wait, read Chapter 16 of the Microsoft Windows
95 Resource Kit to see how to set up and manage remote control
and administration.) When you use the Policy Editor in Registry
mode, just click on the portion of the Registry you want to
set policy for-either the user or the computer. Changes you
make become effective after you restart the machine. Use this
mode with caution, because you could end up making changes
that will affect your machine.

Use the SPE to create policy files you store on the server and
download whenever a user or member of a group logs into the
network. This mode is sometimes called Policy File mode. It
doesn't directly affect the Registry-rather it creates the
file containing directives that are downloaded into the Registry
during the log-in process. I used the Policy File mode in my
earlier example. It permits you to explore the capabilities
without making changes to your Registry. Don't save the file
while you're getting used to the Policy Editor. When you're
ready, though, save it as CONFIG.POL.

Apply the changes to many users

Adding policies for specific groups is a snap. From the Edit
menu, select Add Group. To get a pick list of the available
groups, click on the Browse button and stand back. We did this
on our server in San Mateo and got a huge list of users, groups
and print queues.

You can define only those groups that have been previously defined
within the network operating system. As you might expect, Group
Policies look exactly like User Policies, because groups are
made up of multiple users. To ensure Group Policies are enforced,
install GROUPPOL.DLL on each participating computer in the
group. Do this when you first deploy Windows 95 in a custom
installation script. Or, you can go around to each computer
and do it individually, just as you installed the SPE.

To activate the new policy that you've constructed, copy the
CONFIG.POL file to the server. For Windows NT, place the file
in the NETLOGON directory; NetWare users should place the file
in the PUBLIC directory. Once again, you'll need to be running
the 32-bit client to make this work automatically, but there
are workarounds if you're running another type of client, as
with User Profiles. To configure for manual downloading of
System Policies, edit the local Registry of the machine using
the SPE, as shown in the sidebar "Switch to Manual." Make sure
you specify the complete path and filename for the manual download.

You need to install the SPE on every machine to make some of
these changes. At the very least, you'll need a disk containing
the SPE that you can carry around as you visit different desktops,
or the editor loaded in a secure area of the network that only
you can access. Although these approaches will all work, there's
a more elegant method of managing and controlling remote computers'
Registries-and that's what I'll show you next month.

Contributing Editor Eric Carr is owner of F1, a Mountain View,
Calif.-based consultancy. Contact Eric in the "Networking Windows"
topic of WINDOWS Magazine's areas on America Online and CompuServe,
or care of the editor at the addresses on page 18.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "161"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Networking Windows: So You Wanna Be A Systems Programmer

By:
Eric Carr

Although the System Policies supplied with Win95 are comprehensive,
they don't address the needs that could crop up when you're
deploying a custom or in-house-developed application. For these
requirements, you may need a customized version of the System
Policy template. You can create one using a text editor. This
is not for the faint of heart, but it can be done. The text
below-from the \WINDOWS\INF\ADMIN.ADM file-shows what it takes
to create two small policies. So, dust off your books on structured
programming, bone up on object-oriented terminology and you,
too, can become a systems programmer.

CATEGORY !!Logon

POLICY !!LogonBanner

KEYNAME

Software\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\Winlogon

PART !!LogonBanner_Caption EDITTEXT

VALUENAME "LegalNoticeCaption"

MAXLEN 255

DEFAULT !!LogonBanner_DefCaption

END PART

PART !!LogonBanner_Text EDITTEXT

VALUENAME "LegalNoticeText"

MAXLEN 255

DEFAULT !!LogonBanner_DefText

END PART

END POLICY

POLICY !!ValidatedLogon

KEYNAME Network\Logon

VALUENAME "MustBeValidated"

END POLICY

END CATEGORY




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "162"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Windows NT: NT's Future Looks Bright

By:
John D. Ruley

I'VE POLISHED OFF my crystal ball just in time for the New Year,
so I can bring you the first-ever State of NT report. I've
drawn from Microsoft's public statements, Deep Dark's and other
confidential sources' whisperings, and other industry information.
It's guaranteed to be as accurate as possible-meaning somewhere
between blind guesswork and gospel truth.

Let's start with 1996. First, we'll see public demos of the
next NT product, Microsoft's Shell Update Release (SUR). Microsoft
has already shown it at Networld/Interop, and I'll bet that
by now we've seen more of it at Fall Comdex. Aside from the
Windows 95-style Explorer interface, we'll see other features
in the SUR (see "The Big SUR")

Once Microsoft releases SUR, we'll see new NT/Back Office products
from the company. Among these will be the Gibraltar Internet
server, maybe Microsoft's Catapult Firewall, the much-anticipated
Exchange messaging server and a new version of Systems Management
Server (SMS) with secure remote control for NT clients. (Deep
Dark tells me this may turn up in a Service Pack to SMS 1.1).
These pieces will be integrated into the obligatory new version
of Microsoft's Back Office bundle, which should appear around
the third quarter. By that time, developers should see Cairo
related developmental betas: Network OLE, Object File System
(OFS) and Distributed File System (DFS)

Further ahead: 1997

Here's where I go out on a limb. Look at the calendar, consider
everything I've just mentioned and think about something Deep
Dark once said ("If we can't ship a new release by Comdex,
we can't ship it by the end of the year!"). I can't see Microsoft
shipping even a beta version of Cairo this year. Developers
will get an early peek, but even they won't get a full operating
system beta until January 1997. It may take that long just
to merge OFS and DFS into a single file system.

Slipping to 1997 means Cairo should have no trouble integrating
all the anticipated major features: Plug-and-Play support (which
will make possible a new spate of hot-swappable peripherals
for network servers), Kerberos networkwide security and cluster
support integrated directly into the NT kernel (jointly developed
by Microsoft and Digital). By then, the Windows 95 team will
have a new version of its OS with Network OLE support in place
to act as a Cairo client. There should be another round of
new server-side products by then, but I have no idea what they'll
be.

A look back at 1995

It's interesting to look back at what seemed important last
January. The PowerPC topped everyone's list. Even Microsoft
called NT 3.51 the PowerPC version. What impact has the PowerPC
made on NT to date? CompuServe provides an interesting answer.
Since August, users have downloaded a minuscule percentage
of files for this and other RISC platforms.

Lesson: PowerPC, and RISC platforms as a whole, represent an
insignificant percentage of NT desktops (Shell Technology Preview
is a desktop-oriented file). They represent a greater portion
of NT Servers, but they're still a minority. PowerPC has merely
split the already small RISC pie among three players instead
of two. The big loser in that split has been Mips Technologies,
which was the first RISC architecture NT supported.

This is a pity. Many people-including me-had high hopes that
NT's RISC platform support would bring some badly needed competition
into the microchip market, but it didn't happen.

Something else that didn't happen in 1995 was the expected flood
of 32-bit Windows applications for both Windows 95 and NT.
Microsoft could point to its InfoSource CD-ROM, which lists
more than 4,000 Back Office-compatible products-75 percent
of which run on NT and are presumably 32 bit. But most of those
are specialized-looking for word processors and spreadsheets
still turns up only two products each. (I'm writing this before
Fall Comdex, so there could be a surprise batch of end-of-the
year products. If that's the case, vendors are being awfully
quiet.)

WINDOWS Magazine's senior technical editor Dave Methvin found
out why while he was working on Wintune 95 (downloadable from
our areas listed on page 18 and available on the WINDOWS Magazine
CD-ROM). This test and tune-up kit is a Win32 application targeted
at Windows 95 and designed to run on NT as well. Dave found
Win32 development to be more difficult than he expected. The
current Win32 SDKs are buggy, and the documentation is incomplete.
Many incompatibilities exist between NT and Win95, and as I
write this, Microsoft is still changing guidelines for Win95
developers-a good two months after Win95 shipped. I'm hoping
these problems will be cleared up in 1996.

In other news

The NT 3.51 Resource Kit is finally about to ship and should
be available by the time you read this. I still haven't gotten
a copy. I'm expecting NT script support for both PERL (the
scripting language used by World Wide Web servers) and REXX
(popular with OS/2 folks), along with improved versions of
several popular NT utilities, which I hope include a better
DNS implementation. Multiprotocol Router might ship in the
resource kit, but I doubt it. Microsoft is also offering Service
Pack #2 for NT 3.51, which fixes yet more bugs. The company
has released to manufacturing Back Office 1.5 (NT Server 3.51,
SQL Server 6.0, MS Mail 3.5, SMS 1.1, SNA Server 2.11) and
it should be available by now. Microsoft is also offering Microsoft
Developers Network (MSDN) level III, something new for Back
Office developers. This is basically everything from levels
I and II (all SDKs and access to early Win95 and NT betas),
plus a Back Office suite developmental test version. It's also
a good tool for IT departments.

How not to 

A correspondent who prefers to remain nameless recently pointed
out something I'm not too happy about: Microsoft's Repair Disk
(RDISK) utility for NT doesn't save security information-including
user accounts-when you use it after you install NT. There's
a difference of opinion about whether this is a bug. Deep Dark
said the development group told him this behavior is by design,
but TechNet yielded a product support item (PSS ID Number:
Q126464) that reports it as a bug. Both groups agree on the
workaround: Use NT's built-in backup (NTBACKUP) app, with the
option to save/restore Registry data.

Sorry, Deep, but this time I'm with the product support folks.
It's a bug. Users who create an emergency disk on setup, and
then regularly update it using RDISK, ought to expect all their
Registry settings would be restored, including security and
user accounts. Otherwise, what good is it? With the current
setup, using the emergency disk to recover after a server fails
to boot will give you just one account:

Administrator.

Because this information differs from what I wrote in my first
NT Question and Answer file, and in my book, Networking Windows
NT 3.51, I've posted corrected files (NTQA02.ZIP and NETNT02.TXT).
You'll find both in the NT and Windows 95 section of our file
library on CompuServe (GO:WINMAG), AOL (Keyword:WinMag) or
ftp.winmag.com. These files also include answers to the most
common questions, as well as updated information since the
book went to press.

Brilliant and bogus

I recently spent a day at Arbor Software's (408-727-5800, fax
408-727-7140) annual meeting for ESSbase users. This multidimensional,
nonrelational database is aimed at On-Line Analytical Processing
(OLAP). It's expensive-an entry-level setup runs around $43,000
but it can turn trend analysis at a big company from a task
that takes weeks to one that can be completed in minutes. Users
I spoke with, including representatives from ARCO, May Co.
stores, the U.S. Navy, Intel and Microsoft, had nothing but
good things to say about the database. The only bad comment
I heard was from some IT folks who worry about end users trying
to do too much, which is what IT folks usually say. Arbor originally
wrote ESSbase for OS/2, but now supports it on UNIX and NT
platforms.

In the bogus department I hate to do this, but I can't let IBM's
Warp Server beta pass without comment. I haven't spent much
time with it myself, but our assistant technical editor Serdar
Yegulalp did, and his reaction was far from positive. In fairness,
we have to tell you that he did eventually get it installed,
but he described the experience as an "ugly bloody mess." IBM's
"Easy Start" code name seems like a bad joke.

We're also not impressed by the feature set-Warp Server seems
to be a basic bundle that includes file-and-print services
from the old LAN Server product line, Warp itself, LAN Distance
remote access, SystemView system management, a basic backup
application and a print spooler IBM pretentiously refers to
as "Advanced Print Services." Compared with NT Server, the
bundle lacks Macintosh client support and isn't nearly as well
integrated. We were hoping to see IBM bundle in some form of
Notes server, but it's not in the beta Serdar installed. Pretty
bogus, IBM!

Book of the month-and a surprise

The book of the month is A History of Knowledge by Charles Van
Doren (Ballantine Books, 1992, $12.50 softbound). This isn't
a computer-related book, but the final chapter contains some
of the most profound thinking I've ever seen about the computer's
impact on our society.

Now for the surprise. If you haven't already done so, look at
the Info File sidebars in this month's Software First Impressions.
We're reporting platform compatibility for all versions of
Windows, including NT. This is information many of you have
requested. Some of you have also asked for more specialized
high-end coverage. Later this year, you'll find a new section
in WINDOWS Magazine that's aimed at the world beyond the PC
desktop. I'll have a column there, in addition to my usual
Windows NT column. It's going to be a great 1996 for NT.

Editor-at-Large and resident Windows NT expert John D. Ruley
is the principal author of Networking Windows NT 3.51 (John
Wiley & Sons, 1995). Contact John in the "Windows NT" topic
of WINDOWS Magazine's areas on America Online and CompuServe,
or at the addresses on page 18.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "163"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Windows NT: The Big SUR -- Here are some of the features you should see
in Microsoft's Shell Update Release and companion products.

By:
John D. Ruley

Graphics Device Interface (GDI) integrated directly into the
NT kernel. This is Dave Cutler's last shot at making NT run
in 8MB. I don't think he'll make it, but this will improve
performance, so it's worth doing anyway.

An Internet browser built directly into the SUR's shell. This
will be an NT version of Microsoft's Internet Explorer browser
for Win95, which is currently on beta at Microsoft's Web site
(www.microsoft.com). You may still want to keep Netscape handy,
but having a browser built right into the shell is convenient.

The long-awaited Windows 95-style Telephone API (TAPI) and associated
modem driver. We'll finally be able to use NT as a client to
the Microsoft Network. The modem driver will be either Unimodem
or a hack using NT Remote Access Services to give NT equal
capabilities.

A new Multiprotocol Router either built into NT Server or available
as an add-on. As I write this, it's in public beta on the MSNET
forum on CompuServe. It fills in one of the last places where
NetWare has a feature NT lacks. Combined with RAS, it should
significantly enhance NT Server's capability in WAN environments.
(Editor's Note: At press time, Microsoft released a version
of the Multiprotocol Router for NT Server in NT 3.51 Service
Pack #2.)

NetWare file/print emulation (FPNW) and a NetWare Directory
Service Manager (DSMN). The former is now shipping as an add
on for NT Server 3.51; the latter is in beta. Together, these
products facilitate bringing NT Server into a NetWare environment.
They enable you to use existing NetWare client software without
any modification, and administer both NT Server and NetWare
servers from a single graphical interface. Microsoft is also
experimenting with dedicated telephone support for users converting
to NT Server from NetWare (800-833-9264). The promotional price
is $75 per call.

Microsoft's new DirectX low-level game API and other Win95-specific
APIs for NT Workstation. Future Win95 versions will get more
of the NT APIs. In the short term, this means DOOM for Windows
95 should run on NT as well. In the long run, it means a new
generation of high-performance graphics in business applications
like videoconferencing and presentation graphics can be developed.

Unified administration tools in NT Server. This one's chancy.
It's based on an off-the-cuff comment from a Microsoft contact,
but NT's administration tools are due for a face-lift. I'm
hoping for something similar to the Starfighter tools introduced
in SQL Server 6.0-a single, integrated management interface
with OLE Automation support. That would allow an administrator
to use Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) as language to write
management scripts.We'll get this eventually, but maybe not
in the SUR.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "164"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Programming Windows: Better the Devil You Know

By:
Martin Heller

IN PARADISE LOST, Milton tells the tale of a rebellion in heaven
led by Lucifer, one of the brightest archangels. The revolt
fails, and when the rebel and his followers are cast into the
pit, he reflects:

"Here at least

We shall be free 

Better to reign in Hell,

than serve in Heav'n."

Now, you may not agree with me, but I've long thought Lucifer
got a bad rap. Think about it: How much free will does an angel
have? Could Lucifer have opposed God if it hadn't been God's
will? Didn't Lucifer's opposition cause God to kick Adam and
Eve out of that stifling Paradise and into the world where
they belonged? Wouldn't it all have been too boring for words
otherwise?

Although he's certainly the archetype, Lucifer isn't the only
case of demonization on record. Take Microsoft-and more specifically,
Bill Gates. Many imagine Bill to be Satan, reigning in hell
with his 12,000-odd minions, instead of a nerdy Harvard dropout
hacker with a strong sense of competition, an ability to see
the obvious, and a lot of good luck and perseverance. They
view Microsoft as a unified demonic hierarchy, operating with
a single malicious mind, instead of a mixed collection of fairly
bright, underpaid people all with different agendas, trying
to operate as well as they can in a state of ever-changing
goals and e-mail overload.

These same people buy Microsoft products-sometimes with justification,
sometimes without. It's as though the old adage about nobody
losing his or her job buying IBM has shifted to refer to Microsoft.
I wouldn't lose my job talking about word processors and spreadsheets,
but what I really know about are development tools. Usually,
when I ask Win32 programmers which C/C++ compiler they use
and which they want tools for, they say "Microsoft."

I'm not as sure. Readers, especially beginners, often send me
e-mail requesting advice. After "What's the best language for
a beginning programmer?" (Answer: "It depends"), the most common
question is "What's the best C++ compiler?" That answer is
also "It depends," although the parameters are slightly different.

I currently recommend four C/C++ compilers for Windows platforms,
from Microsoft, Borland, Watcom and Symantec. One salient point
is that all but Borland's come with essentially the same class
library, MFC (Microsoft Foundation Class). So if you hate MFC,
or love Borland's Object Windows Libraries (OWL), buy Borland.
If you love MFC, buy one of the other three. Typically Microsoft's
MFC version is slightly newer than Watcom's and Symantec's,
but that only matters when something you need right away is
added to the class library.

In addition, Microsoft offers the only compiler that's supported
on RISC platforms for Windows NT. That cross-platform strategy
appeals to a lot of people, and certainly convinced me for
awhile. But I no longer think it's terribly important. Except
in specialized areas such as engineering, software sales on
Intel platforms far outweigh sales on RISC platforms like Mips,
Alpha and PowerPC. Because Windows 95 is Intel-only, Intel's
dominance will most likely continue. In addition, the power
of the P6 processor will make it awfully hard for the others
to continue to compete on performance, despite all the advantages
inherent in RISC designs-small dies, low cost and so on. I'm
not saying you should ignore the market for Win32 applications
on RISC machines, but it isn't a life-or-death consideration.

From a performance standpoint, Watcom has consistently been
my pick among compilers. There are always specific things each
compiler does a little better than the others. I haven't had
a chance to do a scientific comparison, but Watcom still appears
to hold an edge on code optimizations. On the other hand, Watcom's
previous reliance on cryptic command-line interfaces has historically
produced an overall development package only a seasoned hacker
could love.

Keep it simple

That's changed in Watcom C/C++ 10.5. The company has cleaned
up its development environment a bit and added Visual Programmer,
an excellent visual development tool that generates MFC code.
Visual Programmer is a stripped-down version of WindowsMaker
Professional, licensed from Blue Sky Software. Symantec has
also shipped Visual Programmer with its compiler.

Visual programming has its pros and cons. It's flexible, and
it's productive if the user interface is the most important
part of the application. On the other hand, visual programming
can isolate you from the underlying code, and sometimes the
simpler approach is just as effective. For 90 percent of the
programs I've worked on, I've found generating the application's
user interface with Microsoft's wizards or Borland's assistants
works well and gets me to the meat of my programming in under
an hour.

In its latest compiler, Visual C++ 4.0, Microsoft has made a
number of productivity improvements that raise the bar for
its competitors. The most important involve code reuse. The
new Component Gallery is a stab at a code repository. The ability
to create and use OLE controls complements the ability to create
and use C++ classes. Resource templates let you reuse dialog
designs and other resources. The ability to create custom AppWizards
allows you to capture and distribute your own experience and
standards. Finally, for those of you who like to prototype
in VB, the VC++ dialog editor can now import Visual Basic forms
within limits.

Microsoft has addressed many of VC++'s shortcomings. The latest
version's development environment offers the option to rebuild
only files really affected by a header change. It also sports
more convenient debugging, a beefed-up editor, incremental
compilation and improved incremental linking. You no longer
need to compile to browse your code by classes and functions.
You can finally create an OLE control container as well as
an OLE control. The memory allocator-the cause of the "out
of virtual memory" problem first made public in this column
last July-has been completely rewritten.

Many enhancements have been made to MFC. For example, the classes
for OLE controls have been integrated with the rest of the
framework-there's no longer a separate OLE control development
kit. And the support for OLE controls and their containers
is built right into the CWnd class. An OLE control in a window
is treated as a special kind of child window. You can create
an OLE control dynamically using CWnd::CreateControl or statically
from a dialog template, with support in the dialog editor for
placing OLE controls in dialog templates just like any other
kind of controls.

Along the same lines, two new classes encapsulate the OLE common
dialogs for setting up printed pages and modifying the properties
of OLE objects-CPageSetupDialog and COlePropertiesDialog. Similarly,
new classes are provided for all the Windows 95 common controls
(see "A Glossary of Common Controls")

The list, tree and rich edit classes are a bit complicated to
use by themselves, so the following view classes have been
added: CListView, CTreeView and CRich- EditView. What's the
sample program for the CRichEditView class? WordPad!

The common controls aren't the only Win32 enhancements to MFC.
It finally has real support for multithreading, in the form
of synchronization object classes, to supplement the existing
thread-creation functions and classes. Synchronization object
classes provide an interesting alternative to separate synchronization
objects. You can add the synchronization objects a class needs
as data members, add the synchronization code needed to the
class member functions and have a thread-safe class ready to
drop in place without further ado. This ease of use, however,
sometimes comes at a cost to runtime speed.

Database heaven

MFC has finally gotten new classes for Data Access Objects (DAO)
in other words, classes to allow C++ programmers to use the
same Jet database engine as Visual Basic and Access. Until
now, the MFC database classes have been limited to using ODBC
drivers, and until now the ODBC drivers have been slower than
molasses in January.

The claim is that ODBC drivers are now much faster. I haven't
had a chance to test them, but there was certainly plenty of
room for improvement. The DAO classes are reputed to be faster
than ODBC classes when using MDB (Access format), dBASE, FoxPro
and Paradox databases; Excel and Lotus spreadsheets; and text
files for data. The DAO classes-and the underlying Jet engine
can also use ODBC drivers, but this generally adds overhead
and slows things down. The only advantage of using DAO is that
the Jet engine can perform heterogeneous joins, which can be
a big help when you're trying to build a table from multiple
data sources.

Building a DAO application with VC++ works much like building
an ODBC. You start with AppWizard, select DAO database support
and pick a database. AppWizard knows only about MDB files,
so if you want to use another kind of database at this point
you need to attach it to an Access database. You have the option
of selecting a snapshot, dynaset or table for your recordset.
You also have the options to detect dirty columns and bind
all columns.

Once you've generated your code you can use the dialog editor
to design a data-entry form, and ClassWizard to bind controls
on the form to fields in your recordset. You can use list boxes,
combo boxes or grid controls to add browses, and you can populate
them from appropriately filtered and sorted recordsets.

It'll take me awhile to absorb this, but at first examination
I'd say that DAO turns VC++ into a fairly serious database
development tool right out of the box, with no need for third
party libraries or drivers. I doubt Oracle is worried, but
some of the less-secure database tool vendors might well consider,
to paraphrase Milton, wheth'r th' Almighty, who hath now built
here for his envy, might yet drive us hence.

Senior Contributing Editor Martin Heller lives between heaven
and hell in a place called Andover, Mass., with his wife, one
remaining cat and four children. In his spare time, Martin
likes to program computers. Contact Martin in the "Programming
Windows" topic of WINDOWS Magazine's areas on CompuServe or
care of the editor at the addresses on page 18.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "165"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Programming Windows: A Glossary of Common Controls -- New MFC classes 
for the Windows 95 common controls.

By:
Martin Heller

Control Normal Use

CAnimateCtrl This class displays successive frames of an Audio
Video Interleaved (AVI) clip during a lengthy operation.

CHeaderCtrl This resizable button appears above a column of
text, allowing you to display more or less information in the
column.

CHotKeyCtrl Create a hotkey with this window.

CImageList Manage sets of icons or bitmaps.

CListCtrl Display a collection of items, each consisting of
an icon and a label.

CProgressCtrl This is a progress bar.

CRichEditCtrl Include embedded OLE objects, and enter and edit
text with character and paragraph formatting within this window.

CSliderCtrl This is a trackbar.

CSpinButtonCtrl Control up-down movement.

CStatusBarCtrl This status bar resembles the MFC CStatusBar
class.

CTabCtrl MFC class CPropertySheet is similar to this tab control.

CToolBarCtrl This button bar resembles the MFC CToolBar class.

CToolTipCtrl Implement a small pop-up text window that describes
the purpose of a toolbar button or other application tool.

CToolBar This class implements its own tool tips.

CTreeCtrl The Windows 95 Explorer uses this tree view.

New DAO classes:

CDaoWorkspace This class defines an open session, contains databases
and provides a mechanism for multidatabase transactions.

CDaoDatabase Here, a single database connection is represented.

CDaoTableDef This represents the schema of a database. Unlike
the ODBC classes, the MFC DAO classes let you manipulate your
database schema. You can create and delete fields and even
create and delete indexes.

CDaoRecordset Select one or more columns from rows of one or
more database tables, as well as the field values for the current
record. A recordset is often the result of a query, represented
by a CDaoQueryDef.

CDaoException Handle unexpected conditions in the database.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "166"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Hot Picks: Stormy Weather

By:
Donna Tapellini

The wind whistles, trees bend and debris flies. Weather buffs
and storm chasers will love the great storm videos in the Everything
Weather CD-ROM, created by the Weather Channel. View footage
of blizzards and notorious hurricanes, including a 1938 New
England storm. Also on the CD are storm chasers' homemade tornado
videos, and full-color photos of lightning and other weather
phenomena. Customizable weather charts provide a variety of
climatic data, from heaviest thunderstorm activity to highest
temperatures and most snowfall.

$49.95 (street). Bureau of Electronic Publishing, 800-828-4766,
201-808-2700 x152. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "167"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Hot Picks: Drive Time

By:
Eileen McCooey

Looking for new wheels, or just wish you were? Cruise through
Popular Mechanics Car Guide, 1996 edition, and get up to speed
on more than 7,500 new and used cars, trucks, vans and recreational
vehicles. The CD has complete specs and pricing (including
dealer invoice), user satisfaction ratings, buying tips, pointers
on loans and leasing, and more. Search for specific criteria
say, four-door sedans priced under $20,000-then compare the
prospects side by side. And check out the car of your dreams
in a rainbow of colors!

$30 (street). Books That Work/Hearst New Media, 800-242-4546,
415-326-4280. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "168"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Hot Picks: Job Lists You Can Bank On

By:
Paul Silverman

If you're tired of wading through the want ads in search of
that perfect job, throw out the Sunday paper and boot up Adams
JobBank. This 10-diskette database includes more than 15,000
employer profiles, placement agencies and job lines that you
search by industry, state or position. Search results include
company descriptions, benefits, contact names and phone numbers,
common positions and required backgrounds for prospective employees.
The program also offers interview, r sum and cover letter advice,
as well as access to Adams' online postings and career center.
$39.95 (street). Adams Media Corp., 800-USA-JOBS, 617-767-8100.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "169"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Game of the Month: Ready, Set, Go!

By:
Ian Etra

Sometimes the simplest ideas make the best games. It may be
just a simple card game, but Set has won seven best game awards
and recognition by Mensa. The "cards" in Set have symbols with
four features: shape, color, number and texture. The goal is
to pick sets of three cards based on a single-but subtle-rule
 Each of the four features must be the same on all three cards,
or different on each card. Think it sounds too easy? Set forces
your brain to perceive patterns in a new way, and several variations
keep you on your toes. Play solo, against the computer, with
another player via modem or with up to nine others on the same
PC. While Set may not have the glamour or visuals of the latest
CD-ROM titles, it will keep you coming back for more (and it'll
give you a better mental workout than Minesweeper)

$24.95. Set Enterprises, 800-351-7765, 602-837-3628. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "170"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Hot Picks: Tickle the Ivories

By:
Jim Forbes

Help a budding Beethoven learn music with the Piano Discovery
System. Bundled with a MIDI keyboard that attaches to your
computer, this CD uses activity-oriented software that teaches
basic music as well as fundamental keyboard techniques. The
interface uses a town square, in which you visit various buildings
to learn and be entertained. You can also compose and record
your own music. $199. Jump Music, 800-BUY-JUMP, 415-917-7460.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "171"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Hot Picks: Picture This

By:
Diganta Majumder

Photo Op uses not just 350 photographs but numerous audio and
video clips to document the work of Pulitzer Prize-winning
photojournalist David Hume Kennerly. The marketing on this
CD is a little overdone-even brief captions are accompanied
by lengthy sales pitches. Still, this is a vivid portrait of
the past 30 years. It presents events ranging from the Vietnam
War to the Simpson trial and personalities from Mikhail Gorbachev
to Whoopi Goldberg. $24.95. Portland Software, 503-636-6026,
fax 503-636-6039. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "172"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Hot Picks: Compelling Rappelling

By:
Tom Ponzo

Are you a rock-climbing daredevil? Are you challenged and awed
by mountains and rock formations that make you question your
inner strength? Rock Climbing will ease the initial fears of
making that first climb, bringing you to the pinnacle of this
fast-growing sport in no time. Rock Climbing starts at the
mountain's base and takes you through the identification and
proper use of the equipment necessary to get you to the top.
Based on the book Mountaineering: The Freedom of the Hills,
this CD-ROM provides eight to 10 hours of lessons on conquering
overhangs, climbing steep faces, taking advantage of cracks,
navigating cor- ners, rappelling, implementing safety techniques
and leading a climb.

$49.95. Media Mosaic, 800-972-3766, 503-225-1988. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "173"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Book of the Month: Inside Windows 95

By:
Lori L. Bloomer

No less than seven million copies of Windows 95 flew off the
shelves in the five weeks after the operating system's release.
Although some buyers are new to the Windows environment, others
are power Windows 3.x users looking to make a quick transition
to the new platform. It seems like most upgrade manuals are
for beginners-unless you count Inside Windows 95. Written by
WINDOWS Magazine contributing editor Jim Boyce, this thick
tome is geared toward the intermediate-to-expert user. It offers
hints and tips that experienced users will want, while sparing
many of the intricate explanations that populate beginner-level
books. It comes with a CD-ROM of Win95-compatible software.
Boyce's book will help you quickly become the Windows pro you
were in the "old days."

1,083 pages. $40. New Riders Publishing, 800-428-5331, 317-581
5884. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "174"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Snapshots

By:
Tom LaSusa

Famous typing instructor Mavis Beacon will help you brush up
your typing skills for only a few dollars. Version 4.0 of Mavis
Beacon Teaches Typing adds a 3-D interface to the tutoring
product, as well as content from classic books, power spelling
and vocabulary, and enhanced artificial intelligence for better
skills analysis. $40 (street). Mindscape, 800-234-3088, 415
897-9900. 

It's a bird it's a plane it's Comic Creator! Your kids can design
their own comic strips using original heroes and villains,
and the provided backgrounds. The software comes with character
histories and story ideas, or kids can develop their own. After
they've created their masterpiece, they can even share their
comics on the Internet with a bundled Netscape Navigator. $39.95.
Hearst New Media and Technology, 800-685-4026, 212-649-2818.


SimIsle, Missions in the Rainforest is the latest member of
the popular Sim games family. This time, you're working to
save the threatened sanctity of the rain forests and all its
creatures, great and small. You deal with everything from natural
disasters to drug producers in order to maintain the exotic
islands' delicate economic and ecological balance. Game play
is enhanced with 3-D viewing, and actual tropical video and
sound effects. $39.95. Maxis, 800-52-MAXIS, 510-933-5630. 


Midisoft Braveheart, the CD-ROM, explores both the recent movie
and the actual struggle for independence in 13th-century Scotland.
The program looks in-depth at the lives of the nobility, peasants,
culture and art of the era. Follow animated reenactments of
famous battles and view footage of warrior Mel Gibson from
the motion picture. You can also assemble your favorite video,
photos and artwork into a personalized slide show. $49.95.
Midisoft Corp., 800-776-6434, 206-391-3610. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "175"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Here's How: Hire a Web-Building Team

By:
Julie R. Blumenfeld

You already know how to build your own World Wide Web site (see
"Step-by-Step to a World-Class Web Site" in the July 1995 issue
of WINDOWS Magazine), but you don't want to go through the
expense of buying a server or the hassle of finding an access
provider.

Internet presence providers are the answer. Yahoo has created
a new section for them, and at press time the section already
had 2,100 entries. You can get there by going to http://www.yahoo.com
Business_and_Economy/Companies/Internet_Presence_Providers.

Presence providers give you everything you need to get your
Web site up and running, and they come in all shapes and sizes.
Some work as consultants to help you build and market your
site; others offer inexpensive server space rental and Web
development; and some even furnish all of the above.

With Yahoo's new list, you can browse the providers' sites to
find the one that best suits your needs. Most offer examples
of the pages and services with which they're affiliated. You
can also

e-mail the affiliated sites' Webmasters to see if they're satisfied
with the provider. It's a great way to keep from getting tangled
up in the Web.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "176"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

New on the Net: Go on a Virtual Job Hunt

By:
Julie R. Blumenfeld

Tired of pounding the pavement? Take your job search online.
Employment sites are cropping up all over the Web to bring
job candidates and employers together. Here are some of the
offerings:

The Monster Board http://www.monster.com

Post your resume or browse more than 50 job-listing categories.

E-Span Interactive Employment

Network

http://www.espan.com

This searchable job library has more than 3,500 openings with
1,700-plus employers.

Career Mosaic

http://www.careermosaic.com

Along with its J.O.B.S. database, this site provides a Usenet
search and an entry-level section.

Tech Careers

http://techweb.cmp.com/techweb/techweb/careers/careers.html

This resource offers technical job listings, salary surveys,
search engines and links to related sites.

Intellimatch

http://www.intellimatch.com

Fill out and post your structured resume, and employers will
evaluate it using profile-matching software.

Online Career Center

http://www.occ.com

Enter your resume in HTML at this not-for-profit site. Include
color, pictures, graphics and links.

Winmag Online Locations

America Online (Keyword: WinMag)

CompuServe (GO: WINMAG)

WWW (http://techweb.cmp.com/win/current/)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "177"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Windows Online: Online News

By:
Julie R. Blumenfeld

- America Online has introduced Picture Place (Keyword: Pictureplace),
a new service that lets users submit prints, slides or negatives
for digitization and delivery online within 24 hours. n The
World Yellow Pages Network (http://www.wyp.net) has placed
the Yellow Pages for the entire U.S. on the Web. Directories
for other countries are in the works. n CompuServe is testing
a combination of online and wireless technologies that will
allow members to send e-mail to other members' numeric or alphanumeric
pagers. n As part of its ongoing development, AT&T Interchange
has added Web access from within the service.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "178"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Windows Watch: Know What Works with Win95

By:
Julie R. Blumenfeld

Thinking of upgrading to Windows 95, but nervous that your current
hardware and software won't work? Before you buy, go to Microsoft's
Web site (http://www.microsoft.com/windows/thirdparty.htm)

to find out what works with Win95 and what doesn't. You can
download complete lists of hardware and software compatible
with the operating system. The hardware list is 142KB; the
software list, 188KB. You'll also find information about the
Microsoft Plus Pack and products designed specifically for
Windows 95.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "179"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Winmag Online: Have We Ever Covered ?

By:
Julie R. Blumenfeld

You no longer have to e-mail us to find out if we've covered
certain products or topics; all you have to do is search our
issue library on the Web. We've implemented a search function
that uses O'Reilly & Associates WebSite software. You'll find
the WinMag search engine at http://www.winmag.com/library/.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "180"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Recommended Downloads -- Superior Shareware


Available on America Online (Keyword:  WinMag), CompuServe (GO:  WINMAG) and
the World Wide Web (http://techweb.cmp.com/win/current)

Program Name/Description                    Registration        File Info

AMF Daily Planner and PIM 5.0:          $21.95 (upgrades $15)   WPIM.ZIP
There have been lots of changes to      Andrew M. Freeman       1.23 MB
this program since we last reviewed     P.O. Box 189
it (Superior Shareware, January 1995).  Holbrook, NY  11741
Its system-wide hotkeys, additional
fields, called ID and WinCIM e-mail 
support make it an affordable alternative
to retail power PIMs.

Dear Diary 3.0:  You can record      $19.95 (+3.95 shipping)   DIARY.ZIP
64KB of entries per day in this      Q&D Software Development    738KB
daily-journal program. It features   10B Sentinel Court          Requires:
password protection, text search     Chatham, NJ  07928         VBRUN300.DLL
and database compression. View
a record for a specific day using
the calendar window, or print a
range of entries by date using 
this version's improved printing 
capabilities.

Flute 1.5:  Record mouse and key-     Freeware             FLUTE.ZIP
board actions using a proprietary     Working Tile         692KB
programming language that supports    59 Copeland Avenue   
DDE and OLE automation. You can       Mirehouse, Whitehaven
then edit, rearrange or augment the   Cumbria, CA28 9HZ England
resulting scripts with more sophis-
ticated commands. Flute comes with
several sample scripts to get you started.

METZ Stop for Windows 95: Finish   $5 (+$5 shipping)        METZSTOP.ZIP
what you start with METZ Stop for   METZ Software           141KB
Windows 95. Click on this app in    PO Box 6699             Requires:
the taskbar to shut down, restart   Bellevue, WA  98008     Windows 95
log off or open a dialog box with 
the above options. METZ also 
accepts command-line arguments
for controlling Win95 from a 
scheduler.

Mr. Burns 1.0:  This app runs      $69.95                     BURNS100.ZIP
discreetly in the background to    Esm Software c/o Mr. Burns 126KB
monitor which applications are     PO Box 176   
launched and how long they've      Pierrefonds, Quebec
been open. You can track your      H9H 4K9, Canada
own PC or online use, monitor 
unauthorized access to your machine 
or install the app on an employee's 
computer to encourage productivity.

OsoSuite 1.1:  This shareware suite   $75                     OSOSUITE.ZIP
combines six oh-so-good OsoSoft       OsoSoft                 693KB
programs. It includes the latest      1472 Sixth Street       Requires:
versions of AdMaker, an ad            Los Osos, CA  93402     VBRUN300.DLL
designer; MultiLabel, a label 
designer; Rockford Professional,
a business card creator; Filer, a 
File Manager replacement; Fonter,
a font manager; and the WinClip
clip-art organizer.

PageMaster 1.6:  Go beyond          $49.95 (($69.95 for     PM32.ZIP
sending basic pages to numeric or   e-mail support)         1.26MB
alphanumeric pagers.  PageMaster    Omnitrend Software      Requires:
lets you forward selected e-mail    15 Winchester Court     Windows NT or
from any MAPI-compliant program     Farmington, CT  06032   Windows 95
and send Microsoft Schedule+
reminders. It will also notify you if
a phone line has rung and provide 
caller ID services.

Private Cryptographer 1.25:  Private     $50                  ENCRYP.ZIP
Cryptographer uses a strong              Ivory Tower Software 172KB
encryption algorithm to protect your     Richard Wagner
data from prying eyes. It can view and   4319 West 180 Street
encrypt text files. Clipboard text or    Torrance, CA  90504
entire directories using your chosen 
password.  One caveat: Keying in an
incorrect password for decryption can
cause data loss.

WaveMaker 1.0:  Looking for that     $39                    WAVEMAKER.ZIP
special effect for closing Windows?  Paul Keet              88KB
WaveMaker lets you build sounds      12726 Southridge Drive Requires Windows 95
from scratch by manipulating wave-   Surry, British Columbia  Windows NT
forms. You can add harmonics,        V3X 3C6, Canada
white noise and echoes for more 
complex sounds. The registered 
version can export your masterpiece
to the WAV format.

WebSpace Navigator 1.0 for Win32:    Freeware ($49 for support   WEBSPC10.ZIP
WebSpace lets your Web browser       and online access)          4.16MB
view Virtual Reality Markup Language Template Graphics Software  Requires 
pages on the Internet. You can explore  9920 Pacific Hts. Blvd.  Windows 95 
and manipulate 3-D scenes and objects   Suite 200                or Windows 
with built-in links to other pages and  San Diego, CA  92121     NT, plus Web 
resources.  But you'll need a network                            browser
connection for browsing.

--Compiled by Ian Etra.  Seen any cool shareware?  Contact Paul Silverman at
the addresses on page 18 and we'll send you a mug and T-shirt for each item we
publish.








<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "181"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Recycle Bin: Screen Saver O' the Month



Take the slopes to the office with the North American Ski Area
Screen Saver. This CD-ROM offers trail-map images from 25 major
ski areas across the United States and Canada. There's also
a foldout SkiData Guide with information for planning ski trips.
To see the same data on screen, click on the resort name on
your wallpaper. You can also visit the company's Web site (http
//www.lucky dog.com/skidata/) to hotlink to resorts for current
snow reports, lodging rates and so on.

$19.95. Cylogic, 800-CYLOGIC, 206-283-8800. 




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "182"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Recycle Bin: This Means War!



Hmmm, if this is the type of weaponry you can trade for a 386
or 486, your new Pentium's probably good for a tank.

Submitted by Alan Langley, Plano, Texas.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "183"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Recycle Bin: When is a CD-ROM Not a CD-ROM?


When it's a tape backup drive, of course. Submitted by Roman
Roytfeld, Brooklyn, N.Y., and J. Nelson McLean, Wenham, Mass.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "184"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Recycle Bin: A Miscreant Monitor


Remove your rings before you set your fingers on this notebook's
keyboard. Submitted by Paul F. Murphy, Hinsdale, Ill.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "185"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Recycle Bin: Easter Egg O' the Month


1) Start Excel 95.

2) Scroll down to the 95th row of the spreadsheet.

3) Click A95 (the first cell in the 95th row)

4) Click the 95 row number button to select the whole row.

5) Press the Tab key.

6) Use your mouse to select Help/About Microsoft Excel from
the menu.

7) Hold down Ctrl and Shift and click on the Tech Support button.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "186"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Recycle Bin: EXPRESS ROUTE TO REDUCED PRODUCTIVITY


Save your receipt. When you see how slowly your new Mac runs
Windows 95, you'll want to trade it in for a PC. Submitted
by Kenneth Ong, Bethpage, N.Y.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "187"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ec29.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet
January 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. 

Give us a sign! We're looking for road signs or any signs that

Give us a sign! We're looking for road signs or any signs that
say something funny and meaningful in a Windows PC context.
If you see such a sign, take a picture of it and send the photo
to Nancy A. Lang at the addresses on page 18. We'll send you
a cool WinMag coffee mug and T-shirt for each item we publish.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B34-4</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B029-40</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey16.html 205.156.212.5 19970114225518 text/html 79528
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:52:48 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:55 GMT
Content-length: 79341
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ey16.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>CAR TALK AUTOPSY REVEALS PERILS OF ENDEMIC DISTRUST</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(700 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>EPA'S 1996 AGENDA HOLDS A MIXED BAG FOR REFINERS AND MARKETERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(616 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>EAST COAST ROUNDUP</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>RFG BENEFITS IN ATLANTA MAY BE OUTWEIGHED BY COSTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(293 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>NYMEX CUTS RFG OXYGEN SPEC TO 1.5 WT% YEAR-ROUND</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(245 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>STAR ENTERPRISE & SUBWAY CO-DEVELOPMENT STARTS IN PA & NJ</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(262 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MIDWEST ROUNDUP</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>ETHANOL ATTACKS CONCERN MINNESOTA ATTORNEY GENERAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(174 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>MARATHON EXPANDS RETAIL BUSINESS WITH KEIL BROS.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(77 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>BRIMM SUPPLIES ETHANOL TO CIRCLE K IN IDAHO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(65 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>COUNCIL OF GREAT LAKES GOVERNORS FUNDS ETHANOL RESEARCH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(331 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>GULF COAST ROUNDUP</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>DIAMOND SHAMROCK COMPLETES ITS TENDER FOR NCS CHAIN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(181 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>TOTAL PETROLEUM PUTS ARKANSAS CITY REFINERY UP FOR SALE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(255 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>VALERO CRITICIZES FLAW IN TOXICS RELEASE INVENTORY AND STUDY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(328 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>WEST COAST ROUNDUP</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>CALIFORNIA'S LATEST ESTIMATE SEES ADEQUATE RFG SUPPLY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(252 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>GIANT SELLS E&P TO FOCUS ON REFINING AND MARKETING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(271 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>CHEVRON REORGANIZATION COMBINES OFFICES & CUTS 130 JOBS </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(178 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>IN NEW TECHNOLOGY</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>INDUSTRY DEBATES EFFECTIVENESS OF OXYGENATES IN RFG</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(672 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ALTERNATIVE FUELS UPDATE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>CALIFORNIA CHIPS AWAY AT ELECTRIC VEHICLE MANDATE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(342 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>ILLINOIS PREPARES TO BEGIN VEHICLE INCENTIVE PROGRAM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(225 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>NEVADA CERTIFIES WATER-BLEND AS AN ALTERNATIVE FUEL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(286 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>NEW JERSEY FIRST TO EMBRACE NLEV, BUT RETAINS CONTINGENCY  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(389 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>WASHINGTON ROUNDUP</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>API PETITIONS EPA FOR PHASE II NOX REPEAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(136 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>FIRST CAAA 1990 CHANGE PASSES HOUSE AND SENATE </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(199 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>EPA POSTPONES NOZZLE FLOW RATE DEADLINE FOR SIX MONTHS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(199 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ETHANOL WATCH</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>ETHANOL WATCH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(304 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>IN CNG MARKETS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>INTERNATIONAL JOINT VENTURE TO BUILD NGVS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(520 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MTBE WATCH</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>MTBE WATCH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(756 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ETBE WATCH</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>HOUSE RECONSIDERS TAX INCENTIVE </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(307 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>GASOLINE/DIESEL WATCH</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>GASOLINE/DIESEL WATCH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(420 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>SUPPLY/DEMAND WATCH</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>SUPPLY/DEMAND WATCH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(496 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>STATE INTELLIGENCE PROFILES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>STATE CLEAN AIR PROGRESS RANKED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(630 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ALTERNATIVE FUELS CALENDAR</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>ALTERNATIVE FUELS CALENDAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(95 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>21ST CENTURY FUELS - INDUSTRY SURVEY -</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>SOME FUEL TAXES DROP AT  START OF YEAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(125 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

CAR TALK AUTOPSY REVEALS PERILS OF ENDEMIC DISTRUST

      President Clinton's October 1993 Climate Change Action Plan
established several projects, including "Car Talk," a collaborative
process that was originally designed "to develop measures to
significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions from personal motor
vehicles, including cars and light trucks."  
      Unfortunately, Car Talk was marred by suspicion and distrust
which eventually led to its failure, George Eads told an audience at a
recent seminar, "Car Talk: An Autopsy Report," sponsored by Resources
for the Future (RFF).  Eads is a former Car Talk Committee member and
is now an economic consultant for RFF.
      Many of the groups participating in this failed effort are now
joined in the Common Sense Initiative, the Ozone Transport Assessment
Group and other co-operative ventures that are seeking cost-effective
solutions to environmental problems.
      One of the two committees with input into Car Talk was a
presidentially appointed Advisory Committee of representatives of the
auto industry, environmental community, state and local government and
"others with potential solutions to offer."  
      In growing to include 29 members, that committee was an unwieldy
grouping that included members with only tangential interest in the
issue, said Eads.
      The Advisory Committee was charged with developing
"recommendations on sets of policies that would, if adopted, most
cost-effectively obtain a return to 1990 levels of greenhouse gas
emissions from personal motor vehicles by the years 2005, 2015 and
2025, with no return thereafter."
      However, its efforts were hindered from the start by lack of
trust.   "This theme of lack of trust ran through the Advisory
Committee's entire existence," Eads explained.  "Many had been
adversaries for 25 years or more and were on opposite sides of many
issues even while the Car Talk process was going on." 
      This distrust was compounded by "actions large and small
throughout the life of the Advisory Committee that helped destroy any
spirit of trust that might have begun to grow." 
      A three-way impasse developed that pitted automakers, the
petroleum industry and environmentalists/government officials.  
Automakers refused to support any policy setting automatic "direct"
actions, such as CAFE standards or "feebates."  The petroleum industry
rejected any policy involving gasoline tax increases.  The third
coalition resisted "any policy that didn't support some `direct'
instrument that would, in their view, have provided `certainty' of
fuel economy improvements," Eads said.
      Although a draft final report was issued and members submitted
comments, no final report was produced.  Instead, two groups produced
final statements: 
      (1) Automakers wrote a letter explaining why they could not agree
to the report and attached a version they would accept; and 
      (2) A group of 17 members put together a "majority report," which
they asked the Interagency Steering Goup to submit to the president. 
Subsequently, it was "back to business as usual," Eads said.

Roads Not Taken

      According to Eads, three "roads not taken" could have achieved
some of Car Talk's early goals:
      1. A voluntary commitment towards reducing fuel consumption,
similar to the one set forth on March 22, 1995, in Germany to "reduce
the average fuel consumption of passenger cars and multi-purpose
vehicles produced and sold in Germany by the year 2005 by 25%, based
on 1990 levels."
      2. A pricing mechanism combined with a regulatory backstop, such
as a fuel tax or vehicle miles traveled, which could come into effect
if deadlines were not met.  While this "absolute" form was
unacceptable to automakers, Eads claims that a "conditional" version
could have been adopted.
      3. An agreement to disagree, which outlined areas of general
consensus while acknowledging that some members opposed certain
points.  This did not materialize, however, because of the pervasive
lack of trust among participants as well as member fears that signing
the document could lead to repercussions later on.
      "Collaborative processes, especially ones involving long-time
opponents, require great attention to confidence building.  Confidence
building takes time and the right environment," Eads pointed out. 
Among his recommendations:
      * Long-time opponents must resist temptations to take "cheap
shots."
      * Confidences must be scrupulously observed -- even minor ones.
      * Opportunities must exist for private, off-the-record meetings
      and for activities that are not really threatening but that
      involve some minor degree of risk-taking. 
      * All parties must have interest in seeing projects succeed --
      or, at least, not fail.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

EPA'S 1996 AGENDA HOLDS A MIXED BAG FOR REFINERS AND MARKETERS

   Although U.S. EPA resounded its commitment to streamline and
simplify environmental regulations in its 1996 agenda published in the
Federal Register, the agency will add new rules to its repertoire,
including some that will cost refiners and marketers.  
   Some top items on the list curb heavy-duty vehicle pollution,
finalize emissions trading and review national air quality standards.
   Regulations that could be helpful to refiners include:
   * Emissions trading:  The agency will advance its open-market
emissions trading intended to minimize transaction costs and harness
the power of the marketplace to enhance air quality, the agency said. 
It will issue a final policy and model rule for open-market trading of
ozone smog precursors, primarily volatile organic compounds (VOCs) 
and NOx by June 1996.
   The program promises to provide more flexibility for companies to
trade emission credits without prior state or federal approval, EPA
reported. 
   * New source review: The agency will propose to simplify and
streamline the new source review program, which requires newly built
facilities or those undergoing major modifications to obtain an air
quality permit.  By excluding from the new source program activities
that have very little impact on air pollution, the program is expected
to save the industry at least $6 million per year, the agency
reported. 
   * Compliance-assurance monitoring program:  EPA is planning to
propose a rule to introduce additional flexibility into its
compliance-assurance monitoring, expected to be completed by July
1996.  A major departure from the agency's "command and control"
tactics, the rule would shift the burden of performance monitoring to
regulated sources, which would also "take proactive steps to minimize
emission exceedences."
   However, other regulations may potentially require significant new
investments by refiners and marketers, such as a national ambient air
pollution review that will likely spark changes in either fuel or
stationary source emission requirements, a more stringent diesel fuel
specification or changes in underground storage tanks.  Regulations
refiners should look out for include:    
   * National ambient air quality:  The agency plans to review the
standards for sulfur dioxide, ozone and particulate matter (PM).  "The
ozone and particulate matter reviews seek to incorporate new
scientific and technical information that has become available since
the last reviews," the agency reported.  Since 1987, when PM was last
reviewed, a growing body of scientific information associates PM with
excessive death rates, even at levels below the existing 24-hour
standard.  "The sulfur dioxide review...is intended to determine
whether further protection for certain exposed individuals is needed."
   * Mobile heavy-duty engine emissions:  EPA expects to issue a
formal rule proposal in February 1996, after issuing an advance notice
of proposed rulemaking Aug. 30 for public comment on requiring
additional nitrogen oxide, hydrocarbon and particulate matter
reductions for heavy-duty highway engines, model year 2004 and beyond.
   * 49-state car: EPA will issue its national low-emission vehicle
(NLEV) program this month.  Tests are underway to determine whether
the 49-state vehicle, modeled after California's, will also require a
California-style fuel that is equally low in sulfur.  Some question
whether the higher national fuel sulfur levels may impair the
catalytic converter and advances on-board diagnostics, such as the
OBD-II systems now under development.
   * Federal test procedures:  Will be developed for motor vehicle
emissions.
   * Toxics Release Inventory:  Expansion of the list of facilities
that must report under the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-
Know law, including oil and gas producers and materials recovery,
among others.  
   * Underground tanks:  Under the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act, EPA expects to issue in December 1996 a final rule to exempt from
hazardous waste management requirements petroleum-contaminated soil,
ground water and debris resulting from underground tank cleanups.  A
temporary exemption for such contaminated media is already in place
and has no sunset date.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

RFG BENEFITS IN ATLANTA MAY BE OUTWEIGHED BY COSTS

   The debate over the use of RFG or low-Rvp gasoline in Atlanta
continued last month, as a BP Oil official noted that the area
considered the federal program but decided against RFG use.
   "When Georgia was considering its fuel options in 1993 and 1994,
two factors influenced its decision against RFG," said Kenneth Alfred,
manager of clean fuels coordination for BP Oil.  "One was a concern
over NOx increases due to oxygenate use, and the other was cost."
   Concern remains that oxygenate use may increase NOx, said Alfred,
even though the U.S. EPA recently changed its thinking on the
relationship between oxygenate use and NOx emissions.  BP agrees with
the American Petroleum Institute that EPA has not proved that there
will be no NOx increases with increased summertime oxygenate use,
Alfred said.  "EPA did not use the appropriate modeling techniques to
reach its conclusions."
   Alfred offered these arguments:
   1.  Phase I Simple Model RFG has no NOx reduction requirement,
giving no assurance that it would help the Atlanta market to cut NOx.
   2.  Georgia air quality authorities recognized that Phase I RFG
would provide no NOx reduction benefits and only marginally more VOC
reductions than Atlanta's summer 7.0 psi Rvp requirement.
   3.  Carbon monoxide benefits are non-germane.  CO emissions are a 
wintertime issue, not a summer concern, and Atlanta does not have a CO
problem.
   While CO is included in modeling programs as an ozone precursor, it
only has a "minor impact" on ozone.  "It is a stretch to use it as a
selling point for RFG in this market," said Alfred.  "The Atlanta
market would be far better served by evaluation and implementation of
local stationary source NOx controls, which have been demonstrated to
be far more cost-effective than mobile source controls."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

NYMEX CUTS RFG OXYGEN SPEC TO 1.5 WT% YEAR-ROUND

   The New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) amended its futures
contract to 1.5 wt% for all 12 months beginning in March 1996.  From
November through February, NYMEX will allow delivery of RFG with an
oxygen content of 2.0 wt%, to be designated "Oxygenated Program RFG,"
but will not consider it a separate contract.
   "In our research, we found the 1.5% minimum oxygen RFG cash market
to be extremely active in New York Harbor," said NYMEX President R.
Patrick Thompson.  "These specifications will not only enable our
contract to reflect retail demand beyond the New York metropolitan
area in the greater Northeast corridor, but also will make it
consistent with the predominant RFG standard nationwide."
   The change will not affect NYMEX's dispute with the state of New
Jersey over the attempt by that state to end its oxy-fuel season this
year, spokeswoman Nachamah Jacobovits said.  New Jersey Department of
Envornmental Protection officials attempted to "cancel" the season at
the last minute without prior EPA approval, which would have cut
oxygen content to 2.0 wt% year-round instead of requiring 2.7 wt% in
the winter.  NYMEX won a suit against the DEP blocking the move, so
NYMEX's higher standard will remain in effect through February 1996.
   Several East Coast states have since ended their oxy-fuel programs,
leading NYMEX to adopt the lower oxygen requirement.  "It will allow
users of the contract to avoid delivery risks associated with changes
to the oxygenated fuels programs within the metropolitan area,"
Thompson said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

STAR ENTERPRISE & SUBWAY CO-DEVELOPMENT STARTS IN PA & NJ

   Star Enterprise and Subway have entered into an agreement in the
fast food company will lease space inside Star Enterprise owned and
operated Texaco-branded System 2000 stations in 26 East and Gulf Coast
states and Washington, D.C. The Subway franchisees will operate full-
menu restaurants on-site.
   Star also announced plans to open Taco Bell franchises in Florida
retail outlets this month.
   The first co-developed outlets to open under the agreement will be
in Pennsylvania and New Jersey.  A Subway linked to a Texaco branded
food mart will open in Allentown, PA in January.  "We expect to open
additional Subway co-developed locations in the eastern part of the
state in the first quarter," said Jay Wetherby, Star Enterprise
district manager.
   A Subway located in a Star Mart opened in November in Millville,
N.J., with another opening in Mt. Laurel, N.J. at the end of December. 
Two additional Texaco-branded Star Mart/Subway combinations will open
in Berlin, N.J. in the first quarter 1996.  While the Mt. Laurel
location seat for 20, other locations will only offer takeout food.
   "New Jersey is a full-service state which means that customers
don't have to get out of their cars to gas up or pay," said Joe
Jantorno, Star Enterprise district manager.  "We, of course, want them
to visit our Star Marts, so we had to find something to that would
motivate them to come inside, especially in the winter months when
everyone would prefer not to leave the warmth of their cars.  We hope
that our alliance with Subway will be a good incentive to get
customers inside."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

ETHANOL ATTACKS CONCERN MINNESOTA ATTORNEY GENERAL

   Minnesota Attorney General Hubert H. Humphrey III expressed concern
over radio spots sponsored by Minnesotans for a Fuel Alternative
(MFFA) that questioned the safety and reliability of ethanol use in
small engines.
   "What is in the best interest of the petroleum industry is not
always in the best interest of Minnesota," Humphrey said.  "What is in
Minnesota's best interest is the air we breathe; the water we drink,
swim and fish in; our economy; and the health of our children."
   "Amoco's continued attack on the year-round use of oxygenated fuels
is a shortsighted attempt to increase Amoco profits at the expense of
Minnesota's clean air," said Jerry Orr, Executive Director of the
American Lung Association of Hennepin County, MN.
   Although Minnesota does not require a specific oxygenate in its
2.7% oxygenate blend law, ethanol has become the oxygenate of choice
in Minnesota, according to a statement released by the Attorney
General's Office.  Amoco claims that because there are no testing or
blending tolerances in the Minnesota law, MTBE and ETBE cannot meet
the specification.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

MARATHON EXPANDS RETAIL BUSINESS WITH KEIL BROS.

   Marathon Oil Co. has signed a definitive agreement with Kiel Bros.
Oil Co. of Columbus, IN, that increases Kiel's motor fuel business and
extends the Marathon Brand presence in southern Indiana and Kentucky.
   Terms of the agreement were not disclosed.  However, new purchase,
lease and re-branding options to be exercised by Kiel Bros. will raise
its number of Marathon retail units to more than 150.  The supply
agreement between Marathon and Kiel Bros. took effect in December.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

BRIMM SUPPLIES ETHANOL TO CIRCLE K IN IDAHO

   Vancouver-based Brimm Energy Corp.  is now supplying ethanol-
blended gasolines Circle K retail stations in Idaho on a year-round
basis, Brimm said.
   Circle K has 48 retail outlets in Idaho, and more than 2,500
stations across the U.S.  Brimm energy also supplies ethanol to 20
Circle K stores in Western Washington state.  Brimm Energy
manufactures and distributes ethanol in the Northwestern and Rocky
Mountain states.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

COUNCIL OF GREAT LAKES GOVERNORS FUNDS ETHANOL RESEARCH

   Three ethanol research projects were among the ventures receiving
grants from the Council of Great Lakes Governors, the group said.  The
Council, through its Regional Biomass Energy Program (RBEP), will be
providing grants to a total of seven research projects focusing on
developing the region's renewable resources.
   Ethanol research will receive more than 40% of the $323,800 given
by the group, according to Fred Kuzel, director of RBEP.  "Because of
the amount of ethanol produced in this region, the [grants] Steering
Committee has decided to make this research a priority," he said.  The
seven-state Great Lakes Region, which includes Illinois, Indiana and
Minnesota, produces about 800 million gallons of ethanol per year, or
about 57% of the total U.S. production.  Ethanol research projects
funded were:
   "The Application of Waste Sugar Alternative Feedstocks to Ethanol
Production" by Vienna Agricultural Research Center, Illinois
Department of Corrections.  This project, to receive $30,000 from
RBEP, aims to reduce the cost of ethanol production by supplementing
the primary feedstock (corn) with waste sugar from confectioners and
beverage manufacturers.
   "Improved Alcohol Production from Corn Fiber Employing SSF with
Thermal and Ethanol Tolerant Yeasts" by the Laboratory of Renewable
Resources Engineering at Purdue University.  This project, to receive
$60,000 from RBEP, will genetically engineer a strain of yeast culture
that can simultaneously ferment glucose and xylose sugars to ethanol. 
The project will also develop simultaneous sacrification and
fermentation (SSF) technology in a multiple-stage fermentor system for
recycling yeast cells to improve ethanol yield from corn fiber.  The
project is part of a larger on-going research sponsored by Amoco Corp.
and the Consortium of Plant Biotechnology Research. 
   "Bioblended Fuel for Use in Light-Duty Compression Ignition
Engines" by the Automotive Engineering Technology Program at Mankato
State University (MSU).  This project, granted $50,000 RBEP, will
examine the blending of biodiesel fuel with ethanol to form a bio-
blended fuel for use in light-duty, compression ignition engines.
   RBEP sends requests for proposals out in April.  For information
call Kuzel at (312) 407-0177.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

DIAMOND SHAMROCK COMPLETES ITS TENDER FOR NCS CHAIN

   Diamond Shamrock, Inc. (DS) completed its purchase of  National
Convenience Stores Inc. (NCS) on Dec. 18.  DS now owns the entire
equity interest of NCS.  The company plans to integrate the operations
over the next six to nine months and to begin marketing gasoline under
the Diamond Shamrock brand at Stop N Go's gasoline outlets, with all
locations branded by fall 1996.
   The merger agreement includes 661 Stop N Go convenience stores
owned by NCS, for a price of approximately $260 million, or
$27.00/share.  The merger has made DS the Number 1 gasoline marketer
and c-store operator in Texas.
   DS bought all validly tendered shares of common stock and warrants
to purchase NCS common stock on Wednesday, Dec. 13. Representing about
94% of common stock, NCS security holders tendered 1,868,751 shares of 
common stock and 1,097,848 warrants.
   Through its Stop N Go stores, NCS employs about 5,000 people in the
state.  NCS sells gasoline at about 595 of its stores.  DS has over
2,000 branded retail outlets, including 835 Corner Stores.  DS now has
1,500 company-owned convenience stores, 1,300 in Texas.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

TOTAL PETROLEUM PUTS ARKANSAS CITY REFINERY UP FOR SALE

   Total Petroleum Ltd. will close its 56,000 b/d Arkansas City, KS,
refinery if it cannot find a buyer for the facility.  The company just
recently put the refinery up for sale and contracted Smith Barney to
help unload it.  Some confidentiality agreements have already been
signed by interested parties, according to Total President and CEO
Gary Jones.
   The refinery has a low complexity and has been marginally
profitable for five years, Jones said.  "On a stand-alone basis it is
profitable," he said, explaining that the facility does not fit into
Total's strategy of moving "capital investments toward marketing and
logistics.  The balance in the Mid-continent is such that we are
currently long on product." 
   The gasoline and diesel fuel that is produced at the refinery is
sold on the spot market, Jones said.  The  company relies on its
68,000 b/d Ardmore, OK, refinery to supply all of its retail outlets
in Kansas and Missouri, he said.  Total has invested heavily in
upgrading that facility in recent years and no longer needs the
Arkansas City refinery to meet its needs.
   "It is a good refinery," Jones said.  "We haven't invested much in
it in the past few years, but it is in good shape environmentally," he
said, noting that a buyer would have to make some investments to meet
today's more stringent environmental standards.  "This refinery will
fit someone else's needs better than ours."  Should Total be forced to
close the facility, it would become the fifth Kansas refinery to shut
down in the last decade.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

VALERO CRITICIZES FLAW IN TOXICS RELEASE INVENTORY AND STUDY

   Valero Energy Corp. wrote to the U.S. EPA protesting the way an
environmental group interpreted its Toxics Release Inventory (TRI)
data, contending the group made its Corpus Christi, TX refinery look
like a four times worse polluter than it really is.  The TRI lists the
toxics emissions levels on an annual basis of facilities that use,
manufacture or process, certain levels of toxic chemicals.  This
threshold includes all U.S. refineries, which must report on emissions
of 586 toxic chemicals.  
   Last month, the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF) released a report
that identified Valero as one of the most-polluting refineries, on the
basis of emissions in relation to crude input capacity.  However, as
Valero pointed out in a letter to Lynn Goldman, assistant
administrator, EPA Pesticides and Toxic Substances, Valero primarily
processes heavy resid oil, not crude.
   "When EDF reviewed Valero's refinery, it inaccurately assumed that
Valero's throughput consisted only of crude oil processing (29,000
b/d), when our actual processing throughput was 122,919 b/d (crude and
resid oil) for 1992," wrote William Greehey, Valero CEO.  "This
calculation inaccurately resulted in our emission per barrel of
throughput being reported as four times higher than it actually is." 
Valero should have been ranked 103 on EDF's list, not 27, wrote
Greehey.
   In addition, Valero pointed out that its TRI emissions total for
1992, the year in question, included emissions from its marine loading
facility, which were not required under TRI guidelines.  "Valero
recently installed a marine vapor recovery unit that eliminates
approximately three million pounds per year of volatile organic
compounds from Corpus Christi's air," Greehey added.
   Valero has installed the best available control technology at
Corpus Christi, wrote Greehey, noting that Texas recently presented
the company with its Environmental Excellence Award.  "We are proud of
our environmental record and we believe that EDF's use of TRI data has
unfairly damaged our reputation," wrote Greehey.  "When TRI data are
notably misused, would EPA be willing to assist in setting the record
straight?"



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

CALIFORNIA'S LATEST ESTIMATE SEES ADEQUATE RFG SUPPLY

   California refiners have the capacity to produce enough RFG meeting
Phase 2 specifications even if demand next year surges beyond 900,000
b/d, says the California Energy Commission (CEC) in its latest
"Supply/Demand Balance Update."
   CEC, the California Air Resources Board (CARB), refiners and other
interested parties have been studying RFG implementation through the
California RFG Advisory Committee.  After reviewing gasoline demand
data for the past several years, CEC has determined that the most
likely demand level next year will be 890,000 b/d.  Even with the
closure this summer of two small refineries, Powerine and Pacific,
maximum Phase 2 RFG production capacity for California refiners is
962,000 b/d, according to industry input provided to CEC, leaving a
margin of 72,000 b/d.  Even under its high-demand scenario of 917,000
b/d, "supplies of CaRFG for 1996 should be adequate."
   CARB has recommended that the mitigation fee be 15 c/gal, and
public comments made at a policy workshop generally supported that
level, said Allan Hirsh, CARB spokesman.  CARB staff will review the
written comments and prepare a final recommendation for the full CARB
Board, which will vote on the proposal at its Jan. 25 meeting.
   In January, CARB will finalize the circumstances under which a
refiner can request a waiver, but Hirsch said that these are only for
emergency situations beyond a refiner's control.  Some of the waivers
granted refiners under the clean-diesel program in 1993 were disputed
by competing refiners as too generous, both in terms of the diesel
volumes affected and the waiver fee.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

GIANT SELLS E&P TO FOCUS ON REFINING AND MARKETING

   Giant Industries, Inc. is downsizing after its recent acquisition
of a Bloomfield, NM, refinery by selling off its oil exploration and
production business to focus on refining and marketing operations. 
Giant will upgrade and debottleneck the 16,000-b/d Bloomfield plant
and the 26,000-b/d Ciniza, NM, refinery, but has not settled on the
amount of capital to spend.  It will likely construct a new splitter
tower at Bloomfield as well.  The changes are expected to increase
capacity at both refineries.  
   The company is also looking to expand its company-owned and
operated retail system of some 57 outlets, primarily in southern Utah
and southern Colorado near the "Four Corners" area.  "Although there's
talk about bringing in jobberships or dealerships from time to time, I
think we'll continue to be a company-owned and operated retail and
convenience outlet system for now," said spokesman George Seitts. 
Giant recently installed pay-at-the-pump readers and redesigned some
of its outlets. 
   The exploration and production division reported losses for every
year since 1991, up until the most recent nine months ending Sept. 30,
when it reported pretax earnings of $217,000.  However, the division
must also deduct "substantial" ceiling test writedowns from that. 
Despite the beginnings of a turnaround -- oil production will be 35%
higher in 1995 than in 1993 -- E&P contribution has not met
expectations, the company reported.
   "We are under no pressure to 'fire sale' these assets," said Jim
Acridge, Giant's Chairman and CEO, "as the volume and quality of our
reserves has greatly improved over the last two years as a result of
the efficiencies and efforts of a new management team hired in early
1994."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

CHEVRON REORGANIZATION COMBINES OFFICES & CUTS 130 JOBS 

   Chevron is restructuring its U.S. gasoline marketing business,
combining regional offices, consolidating support functions and re-
focusing the organization on sales and growth.  The restructuring is
scheduled to be finished by summer 1996.
   The reorganization will eliminate about 130 positions, create some
new jobs and relocate others.  Chevron's non-service station workforce
will be downsized 5% to 1,900.
   The Houston and Atlanta offices responsible for the former Central
and Southern gasoline marketing "regions" will combine to form a new
Eastern Sales Center based in Atlanta.  The San Ramon, CA, and La
Habra, CA, offices handling the former Northwest and Southwest
"regions" will form a Western Sales Center based in La Habra. 
Headquarters and specialized support for gasoline marketing will
remain based in the San Francisco Bay Area.
   Operations, business services and station development functions
once managed regionally will be managed on a national basis. 
Specialized groups at the Bay Area headquarters will emphasize Chevron
brand strategy and development, convenience store marketing and jobber
relations.  The Hawaii retail gasoline marketing structure will
continue as a combined sales and distribution unit.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

INDUSTRY DEBATES EFFECTIVENESS OF OXYGENATES IN RFG

   Some refiners claim that the use of oxygen in gasoline only reduces
in CO emissions when new vehicle technology is used.  Fuel oxygenates
proponents claim that an oxygenate addition to RFG provides air
quality and toxics improvement that is superior to low-Rvp
alternatives.  An Auto/Oil study has added fuel to the fire on both
sides of that debate.
   Tests performed on the emissions benefits of California Phase 2 RFG
and a gasoline blended to the same specifications, but without an
oxygenate component, showed that differences between the two gasolines
were generally not statistically significant.  Oxygenate proponents
argue that the study's data only shows that there is little benefit to
oxygen in gasoline and fails to take into consideration the benefits
of oxygenates.
   Auto/Oil technical bulletin #17 suggests that the use of oxygen in
RFG provides little, if any, emissions benefit, outside of reductions
in CO.  In fact, the only significant difference between oxygenated
and non-oxygenated RFG noted was 13% higher formaldehyde emissions in
oxygenated RFG when used in an advanced technology fleet.
   Auto/Oil performed the study to determine whether the oxygenate
required in California Phase 2 gasoline would affect emissions in
later technology vehicles to the extent predicted in earlier work. 
Four fleets, ranging from older vehicles (model year 1983 to 1985) to
an advanced technology fleet of prototype passenger cars, were tested.
   "What [the Auto/Oil Study] tells us is that as the fleet continues
to turn-over, the benefit of mandatory oxygen will continue to
decline," said Mike Ingham, manager of the transportation fuels
performance unit of Chevron Research Corp.  "There continues to be
some benefit to the use of oxygenates in older vehicles.  What we were
trying to do was run a clean test of the benefits of oxygenates."    
   "As for the issue of dilution, what the oxygenate industry wants to
do is take credit for the benefits of splash blending and attribute
them to oxygenates," said Ingham.  "With new technology, that benefit
is not there.  If we need those types of benefits, a refinery can
tweak the blend to hit the desired target.  It is not appropriate to
claim those as benefits of oxygenates."
   Proponents of oxygenates have a different interpretation of the
study, arguing that while the study does show that the addition of
oxygen in RFG provides few emissions benefits over RFG, it helps make
the case that oxygenates added to gasoline provide substantial
emissions improvements.
   "What is important to consider here is the difference between
'oxygen' and 'oxygenates'," said Fred Potter, president of Information
Resources Inc.  "When you add oxygenates to RFG, it dilutes the
sulfur, olefins and aromatics in the blend with a cleaner-burning
hydrocarbon that gets more of its energy from burning hydrogen and
less from carbon.
   "During the Auto/Oil study, these components were often back-
blended into the gasoline, thus eliminating the emissions gains that
are normally made by oxygenate addition," said Potter.  "After
blending these high-emission components back into the fuel, the only
thing left in the oxygenated RFG was the oxygen itself, which, outside
of carbon dioxide advantages, yielded little emissions improvement
over the  non-oxygenated RFG when new vehicle technology was used.  It
is also important to point out that the Auto/Oil Study did not give
any credit to oxygenates for their octane improvements, which allows
for fewer aromatics and olefins in the final fuel.  It also provides
no stationary source credits when less octane production is required
at the refinery."
   "When I looked at the study, I noticed that the properties of the
two gasolines are the same except for the oxygenates," said Cal Hodge,
manager of marketing and regulatory analysis, Valero Energy Corp. 
While the technical bulletin did not say what the octane numbers were
for the two gasolines, it is likely that the non-oxygenated gasoline
lost at least two octane numbers, he said, noting that this will cause
problems for cars that are sensitive to octane.
   Ingham noted that the octane level of the oxygenated RFG was
slightly higher, but that both had adequate octane numbers over 90
(R+M)/2.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

CALIFORNIA CHIPS AWAY AT ELECTRIC VEHICLE MANDATE

   California held a public hearing to accept comments on amending the
Zero Emission Vehicle (ZEV) mandate and unveiled three alternative
emission reduction concepts. 
   The new plan under formulation may be more palatable to automakers
who balked at the 2% ZEV mandate, which would have required them to
offer for sale 20,000 electric cars in 1998 and another 10% in 2000. 
The new plan, expected in mid-to-late-January for a March
presentation, drops the 2% mandate for the first four years of the
program.  Carmakers estimate that the revised plan will still result
in 14,000 electric cars being offered in 1998.
   Modifications are drawing attention in the East because
northeastern states adopted a plan that mirrors California's,
including the ZEV option.  Changes to California's plan may require
changes in those states which have adopted the controversial ZEV
mandates, which at this time can only be met with short-range,
expensive electric vehicles.  
   If the ZEV program was to begin in 1998, as originally mandated,
the vehicles would displace 14 tons per day of pollution by 2010.  The
challenge lies in finding equivalent reductions when "the cherry tree
of options has already been picked," one source said.
    Reformulated gasoline, enhanced inspection and maintenance,
vehicle scrappage and the LEV program (including ZEVs) have all been
counted as part of the on-road mobile source state implementation plan
in California.  Yet even if the ZEV program is fully implemented,
California would fall short of meeting its Clean Air Act requirements. 
   While the program  will "encourage" ZEVs with demonstrations and
credits, the board will not require them.  Secondly, a combination of
market forces and regulatory requirements will include a "market-based
ZEV launch" with incentives and a suspension of the mandate through
2003.  It would also add introduction of 2,000 advanced batteries and
long-range vehicles in 1998 through 2000, with credits for the sale of
additional vehicles.  By 2004, CARB would require automakers to offer
for sale 10% ZEVs.  The last concept would maintain the mandate, but
with slower phase-ins, starting with 1%, and moving to 2%, then 5%,
then 10%.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

ILLINOIS PREPARES TO BEGIN VEHICLE INCENTIVE PROGRAM

   Gov. Jim Edgar (R-IL) has signed into law a measure to promote the
use of alternative fueled vehicles.  The bill, known as the Alternate
Fuels Act, becomes effective within 90 days.
   The Act will establish a rebate program which allows fleet owners
and operators to apply for one of three types of rebates, which
include: a conversion cost rebate;  an original equipment manufacturer
differential cost rebate; and a fuel cost differential rebate -- based
on a three-year life cycle cost.  The rebate shall not exceed $4,000
per vehicle, over the life of the rebate program.
   The Act authorizes the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency to
establish an ethanol research program to cut production costs or
increase the viability of ethanol fuels by developing new engine
technologies and ethanol refueling facilities.
   The Act will be funded by establishing a user fee of $20 per
vehicle required of public fleets with 10 or more vehicles.  All
state, county, and local government vehicles (rental, antique and
electric) along with motorcycles are exempt from the fee.
   In FY96, up to $200,000 may be appropriated from the fund to pay
for administrating the program.   The ethanol research fund will
receive 20% of the remaining funds, and 80% will be appropriated to
the rebate programs.  The program will be in effect until Dec. 31,
1999, or until funds are no longer available.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

NEVADA CERTIFIES WATER-BLEND AS AN ALTERNATIVE FUEL

   A-21, a fuel comprised of 55% water and 45% naphtha and bonded
together by a proprietary surfactant,  can now be used to meet
Nevada's definition of an alternative fuel.  
   "This fuel can be dispensed in existing fuel infrastructure, has a
very low fire hazard potential, can be used in both compression-
ignited engines and spark-ignited engines and has emission levels
significantly below California Air Resources Board (CARB) tier 1
reformulated gasoline emission standards," according to a Nevada
Division of Environmental Protection recommendation that A-21 be
included in the state's clean fuel program.
   State agency fleets of 10 or more are required to incorporate
alternative fuel vehicles starting with the 1995 fiscal year. 
Nevada's definition of alternative fuel follows CARB standards and
includes ethanol, methanol, RFG, natural gas, propane and hydrogen.  
   The request to include A-21 was originally made by the A55 Limited
Partnership.  The Reno-based company has joined engine manufacturer
Caterpillar Inc. in a venture company called Advanced Fuels to
commercialize A-21.   
   A Nevada Division of Environmental Protection demonstration of the
fuel in a 1991 Taurus showed emissions results that surpass Ford
standards for 2002 and beyond.  The Taurus and a Reno city bus also
demonstrated increased fuel efficiency, eliminating the range issue
other alternative fuels are trying to overcome.  
   A-21 is being demonstrated in a stationary generator owned by
Sierra Pacific Power Co., and Nevada is exploring mining applications. 
Other states have expressed interest in A-21 as a cost-effective way
to reduce emissions.
   An expert questioned the viability of using naphtha.  "The direct
use of naphtha in a fuel will undermine its conversion value in a
typical U.S. refinery," said Herb Bruch, president of B&B Associates
and member of the 21st Century Fuels Advisory Board.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

NEW JERSEY FIRST TO EMBRACE NLEV, BUT RETAINS CONTINGENCY  

   New Jersey blazed the trail for northeast states this week,
becoming the first to sign a rule requiring it to participate in the
tenuously pending national low emission vehicle (NLEV) program, if
that plan is passed.  As a contingency, the state ruled for opting-in
to the Ozone Transport Commission's program (OTC-LEV) if the
nationwide plan falls through.
   The state's Department of Environmental Protection said it prefers
NLEV because it provides emission controls more stringent than present
model cars, but at less expense than the technology used in
California.  Also, cleaner cars would be sold nationally, rather than
just in the 12  northeast states plus the District of Columbia, the
department said.  Other states, such as Rhode Island and
Massachusetts, are considering also adopting NLEV, which would begin
with 1997 model-year cars (OTC-LEV starts with the 1999 model year).  
   "Because a substantial amount of air pollution travels across state
lines into New Jersey," said Bob Shinn, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.  "It's important to adopt measures that will
have broad impact on air quality, which will help us meet our Clean
Air Act requirements, and will keep New Jersey economically
competitive with the rest of the country," he said.
   U.S. EPA has set a NLEV resolution deadline of  Feb. 15, by which
time automakers and the Northeast states must either voluntarily adopt
it, or states will likely begin implementing the "backstop" OTC-LEV
plan adopted earlier this year to achieve air quality control.   The
optional zero emission vehicle mandate, adopted by New York,
Massachusetts and Vermont, remains the chief sticking point in the
discussions between the two groups.  Neither of New Jersey's plans
includes a provision for the sale of zero emission vehicles. 
   "Each state may adopt whatever measure it wants as long as it meets
the equivalent air quality reductions," explained Dave West, chief of
New Jersey Bureau of Transportation Control.  "Each does not
necessarily need to adopt OTC-LEV; it may come up with its own plan. 
However, that would be very difficult because the reductions are
considerable from the OTC-LEV program."
   Each state must still form its alternative in a revised state
implementation plan by Feb. 15, and enforce it program with state
regulations.  Although each state will have its own plan, pollution
mitigation is regional because air quality is affected by pollution
crossing state lines, West added.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

API PETITIONS EPA FOR PHASE II NOX REPEAL

   In the first attempt to unravel Phase II RFG, the American
Petroleum Institute (API) filed in early December a petition with U.S.
EPA, seeking repeal of EPA's requirements to reduce summertime
nitrogen oxides (NOX) emissions.
   EPA estimates NOX reduction costs to range $5,000/ton, while API's
estimate exceeds $10,000/ton.  API "remains convinced that EPA's
estimates of gasoline desulfurization costs and the cost-effectiveness
of NOX reductions are far too low because of flawed refinery modeling
assumptions."
   API claims that consumers would face higher costs because refiners
would have to make significant capital investments to comply with the
NOX rule.  
   "EPA's RFG NOX reduction requirements reflect an overstatement of
air quality benefits, are not a cost-effective strategy for ozone
control, and are inconsistent with the Clean Air Act Amendments of
1990 and the 1991 RFG regulatory negotiations," API said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

FIRST CAAA 1990 CHANGE PASSES HOUSE AND SENATE 

   The first modification to the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 --
making Employee Commute Options (ECO) reductions optional -- passed
the House and Senate last month.
   H.R. 325 was sponsored by Rep. Don Manzullo (R-IL) in the House and
Sen. Rick Santorum (R-PA), in the Senate.  
   Under current law, states with severe or extreme ozone
nonattainment areas are mandated to use trip reduction as part of
State Implementation Plans.  Manzullo's office noted that "it has been
found and the EPA has agreed that even if the ECO mandate was
implemented to the letter of the law, at best, it would have only a
`minuscule' impact on clean air.  In the end, the cost of the ECO
provision would far exceed any benefit as the law is currently
written."
   Also known as the employee trip reduction plan, the rule requires
companies with 100 employees or more in the highest nonattainment
areas to reduce commuter car trips 25%.  Though previously mandatory,
the change would make the rule optional and leave enforcement up to
the states.
   "The bill gives states the option to use car pooling or other trip
reduction programs in their plan to attain clean air standards,"
Manzullo said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

EPA POSTPONES NOZZLE FLOW RATE DEADLINE FOR SIX MONTHS

   The Environmental Protection Agency has extended by six months the
deadline to comply with its new gasoline pumping rate restriction (see
story.  
   The previous deadline was Jan. 1, 1996, but a notice from the
director of EPA's Office of Mobil Sources said the agency is extending
it to July 1, 1996.  The change needs approval by the Office of
Management and Budget.
   The extension will give retailers more time to comply with the new
regulation, which limits the rate at which gasoline is dispensed from
the pump to 10 gallons per minute (GPM).  Some dispense gasoline at
rates up to 13 GPM. 
   Several trade associations had requested the extension because EPA
had not set testing specifications with guidelines on how to comply. 
In addition, the groups said, devices to limit pumps to the new flow
rate were not available.  
   "We  think it would have been chaotic if EPA had stayed with the
January deadline," said Petroleum Marketers Association of America
Vice President of Communications David Morehead.
   The EPA rule contradicted a California Air Resources Board
certification of Stage II vapor recovery devices for service station
pumps with dispensing rates of 12 and 13 gallons per minute, according
to API.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

ETHANOL WATCH

   Gulf Coast rack ethanol traded last month at $1.17/gal for domestic
sale, ranging $1.18-1.22/gal for export.  Some ethanol activity
(especially for January delivery) continued in late December.  While
ethanol prices reflected mid-to-late-December wrap-up deals, many
players were already turning their focus to January/February business. 
   Gulf Coast export traffic was slow, which was partially an effect
of high U.S. ethanol prices but also a result of lagging Brazilian
demand.
   Though near-term ethanol prices were expected to remain firm, some
excess product was expected to be available for January/February
deals.
   The West Coast reportedly had a two-tiered market, with contract
barrels at $1.24/gal and spot ethanol deliveries at $1.28/gal. 
Explaining the recent price surge, a source said oxy-fuel blenders
under-contracted their winter requirements, expecting "a loose spot
market" this season, but supplies have been tight for several weeks. 
Also, railroad consolidations in 1995 brought service reductions, so
it often takes twice as long to deliver ethanol from the Midwest.
   Supply tightness persisted in the Midwest.  Chicago prices ranged
$1.18-1.22/gal, a supplier said, while an independent refiner/marketer
placed other markets in the $1.19-1.22/gal range.  Some users cut back
the amount of ethanol blended into gasoline from 10 vol% to 5.7 vol%
per gallon.  The current supply tightness will probably be alleviated
once oxy-fuels demand begins to slow down in mid-February, the
supplier said.  
   An accident at Archer Daniels Midland's (ADM) largest ethanol plant
in Decatur, IL, last month will not impact the company's ethanol
production, the company said.  One of the boilers at a cogeneration
facility ruptured, said company spokesperson Carla Miller.  The
rupture occured in an area which had been shut down for maintenance.
The accident followed reports over previous weeks that ADM was having
production problems at at least one of its plants.  ADM also withdrew
from the spot market and put customers on allocation.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

INTERNATIONAL JOINT VENTURE TO BUILD NGVS

   EDO Corp. and its majority-owned EDO (Canada) Ltd. of Calgary,
Alberta launched a joint venture with three Japanese companies in the
U.S. and international natural gas vehicles (NVGs) market.  EDO makes
LiteRiderR, a lightweight all-composite CNG cylinder available
worldwide.  Japanese partners are: Toray Industries, Inc., a carbon
fiber supplier; Sumitomo Corp., a commodities trader; and Sumitomo's
wholly owned U.S. subsidiary Sumitomo Corp. of America. 
   As part of the alliance, the Japanese companies invested CAN$5
million for newly issued common and preferred shares of EDO (Canada)
Ltd.  Toray holds 9.9% and the Sumitomo group 6.6% of the company. 
The alliance covers technical and marketing issues facing the NGV
industry and will target expansion in the U.S. and the Pacific Rim.  
   A technical task force was set up to advance state-of-the-art
composite NGV fuel storage.  Initially, the task force will focus on
increasing the cost-effectiveness of NGV fuel storage. 

                     This Month          Last Month          Year Ago
                     $/Bu.  $/Ton      $/Bu.   $/Ton         $/Bu.
Corn (#2,Y, 30 D) - 
*Chicago             $3.4400  $135.39  $3.2275   $127.03     $2.2450
   Kansas City      3.5650    140.31   3.3450    131.66      2.2800
   Minneapolis      3.0750    121.03   2.9025    114.24      2.0550
   Omaha            3.2700    128.70   3.0750    121.03      2.1350
   St. Louis        3.5600    140.12   3.3650    132.45      2.3900
   Toledo           3.4100    134.21   3.1575    124.28      2.1300
Barley (#2) - *
Duluth              $2.9000  $133.16   $3.1000  $142.35      1.9800
   Portland         3.845    176.56    n/a      n/a          2.5100
Cane Molasses - 
Baltimore                    $90.00             $90.00       $82.50
   New Orleans               75.00              75.00        66.25
Sorghum (cwt, #2, Y) - 
*Kansas City        $6.240   $245.60   $5.610   $220.81      $3.875
   Texas High Plains  6.6500   305.36  6.1900   243.64       4.5200
Wheat - 
Kansas City (#1)    $5.3700  $197.07   $5.4050  $212.74      4.3250
* Denotes Graph Series  Source: Information Resources, Inc., USDA


                         This Month      Last Month       Year Ago
Corn Gluten Feed (21%)   $/Ton           $/Ton            $/Ton
   *Illinois Points      $117.00         $120.50          $84.00 
   Kansas City           120.00          125.00           92.00 
Corn Gluten Meal (60%)                   
   *Illinois Points      $330.00         $330.00          $240.00 
   Kansas City           337.50          337.50           245.00 
Distillers' Dried Grains (27%)                            
   *Illinois Points      $134.50         $140.00          $110.00 
   Lawrenceburg          149.00          143.50           120.00
Soybean Meal (44%)                       
   Decatur               $221.00         $192.00          $147.25 
   Kansas City           219.50          196.60           148.30 
   Memphis               224.90          202.10           150.20 
   Minneapolis           214.20          187.70           138.60 
   St. Louis             228.50          204.00           156.00 
* Denotes Graph Series  Source: Information Resources, Inc., U.S.D.A.


                   Gasoline & Octane Component Pricing
                               ($/Gallon)
Product/Gulf Coast Spot  January         December         Change
Unleaded Regular Gasoline  0.4860        0.4570           +.0290
Midgrade Gasoline          0.4940        0.4820           -+0120
Premium Gasoline           0.5310        0.5195           +.0115
Benzene                    0.86          0.85             +.01
Toluene                    0.76          0.76             .00
Xylene                     0.98          0.98             .00
Methanol                   0.31          0.34              -. 03
Methanol (contract)        0.42          0.42             +.00
Ethanol/Location           January       December         Change
Bellingham, WA             1.24          1.22             +.02
Bettendorf, IA             1.19          1.17             +.02
Cedar Rapids, IA           1.18          1.16             +.01
Chattanooga, TN            1.14          1.12             +.02
Chicago, IL                1.18-1.22     1.15-1.20        +.03/+.02
Cincinnati, OH             1.21          1.19             +.02
Decatur, IL                1.16          1.15             +.01
Denver, CO                 1.25          1.23             +.02
Detroit, MI                1.18          1.16             +.02
Garden City, KS            1.19          1.11             +.08
Hanford, CA                1.22          1.21             +.01
Indianapolis, IN           1.15          1.14             +.01
Knoxville, TN              1.14          1.12             +.02
Loudon, TN                 1.14          1.12             +.02
Memphis, TN                1.18          1.16             +.02
Minneapolis, MN            1.22          1.20             +.02
Nashville, TN              1.17          1.15             +.02
Niles, MI                  1.17          1.15             +.02
Peoria, IL                 1.15          1.14             +.01
San Francisco, CA          1.28          1.27             +.01
   Source: Hart/IRI Fuel Information Services




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

MTBE WATCH

   Gulf Coast spot MTBE finished December at 92 c/gal on continued
supply concerns.  The spread between East Coast and Gulf Coast MTBE
prices widened slightly from the usual 2.5-3.0 c/gal range to a strong
4-6 c/gal.  
   Octane values for East Coast MTBE were reportedly as high as
$1.10/gal, particularly for premium RFG and RFG for use in oxy-fuel
areas, as a result of continued tight supplies.
   Gulf Coast spot MTBE prices were also considered "fairly strong."  
However, the market was said to have quieted considerably by the end
of the month, and a trader noted that prices for later- month MTBE
delivery were considerably lower.
   Thanks to the latest rise in MTBE spot prices and lower feedstock
costs, producers are again seeing production margins climb to
respectable levels. 
    "Overall, 1995 was a fairly good year for MTBE producers, as far
as margins are concerned," said Jim Thomas, vice president of market
analysis for Houston-based Bonner and Moore Associates.  "After the
methanol price corrected itself at the end of the first quarter, MTBE
margins were fairly strong throughout the rest of the year."
   Margins did feel a pinch in late-October and early-November, but
the summer gasoline season supported the product fairly well, said
Thomas. 
   Incremental MTBE margins rose to a yearly high of 32 c/gal in May-
June, a dramatic improvement over 1994, when the unusually high
methanol price pushed several MTBE producers to cut back or shut down
some production capacity.  The yearly high margin for 1994 was only
about 13 c/gal, which was seen in late-December.
   Producers still using the A-B-C contracts are seeing stronger
margins.  While some A-B-C contracts still exist, they are "rapidly
disappearing," Thomas said.  "The new contracts will be structured for
each individual producer and buyer."  
   Those contracts are expected to be related more closely to MTBE's
gasoline blend value, with a premium or penalty based on the current
market price.  "The new contracts will be closely related to the
market, and the band around that price will be fairly narrow," Thomas
said.
   "MTBE margins are going to begin to stabilize soon.  We predict
that they are pretty much at their peak right now."
   The current strength in MTBE spot prices is due in part to the
closure of Enron's 12,500-b/d MTBE unit in Houston, said Thomas.  
   "The market is sensing a short-term shortage," he said.  "The
underlying fundamentals are not strong enough to support the latest
price increase."
   The major variable in MTBE profitability is methanol, which has
remained weak since early 1995.  The other major input, butane, has
remained steady throughout the year.
   Gulf Coast spot methanol traded in a steady 31-32 c/gal range with
most deals completed at 32 c/gal.  However, trade was very light. 
While a few chemicals-related deals may be completed during the last
week of the year, most players expect to be out of the market until
early January.
   Spot methanol prices were kept in check by the current supply glut,
and contract postings were expected to roll over from December to
January for most methanol producers.  At the end of December, only two
methanol producers have kept their list prices at 39 c/gal, with the
rest at 42 c/gal.  Meanwhile, transaction prices ranged in the mid-
30s, with most deals around 35-36 c/gal.
   Saturn Methanol Corp. plans to have its first methanol plant,
located in Point Lisas, Trinidad & Tobago, on-line by late 1997. 
Construction on the 2,500-metric-tons-per-day (287-million-gallons-
per-year) facility will begin in May 1996.  The capital cost for the
plant has been estimated at $250 million, said Deo van Wijk, president
of Saturn.  Lurgi Corp. will supply technology for the project.
   Financing and product off-take agreements for the plant have been
secured, van Wijk confirmed.  "In order to receive the financing, at
least 80% of your production must be spoken for," he said.  Saturn
will sell all methanol produced at the facility.
   While Saturn is a new company, formed in June 1994, its staff is
definitely not new to the methanol business, noted van Wijk.  "The
people we already have onboard and those we will add when construction
begins on the plant, have more than 200 years of combined experience
in the methanol industry.  For many of us, this will be the seventh
methanol plant we have built together.  This gives the company a
unique advantage," he said.
   Trinidad & Tobago "not only offers competitive natural gas prices,
but also skilled labor, logistical advantages and duty-free access to
both Europe and U.S. markets and has the needed infrastructure
available," said van Wijk.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

HOUSE RECONSIDERS TAX INCENTIVE 

   ETBE's future is in limbo as members of the House of
Representatives reexamine ethanol's 54 c/gal excise tax exemption. 
Members for and against the incentive are circulating "Dear Colleague"
letters outlining their positions.  The main issue is the financial
impact of ethanol and ETBE's excise tax exemption. The House passed a
previous budget reconciliation bill without cutting the incentive.
   The first letter was from Rep. Randy Tate (R-WA), who calls ethanol
"an example of a good intention gone bad" and proposes to phase-out
the ethanol tax incentive.  "According to the Treasury Department,
ethanol has cost the Highway Trust Fund over $5.3 billion from 1983-
1994, $684 million in Fiscal Year 1994 alone.  Motorists pay gas taxes
and other user fees into the Highway Trust Fund. [Ethanol's] subsidy
comes right out of the Highway Trust Fund," Tate wrote.  A later draft
was signed by Rep. Sam Gibbons (D-FL), the ranking minority member on
the House Ways and Means Committee.
   Tate will introduce a bill this month to "eliminate the motor fuels
excise tax exemption for ethanol and scale back the excise tax credit
for ethanol."  The bill echoes Rep. Philip English (R-PA)'s bill, HR
264, which would end the incentive. 
   "The legislation to be introduced by Rep. Tate, if enacted, will
have the sure and swift effect of inflicting mortal damage" to the
industry, wrote Rep. Tim Johnson (D-SD) and others in response. 
   Another letter urges extending the incentive to 2002 to conform
with farm program cuts and other parts of a seven-year budget plan. 
Rep. Richard Durbin (D-IL) and 15 co-signers wrote, "The General
Accounting Office estimates that the value [of the incentive] to the
U.S. Treasury is as much as $6.3 billion over five years.  The direct
cost of the incentive is more than offset by additional income tax
revenues and reduced federal farm program costs."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

GASOLINE/DIESEL WATCH

   Gulf Coast spot regular and premium traded at 46.95 c/gal and 49.65
c/gal, respectively.
   East Coast octane spreads catapulted to 13.50 c/gal mid-month
before ending the month at a still high 9.75 c/gal.  In addition to
higher MTBE prices and tight winter oxygenated (2.7wt% oxygen) RFG
supplies, several local refinery outages were sending gasoline prices
higher.
   Gulf Coast octane spreads widened briefly before returning to 2.7
c/gal, the low side of the typical 2.5-5.0 c/gal range.  Compounding a
glutted products market, Gulf Coast players sold off extra products in
storage ahead of yearly inventory taxes.
   In East Coast refinery news, Sun Co. shut down the 25,000 b/d
catalytic reformer at its 175,000 b/d Marcus Hook, PA, refinery.  At
the same time, BP was reportedly planning to cut production at its
172,000 b/d Marcus Hook refinery to 150,000 b/d before Tosco takes
possession.  At presstime, the company was still in negotiations with
labor leaders over the plan, which would lay off 130 workers.
   Some time in January/February, Chevron will restart its Richmond,
CA, refinery, the whole of which was closed in early December for six
weeks for major scheduled maintenance in anticipation of California
Phase 2 RFG.  Chevron said it had adequate supplies to cover the
shutdown period.  
   Retail gasoline prices made another decline from November to
December.  Self-serve regular gasoline fell 0.5 c/gal to $1.118/gal,
down 3.1 c/gal from December 1994 rates, according to the American
Automobile Association (AAA)'s Fuel Gauge Report.  "The good news
continues for holiday motorists as gasoline prices dropped for the
sixth consecutive month,"  AAA said.   The average price has dropped
11 c/gal since June.
   The average price of self-serve midgrade slipped 0.7 c/gal to
$1.211/gal while self-serve premium declined 0.4 c/gal to $1.295/gal. 
Prices were most expensive in the West, unchanged at $1.254/gal, and
least expensive in the Southeast, where prices fell 0.6 c/gal from
November rates to $1.032/gal.
   In distillates, Gulf Coast low-sulfur and high-sulfur diesel fuel
traded at 54.60 c/gal and 53.35 c/gal.  The cold wave across the
Northeast and Midwest propelled NYMEX No. 2 December heating oil
futures prices to two-year highs at around 58 c/gal.  Prices went
higher when January became the front-month, topping 60 c/gal, but
sources warned that the heating oil contract is overdue for a downward
correction.
   U.S. retail low-sulfur diesel fuel prices hit their highest average
since May 30, $1.12/gal, according to EIA's Distillate Watch for the
week ended Dec. 18.  Regional averages ranged: East, $1.12/gal;
Midwest, $1.11/gal; Gulf Coast, $1.09/gal; Rockies, $1.21/gal; and
West Coast, $1.26/gal.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

SUPPLY/DEMAND WATCH

   Refinery production of gasoline took the opposite direction of
deliveries in November, according to the American Petroleum
Institute(API)'s November statistical report. 
   "Gasoline output declined for the first time this year, while
distillate production rose 2.5%, its strongest showing so far in
1995," API noted.
   Refinery gasoline output fell 1.1% from high November 1994 rates. 
"This was mostly due to unusually strong levels last November as the
reformulated gasoline program was gearing up for retail production
Jan. 1.  Even so, gasoline output has slackened off more than
seasonally in the past two months," API qualified.
   However, continued strong gasoline deliveries outpaced apparent
demand.  "November's 5.1% increase is especially surprising, and
unsupported by other indicators of underlying consumption.  Though
there have been some recent indications of further strengthening
demand, any such strengthening has likely been modest," API explained.
   As a result of declining refinery production of gasoline and
continued stronger-than-seasonal gasoline deliveries, total gasoline
stocks finished below 200 million bbl for the fourth month in a row.
   Influencing demand, the latest (September) on-highway and
interstate travel figures have both shown strong growth.  Meanwhile,
the repeal of Federal highway speed limits is expected to have a
"noticeable but small" impact on gasoline consumption, API said.  
   Many states, including California, Texas and others west of the
Mississippi River, plan to raise speed limits, according to API.
   A cold snap in the Northeast combined with growth in on-highway
trucking to push distillate deliveries 5.0% above November 1994 rates
to 3.34 million bbl last month -- the highest November rate since
1978.  November marked the third straight month of growth above 4%.
   "In addition to increased demand for heating oil, demand for diesel
fuel for on-highway vehicles is also estimated to have added 30,000-
40,000 b/d to final demand for November distillates over last
November," API said.  "A slowing economy has reined in growth of on-
highway diesel demand from about 135,000 b/d in the first quarter. 
November's growth in on-highway diesel is estimated to be the lowest
for the year to date."
   Low-sulfur diesel deliveries continued to surpass high-sulfur
deliveries.  Low-sulfur deliveries rose 150,000 b/d to 3.340 million
bbl.  High-sulfur deliveries totaled 2.049 million bbl -- inching up
10,000 b/d.  
   "Demand for heating oil was estimated to have grown by more than 10
times this amount.  This suggests that the pattern of spill-over of
low-sulfur distillate to uses where it is not required continued in
November, and up to 120,000 b/d of the increased heating demand may
have been met by deliveries of low-sulfur oil," API said.
   Distillate stocks rose 4 million bbl to 135 million bbl, "the low
end of the typical range for November," API said.
   Total imports of crude oil and petroleum products, which had
declined in seven of the previous 10 months, made a strong year-to-
year increase.  Total imports averaged 9.429 million b/d -- 8.3%
higher than November 1994 rates.
   U.S. crude oil production fell again.  The 6.495 million b/d level
trailed November 1994 by 2%.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

STATE CLEAN AIR PROGRESS RANKED

   Across the U.S., five states have made no progress towards meeting
Clean Air Act deadlines -- and only three have made steady progress,
reveals Clean Air at the Crossroads: Progress Made and Challenges
Ahead, a new report released by the Clean Air Network.  
   Michigan, Missouri, Montana, Texas and Virginia were given a "red"
designation, indicating "no progress, will not make deadlines."  Only
New Mexico, North Carolina and Oregon received a "green" designation:
"steadily making progress; on track to meet public health standards by
the deadlines in the Clean Air Act."  
   Most states received a "yellow" or "orange" grade.  While "yellow"
signified "making progress in some areas, no progress in others; could
get back on right track and meet the deadlines," "orange" symbolized
"making progress in a few areas, no progress in others; enough off
track that it will not make deadlines." 
   The group did not rank for 10 states: Arkansas, Hawaii, Iowa,
Kentucky, Mississippi, North Dakota, South Dakota, Tennessee, West
Virginia and Wyoming.
GEORGIA:  Private and local government fleet managers in Atlanta are
showing increased interest in alternative fuel vehicles (AFVs),
according to a survey  by the Energy Information Administration (EIA). 
In 1994, AFVs made up 1% of Atlanta's fleets of six or more vehicles. 
Most were in local government fleets, but 3% of private fleet managers 
reported AFV plans for 1995, EIA said.  
   Fueling availability plays a major role.  Since 85% of local
government fleets fuel at central government-owned sites, alternative
fuels could be easier to incorporate.  Only 10% of the privately owned
fleets had central fueling sites.
ILLINOIS:  Gov. Jim Edgar (R-IL) signed the Alternate Fuels Act, which
will be in effect until Dec. 31, 1999, or until funds are no longer
available.  The Act established a rebate program for fleet owners and
operators, which will not exceed $4,000 per vehicle.
   The Act authorizes the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency to
establish an ethanol fuel research program to cut ethanol production
costs or raise the viability of ethanol fuels by developing new engine
technologies and refueling facilities.  The Act will be funded through
a user fee of $20 per vehicle on fleets with 10 or more vehicles.  In
FY96, up to $200,000 may be appropriated from the fund to pay
administrative costs.  The ethanol research fund will receive 20% of
the remaining funds, and the other 80% will cover the rebate programs. 
KENTUCKY:  EPA Director of Mobile Sources Margo Oge has written the
director of the Kentucky Division of Air Quality, John Hornback,
asking him to consider ending the state's request to leave the federal
RFG program.   EPA is hoping the opt-out request is pulled before it
is forced to make a decision on whether it will allow three counties
in Northern Kentucky to opt-out of RFG.  
   The letter suggests that Hornback should review ozone exceedences
during 1995.  Preliminary ozone monitoring data last summer "reveal a
continuing ozone problem," indicating that there was at least one
ozone violation.  Gov. Brereton Jones (D) originally requested the
opt-outs.  Since then, Kentucky elected a new governor, Paul Patton
(D), and it is unclear whether he will pursue the opt-out.
NEBRASKA:  A coalition of Nebraska ethanol interests is pushing for
all gasoline sold statewide to contain a minimum oxygenate level
starting in 1997, and it hopes to introduce a bill in the state's
legislature by the second week of January.  
   The current "reformulated fuel" definition requires a 3.1 wt%
oxygen, with no other parameters, but the fuel is not required at any
time of year.  Ethanol interests want to amend the law to reduce the
oxygen level but apply it statewide starting January 1997.  Whether to
implement a 2.7 wt% or 2.0 wt% minimum oxygenate standard is still
being debated.  Nebraska uses about 930 million gallons per year of
gasoline; 30% contains ethanol.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

ALTERNATIVE FUELS CALENDAR

*  January 21-24, 1996: Society of Independent Gasoline Marketers of
America's Winter Management Conference, Vail, CO.  Call (703) 709-
7000.
* January 22-23, 1996: 4th Annual Environmental Vehciles EnV '96, Ann
Arbor, MI.  Call (800) 659-2559.
* January 23-25, 1996: LNG-Powered Heavy-Duty Transportation
Conference & Exposition, Los Angeles, CA.  Call (713) 952-9500.
* January 29-February 2, 1996: Energy Week '96 Conference &
Exposition, Houston, TX.  Call (713) 963-6215.
* February 12-13, 1996: Ozone Transport Commission Meeting,
Washington, DC.  
Call (202) 508-3840.
* March 11-13, 1996: Gas Processors Association 75th Convention,
Denver, CO.  
Call (918) 493-3872.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

SOME FUEL TAXES DROP AT  START OF YEAR

   Here is a list of new tax rates as of Jan. 1, 1996, provided by the
Petroleum Marketers Association of America.  "Please note, however,
that the ongoing budget battle could result in changes in these
schedules," PMAA said.  
   All rates are in cents per gallon.

FUEL                       OLD           NEW 
Gasoline                   18.4          18.3
Gasohol:
1% alcohol                 13.0          12.9
7.7% alc                   14.24         14.14
5.7% alc                   15.32         15.22
Gasoline sold for gasohol production:
7.7% alc                   15.42         15.32
5.7%                       16.24         16.14
Special fuel               18.4          18.3
Special (LPG)              18.3          18.3
Inland Waterways Fuel Tax
                           24.4          24.3
Aviation Fuel other than gasoline
                           21.9          0
Diesel Fuel in trains*:    5.65          5.55
Diesel Fuel in buses:      7.4           7.3
Qualified Methanol         0.1235        0.1230
Qualified Ethanol          0.1295        0.1290
* This rate changed Oct. 1, 1995.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B34-5</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B029-92</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey30.html 205.156.212.5 19970114225607 text/html 47057
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:54:09 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:01 GMT
Content-length: 46870
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ey30.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet <BR>
August 13, 1990<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>TVA, Peabody Coal reach new agreement</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(584 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>Backers pull plug on embattled Thousand Springs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(329 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>MSHA rule seen as generally favorable to industry</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(589 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>AMAX mine faces shutdown over permit void</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(357 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Savage to haul W.V. coal for Arch Mineral</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(354 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Oil crisis is no boon to coal -- yet</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(615 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>East Coast exports show little growth</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(336 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Acid rain bills carry high price, in jobs, dollars</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(677 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>McCall fate still uncertain</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(176 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>NERCO gets cautious Shearson nod</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(282 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>NLRB, UMW deal awaits ruling</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(161 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>Arch hit with Ky. finding</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(166 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>Big Mama probe could take month</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(146 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>Crisis may hurt coal</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(143 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>Lawson says `I told you so'</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(150 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>UFI signs coal car deal</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(109 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>Inter-Mountain clarifies identity</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(195 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>Carboex positions for Ashland buy</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(241 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>*PEOPLE IN COAL*</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>     Island Creek has tightened its belt,</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(103 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>      Diane Bunton, manager of marketing research</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(41 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>     Peter Rumsey, former vice president of sales</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(43 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>     A.G. "Tony" Fernandes, previously controller</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(66 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>     Meanwhile, Mark Baylor has been named ARCO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(40 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>     David Hemenway, formerly Peabody Holding's</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(48 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>TVA to buy Kingston coal</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(225 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>TVA reworks Sevier coal pacts</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(139 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

TVA, Peabody Coal reach new agreement

     A new ten-year contract between Peabody Coal
and the Tennessee Valley Authority will allow TVA
to get out of the mining business at the Camp
Breckinridge mining complex in western Kentucky.
     Although the agreement itself is no surprise (CO
4/16), the quantity of coal finally agreed on -- 5
million tons/yr -- does tend to limit opportunities
for other producers to ship coal to Cumberland.
     Under an agreement that TVA's three-man
board of directors is expected to approve this
week, Peabody assumes all of the Camp
Breckinridge liabilities -- including black lung,
reclamation and employee benefits -- for which
TVA had some responsibility.
     In return, Peabody receives title to TVA's
Camp Breckinridge assets, including some mining
equipment, the No. 9 wash plant, the overland
conveyor to the barge loader, and the barge
facility itself.
     However, TVA retains the coal reserves,
which it will lease to Peabody for a nominal fee.
     Under its current Cumberland contract,
signed five years ago, Peabody supplies the plant
with 3.5 million tons/yr, but TVA has been taking
an additional 1 million tons/yr from the Camp
mines under short-term contracts.
     The new base price/adjustment contract calls
for the delivery of 5 million tons of coal per
year, so there is no significant change from the
current delivery schedule.
     Island Creek has the only other contract at
the plant, supplying about 1.5 million tons/yr
through April of next year. Talks are underway on
a possible renegotiation of that contract.
     The new Peabody contract is retroactive to
November 1989 with a base price of $26.50/ton
f.o.b. barge. Specs are essentially the same --
11,425 Btu/lb, 4.9 lbs/mmBtu of SO2, and 10.5%
ash. But sulfur specs have been tightened to
address the quality of individual shipments.
     TVA's current f.o.b. barge cost for Camp
Breckinridge coal is $29.18/ton but this includes
preparation and belt costs. The price paid to
Peabody is somewhat less, a TVA fuels official
said. Market reopener is possible
     The contract allows either party to reopen
for a market- driven price adjustment in the
fifth year (1994), with provisions for
arbitration if no agreement is reached. The
contract expires in 1999.
     In addition, TVA can "wind down" the
contract if it chooses not to install scrubbers
at Cumberland to comply with the federal acid
rain law. Scrubbers are TVA's most likely
compliance choice for Cumberland. in lieu of
high-sulfur Camp Breckinridge coal, but it would
have to do so at the contract price, a TVA
official said.
     TVA purchased the Camp Breckinridge reserves
in 1965 for $7.4 million. Peabody managed the
mines under a cost/plus contract that was costing
TVA over $40/ton in 1985, when it decided to
close the mines and seek coal on the open
market(CO 10/28/85).
     That decision sparked a firestorm of protest
from the United Mine Workers and Kentucky
congressmen. Within a few weeks TVA and Peabody
had a new contract, and the UMW had agreed to
concessions to improve productivity (CO
11/11/85). Peabody reopens Camp No. 11
     Meanwhile, Peabody this week will reopen its
Camp No. 11 mine after constructing a new slope
from the No. 11 seam to the lower No. 9 seam.
Some 30 miners have been recalled, but when the
300 workers in five continuous miner sections to
produce 3.5 million tons of raw coal per year.
     First opened in 1977, No. 11 was closed in
1987, because the Camp No. 1 and No. 2 mines were
sufficient to meet TVA demand. A Peabody
spokesperson said all three mines will continue
to operate.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

Backers pull plug on embattled Thousand Springs

     Developers last week killed the proposed $4
billion Thousand Springs coal-fired generation
project.
     Confronted with uncertain demand for its power
and under attack in three Western states because of
air quality worries, backers of the 2,000-MW project
had little choice. This is a jolt for Western coal
producers. The planned facility would have burned up
to 7.4 million tons/yr.
     Just two years after losing four of the original
partners, the consortium led by Sierra Pacific
Resources had lost four other companies in the past
month, apparently the final nails in the Thousand
Springs coffin.
     Sierra Pacific Chairman Austin Stedham said last
week the holding company would take a $35 million
writeoff against 1990 earnings because of the decision
to terminate.
     Two key equity participants added with much
fanfare in September 1988 were among the recent
dropouts. Foster Wheeler Energy Corp. was to supply
steam generators. And Bonneville Pacific Corp., an
independent power producer, was to play a key role in
permitting and licensing.
     In addition, two original backers, Pittsburg &
Midway Coal Mining Co. and Westinghouse Electric
Corp., pulled out.
     Those four defections left only four backers:
Sierra Pacific Resources, the project manager and
parent of Sierra Pacific Power Co.; Robert L. Helms
Construction and Development Co. Inc.; Coastal States
Energy Co.; and Kidder, Peabody & Co. Inc.
     Bonneville Pacific President Robert Pratt said
his company dropped out because the project hadn't
signed any power contracts. Yet the consortium was
planning to start construction of the first 250-MW
unit next year.
     A Thousand Springs spokesperson said the power
contract problem was the same reason the other three
companies pulled out.
     Ironically, the project's biggest public headache
in recent months was not the power issue but the
debate over its environmental effects on a region
covering parts of Utah, Nevada and Idaho. In a letter
widely distributed by the project's opponents, a
regional EPA administrator said the plant would
seriously degrade a region with exceptionally good air
quality and visibility.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

MSHA rule seen as generally favorable to industry

     Industry is calling the Mine Safety and Health
Admin.'s final rule on patterns of violation fair, but
the United Mine Workers is wondering if MSHA is just
appeasing Congress and miners with an unenforceable
statute.
     The rule, which took 10 years to complete, is
designed to spot coal mines as well as metal/nonmetal
mines that habitually break safety rules. MSHA will
begin its initial screenings of the nation's
underground and surface mines for patterns of
significant and substantial (S&S) violations Oct. 1.
     However, the agency will wipe the slate clean for
operators by not examining any pre-October history.
MSHA says that "only citations and orders, whether
final or non-final, issued after the effective date of
the rule will be considered in the initial screening
process."
     Only final citations and orders will be
considered in the criteria for establishing a pattern.
     "This is about as fair a rule as could have been
expected, based on the Mine Safety statute," said
Bobby Jackson, vice president of the American Mining
Congress.
     "MSHA's prospective application of this rule will
provide mine operators with the Due Process clause of
the Fifth Amendment," Jackson said. He added that AMC
is concerned that parts of the final standard could
lead to "excessive and unwarranted" application of
MSHA's most severe enforcement standard.
     A UMW spokesperson said the strength of the rule
can be measured by industry's reaction, which is
generally positive. It is not typical for a statute
that makes things tougher for an industry to be
welcomed by that industry, the spokesperson said.
     The design of the rule has a double-edged effect,
the spokesperson said. First, it won't take into
consideration true safety conditions at a mine because
it does not consider violations before October.
Second, it will encourage operators to focus on legal
red tape rather than correcting violations.
     "The union has to question whether Congress'
intent to have a rule used as an additional tool to
protect miners from unsafe conditions will ever see
the light of day," the spokesperson said.

     The rule will work this way:

     After Oct. 1, MSHA will review the compliance
records of every mine at least once a year, reserving
the right to take a closer look at specific mines as
often as needed.
     Generally, the agency will use a two-year
yardstick to measure health and safety patterns.
     MSHA will look at each mine's history of S&S
violations, withdrawal orders for failure to abate S&S
violations, and withdrawal orders for conditions
posing imminent danger to miners.
     When a potential pattern of violations is
spotted, MSHA's district manager will provide written
notification to a mine operator and a representative
of workers at the mine. The operator has 20 days to
take a number of possible steps, one of which is to
institute a program to avoid repeated S&S violations.
MSHA will not consider unrelated S&S violations in
identifying a pattern of violations. It will consider
only those of the same standard, or standards related
to the same hazard, or violations resulting from an
operator's unwarrantable failure to comply. Notice of
a pattern can be ended after an MSHA inspection of the
entire mine finds no S&S violations.
     If MSHA inspects a mine within 90 days after
issuing a pattern of violation notice and finds any
S&S violation that could cause a mine safety or health
hazard, the agency will issue a withdrawal order for
all persons in the affected area. Workers will not be
allowed to return until an MSHA inspector determines
that the violation has been abated.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

AMAX mine faces shutdown over permit void

     An AMAX Coal surface mine in southern Indiana
could be idled next week if a state commission agrees
with a finding by an administrative law judge that the
mine's permit is void.
     William Teeguarden, an ALJ for the state Natural
Resources Dept., has ruled that the permit issued in
May 1989 to AMAX for the Cass pit at its Minnehaha
mine is void because two conditions raised at the time
of the permit application were so major that the
permit should not have been approved. The two
conditions have to do with blasting and hydrology
issues at the site, concerns for nearby landowners.
     Nathan Noland, director of the Indiana Coal
Council, said last week that Teeguarden's decision may
hurt the smooth issuance of mine permits in the state.
An attorney for the council is investigating that
potential impact.
     Teeguarden's order, essentially a recommendation,
is what a review commission at the state DNR will rule
on next week. If the commission agrees the permit is
void, the company can appeal, but will have to cease
operations at the site during the appeal. The mine
produces 1 million tons of coal annually.
     Noland explained that when the DNR approves a
permit, it allows a 30-day period for comments from
interested parties. Within that period, the department
can put conditions on the permit that must be met
before the permit is actually issued.
     For example, Noland said, paying bond fees is a
common condition that must be met during the 30 days.
     Teeguarden's ruling says that certain
circumstances are so major they shouldn't be allowed
as conditions within the 30-day period, and should be
met well before then. The two concerns at Minnehaha
fall under that definition, he said.
     Noland says the question here is what constitutes
an appropriate condition for issuing a permit. He said
Teeguarden's order paints a grey area, where it is
difficult to define what exactly is an inappropriate
condition.
     Kevin Feeney, an AMAX spokesperson, said the
company is reviewing the decision and trying to
determine what the judge means in his findings. He
said that in the meantime operations and water pumping
continue at Minnehaha.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

Savage to haul W.V. coal for Arch Mineral

     The largest hauler of truck coal in the West has
taken a piece of the Eastern market, say sources, with
a deal to haul West Virginia coal for Arch Mineral
Corp., on a movement to Dayton Power and Light.
     Savage Coal Industries of Salt Lake City,
Utah, will truck the coal from Arch's Wylo mine
in Logan County, W.V., to Arch's Big Sandy River
terminal (formerly Dock's Creek).
     Savage referred questions last week to Arch
Mineral, whose only comment was that a file agreement
has not been signed.
If the deal does goes through, Arch will take over the
movement from independent truckers.
     The coal -- about 900,000 tons/yr -- is now
trucked some 55 miles from Wylo to the river and
then loaded into barges for shipment to Dayton.
The coal was shipped by CSX Transportation until
last year, when the switch to truck was made (CO
5/8/89).
     That change wasn't and hasn't necessarily
been an easy one. Truckers typically do not bring
reliability and stability to the business of
hauling coal, opined one source in the utility
industry. Although their costs initially are
competitive with rail, controlling those costs
over time has been a problem for some shippers,
the source said.
     Savage's use of storage terminals at the
mines, its emphasis on service, and various
cost-control measures will help Arch and Dayton
in this regard, two sources believe. "It's a good
deal for both companies," added one observer.
Savage competition to improve Eastern trucking?
     Another coal executive sees the Savage
approach as the wave of the future in the East,
putting pressure to upgrade service not only on
independent truckers but on railroads as well.
Others aren't so sure.
     "Savage's entry into the Eastern coal fields
should serve notice there is a need for a vast
improvement in service," agreed one industry
executive. But although Savage itself likely will
get more Eastern business, "I don't see anyone
else putting together helpful transportation
packages," the executive said.
     "A classy trucking company is almost a
contradiction in terms," the executive stated.
"Trucking will continue to be a localized
phenomenon in Kentucky and West Virginia."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

Oil crisis is no boon to coal -- yet

     Don't expect to wake up one morning and see a
significant hike in coal demand or prices as a result
of the oil crisis in the Mideast staring you in the
face, at least not right away.
     Thats the word from most coal buyers and sellers
on the outlook for coal in the wake of Iraq's invasion
of Kuwait. Due to currently soft coal market
conditions, observers were willing to predict that
coal demand and prices are not likely to change much
if any during the next month or two.
     But most coal observers believe all bets are
off if war erupts in the Persian Gulf or if the
crisis lasts well into the fourth quarter.
     From a marketing stand-point, the crisis is
not bad for the coal industry, but so far there
has been no indication of increased demand or
willingness by consumers to pay higher prices,
said Wyn Holbrook, executive vice president of
sales and marketing for A.T. Massey Coal.
     Holbrook's view, shared by several other
coal producers and consumers, is grounded partly
in recent market conditions: relatively low
domestic and overseas demand, coupled with an
excess supply of coal.
     European utilities, many of which are
capable of switching from oil to coal,
conceivably could burn current oil stockpiles and
come back into the market with enough demand to
boost U.S. exports by 4 to 6 million tons this
year, Holbrook said.
     Whether this much extra tonnage withdrawn
from domestic consumption could spark an increase
in prices depends on the actual ratio of supply
to demand. The market will be interesting to
watch, suggested one coal buyer who is not
confident that prices will not get some lift from
the crisis.
     Mark Joseph, president of Maran Coal, an
exporting company headquartered in New York, adds
that European cement companies who were using oil
may now come back to coal, but the tonnage is
relatively minor.

Recession could balance any demand upsurge

     If there is eventually a shortage of oil,
Joseph said, the resulting need for more coal may
be offset to some extent by an economic downturn,
cutting coal buys. "Basically a recession is a
time when you trim inventories," he cautioned.
     But Joseph said he cannot predict what will
happen to coal markets if the oil crisis lasts
past mid-November.
     Ramesh Malhotra, president of Coal Network
Inc., points out that higher fuel prices will
increase ocean freight costs in favor of U.S.
coal over Australian coal in Europe, because the
U.S. is closer to European coal ports.
     Florida and New England -- two areas of the
country heavily dependent on oil -- are not in a
position to take advantage of coal-fired power
generation from other areas.
     Jim Tullis, manager of off-system sales for
the Southern Company, said Florida utilities
which buy coal-fired power from Southern have
already been taking close to the maximum amount
of power for which they have contracts.
     Also, once Florida Power and Light begins
taking another 300 MW beginning Nov. 1, there
will be no transmission capacityleft between
Southern Company and the Florida utilities,
Tullis said.
     The same conditions exist in New England,
where utilities generate 37% of their electricity
with oil. The transmission capacity does not
exist to import large amounts of coal-fired power
from the Midwest, said a spokesperson for the New
England Power Pool.
     In any event, the utilities' oil stocks are
in "relatively good shape" for the short term and
so far there is no shortage of oil on the world
market, although prices are rising, the
spokesperson said.
     Most coal units in New England -- such as
New England Power's Salem Harbor and Brayton
Point plants -- are baseloaded already.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

East Coast exports show little growth

     Three major East Coast coal export harbors
haven't exactly needed to add new shifts to load ships
so far this year, with coal shipments out of Hampton
Roads and Baltimore through June down about 100,000
long tons from the same period last year.
     Latest figures from John S. Connor Inc. of
Baltimore and W.M. Stone & Co. of Norfolk, Va., show
27.5 million long tons (30.8 million tons) shipped
through the three ports through June. That's compared
with 27.6 million long tons (30.9 million tons)
through June 1989.
     (All figures from this point on are in long
tons.)
     Norfolk has seen an upturn in business. Coal
shipments through there are up about 800,000 tons over
shipments through June 1989. But its companion port,
Newport News, is down over 900,000 tons, more than
making up for Norfolk's good fortune. Baltimore's
numbers have been fairly stable so far this year
compared with 1989.
     Pittston Coal has seen a slump in its shipments
Pittston had shipped over 3.4 million tons through
Norfolk and Newport News, despite labor troubles with
the United Mine Workers union. In the first five
months of this year, it's about 3 million tons.
     Pittston did see a strong export picture in June,
with over 800,000 tons shipped through Hampton Roads.
In May, Pittston shipments through those two ports
totaled about 415,000 tons.
     A big operator shoving less through Hampton Roads
through June is Consolidation, with nearly 2.3 million
tons loaded, compared with 2.8 million tons in the
first five months of 1989. Consol increased its June
shipment through the two ports, with around 417,000
tons that month, compared with about 316,000 in May.
     On the brighter side, Westmoreland, another major
exporter, is sending a lot more coal cars through
Norfolk and Newport News. Through June of this year,
Westmoreland shipped nearly 2.2 million tons through
there, compared with a little over 1.7 million in the
same period in 1989.
     June shipments through Hampton Roads for
Westmoreland totaled nearly 394,000, down from nearly
325,000 in May.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

Acid rain bills carry high price, in jobs, dollars

       EPA has finally issued a long-awaited
study of the impact of the acid rain titles of the
House and Senate clean air bills, and it shows massive
costs for utilities and high-sulfur coal.
     Neither the House nor Senate acid rain control
measures is apparently veto bait for President Bush --
at least in terms of cost. The new EPA study says both
bills carry a price tag for utilities through 2010 of
$12 billion-$18 billion. The original Bush bill had an
estimated cost of $13 billion-$18 billion.
     The EPA report is laid out in "high" and "low"
cases. "High" assumes the highest likely impact of the
bill. The "low" case assumes lowest impact, plus an
accelerated utility use of clean coal technologies
that would tend to further soften the blow of the
final clean air bill on coal jobs and markets.
     One major surprise is that by the end of Phase 2
compliance deadlines -- roughly, the end of the decade
-- neither bill would achieve the targeted 10 million
ton/yr cut in SO2. The House bill would go the
furthest, with up to an 8.3-million-ton cut by the end
of 2000. Only by 2005 would the 10-million-ton target
be met by both bills.
     The report, at least in part, answers questions
put to the administration earlier by House Energy
Chairman John Dingell, D-Mich. A House Energy staffer
said last week that Dingell, who chairs the House
delegation to the clean air conference committee, had
not had a chance to review the report before returning
to Michigan for the August recess.
     Work by conferees is on hold for the recess,
which ends the week after the Labor Day holiday.
Negotiations between staff from the House and Senate
will resume the week before Labor Day.
     Some observers say Congress, if it can't pass a
bill in the month it has left in session, may have to
do it in a "lame duck" session after the November
election. Or the bill just may die for this year, they
point out, especially with Congress distracted by the
oil crisis in the Middle East, and other pressing
issues.

Bill hits utilities, high-sulfur regions

     Meanwhile, the EPA report puts some numbers on
acid rain title impacts. Under Phase 1 (early 1990s),
both bills would hit utilities for about $500 million-
$800 million/yr. In Phase 2, House mandates on
scrubbing in the West due to haze problems around
national parks -- and also due to higher mandated
SO2/NOX reductions -- would mean the House bill would
cost utilities more. The House cost -- $3.4 billion-
$4.4 billion/yr. The Senate bill -- $3 billion-$3.9
billion/yr. Costs to utilities under both bills would
peak at $5 billion/yr in 2005.
     In Phase 1, said the report, high-sulfur coal
output sags by 35 million-42 million tons/yr under the
Senate bill over basecase levels. The House bill cuts
high-sulfur coal by 47 million-56 million tons/yr. The
Senate bill has a lower impact because it sets lower
emissions reductions in Phase 1 and has scrubber
incentives.
     In Phase 2, high-sulfur consumption continues to
tumble, by 96 million-98 million tons/yr under the
Senate bill, 92 million-109 million tons/yr due to the
House measure. High-sulfur coal markets will show a
strong recovery after 2000 as new, cleaner coal plants
come on-line.
     The silver lining in this acid rain cloud is that
an uptick in low-sulfur coal production will offset,
basically one-for-one, losses in high-sulfur coal
lining doesn't help high-sulfur coal regions.
     In Northern Appalachia and the Midwest, the two
main high-sulfur regions, the Senate bill would cut
end of the century. Under the House proposal, it's
6,000-7,000 jobs by 1996, 13,000-16,000 after 2001.
(The House bill's Phase 1 and 2 deadlines are one year
later than those of the Senate.)
     One factor in the House bill that could mitigate
high-sulfur coal losses is a provision allowing
governors to mandate use of in-state coal. The report
does not analyze that factor, but says job losses can
be held down with it -- at the cost of higher utility
rates.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

McCall fate still uncertain

     Jno. McCall Coal has told its coal suppliers
and creditors that it will resolve its current
credit crisis and resume buying coal for its 1990
export contracts.
     "I'm confident McCall will get themselves
out of it," said the sales executive for one
producer who has sold coal to McCall for over 10
years. "They indicate to me they will."
     As reported last week, numerous sources in
the coal industry believe McCall's major bank
pulled its line of credit, preventing the company
from paying for coal already shipped and, in
some cases, from procuring new coal.
     There was no indication late last week that
the problem had been resolved. McCall continued
to decline comment.
     Coal industry executives speculate that
McCall will choose to file for protection from
its creditors under Chapter 11 of the federal
bankruptcy code, but one supplier said he
believes any filing would protect creditors as
well.
     But McCall had made no such filing through
last Thursday, according to a clerk in the U.S.
Bankruptcy Court in Baltimore, Md., where McCall
is headquartered.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

NERCO gets cautious Shearson nod

     Coal makes NERCO Inc. a good investment, but the
company's natural gas and precious metals divisions
are putting the company on slightly shaky stock market
ground for the moment.
     Rafael Villagran, coal analyst for Shearson
Lehman Hutton, says in a new report that continuing
soft prices for gas and precious metals for the rest
of this year and through 1991 will hamper NERCO's
profitability even though NERCO's second-quarter
earnings were higher than Villagran expected.
     He points out that the price of NERCO shares has
fallen in the past two months -- down 14% from a high
of $25/share. That downturn likely will be corrected
in the long run as gas and precious metals prices
recover, Villagan predicts. He adds that pending acid
rain legislation should also boost NERCO stock because
of the company's heavy position in low-sulfur coal.
     NERCO coal shipments in the second quarter of
1990 hit 8.8 million tons, 1 million tons above
Villagran's earlier estimates. Because of an unusually
strong marketing push that resulted in recent spot and
test-burn sales, 1990 company sales should hit 36.2
million tons, Villagran predicts. The company shipped
32 million tons in 1989, he reports.
     The situation in the Middle East, with Iraq
invading Kuwait, could also help NERCO, if the
instability lasts long enough. Investors tend to go
heavily into precious metals during unstable times,
Villagran points out. And an oil shock would tend to
drive up prices for natural gas.
     That aside, Villagran is cutting his estimate of
NERCO's expected profits/share this year from $2.15 to
$1.95, and from $2.50 to $2.25 in 1991. But he has a
high recommendation out for the stock, especially for
investors interested in long-term performance.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

NLRB, UMW deal awaits ruling

     A decision is imminent on a settlement between
the National Labor Relations Board and the United Mine
Workers on litigation over secondary boycotts during
the Pittston strike (CO 4/16).
     The settlement would prohibit secondary boycotts
nationwide, and in exchange the union would not be
found guilty of secondary boycott activity in the
Pittston strike. The NLRB's general counsel is
deciding on the merits of that settlement.
     John Falcone, the NLRB attorney working on the
case, said the settlement was filed with the board
along with the objections of most of the 300 companies
involved in the secondary boycotts.
     If the general counsel decides the objections
have merit, the settlement will be sent back to the
parties for further negotiations. If the counsel
decides the objections lack merit, the settlement will
be forwarded to the labor board for approval.
     One source said the counsel is unlikely to
endorse the settlement with the full weight of all
those objections attached to it.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

Arch hit with Ky. finding

     Arch Mineral Corp. has been slapped with a pair
of relatively mine violations by the state of Kentucky
that could endanger another project.
     The state Natural Resources Cabinet last week
cited the company for not reclaiming all of a highwall
at a surface mine in Breathitt County, next to the
Robinson Forest. Company attorney Blair Gardner said
that finding will be appealed.
     A second citation has to do with spillover of
site debris onto nearby land owned by the University
of Kentucky. Gardner said the company will clean the
debris and won't appeal the state ruling.
     The state action has larger implications for
delicate negotatiations among the state, the
university and Arch over a 350-acre site Arch has
leased for a surface mine in the Robinson Forest.
     The university claims the site is part of a
watershed it uses for research purposes. Both sides
are talking about a possible land swap to ease
environmental concerns.
     The application to mine the property is pending
with the state.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

Big Mama probe could take month

     Kentucky investigators in the triple-fatality Big
Mama mine blast are saying the investigation probably
will not be complete until mid-September.
     Leroy Gross, supervisor for the London district
office of the state Dept. of Mines and Minerals, said
the investigators have not reached any conclusions and
have not ruled anything out.
     Gross had told Coal Outlook  after the explosion
that he thought the investigators would have some
conclusions this week (CO 8/6). He said last
week, however, that the investigation will probably
not be completed until mid-September.
     Charles McGraw, team leader of the Mine Safety
Health and Admin.'s investigation, said investigation
team members are not allowed to talk about the
investigation or findings until a report is published.
He said the agency may issue a preliminary report,
perhaps in September.
     Gross said the investigators interviewed the
witnesses last week but he could not discuss the
findings.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

Crisis may hurt coal

     Far from aiding the coal industry, the
current oil crisis may reduce its profits,
suggests Ramesh Malhotra, president of Coal
Network, Inc. of Mason, Ohio.
     Higher oil prices will increase rail, barge
and truck costs, as well as mining costs,
particularly at surface mines, Malhotra notes.
     "At the same time, demand for coal will not
increase, because there will be a very limited
demand as a result of oil shortages or higher oil
prices," he added. Because there is a current
oversupply of coal, producers will not risk
losing market share by increasing prices.
     "Profit margins will go down," he concludes.
     The only wild card is the export market and
the possible increase in demand for U.S. steam
coal worldwide resulting from oil shortages,
Malhotra said.
     Malhotra acknowledged that coal contracts
with pass-thorugh provisions will allow producers
to escape the cost increases.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

Lawson says `I told you so'

     Richard Lawson, retired Air Force general and
head of the National Coal Assn., pointed out last week
he was right in his repeated warnings over the years
about U.S. reliance on Middle East oil.
     A continuing crisis over the Iraqi seizure of
Kuwait has driven up world oil prices, and put in
doubt the continued steady supply of oil from that
region.
     Lawson said that for too long the U.S. has been
ignoring the true cost of Middle East oil, including
the cost of "keeping $8 billion aircraft carriers
(and) $3 billion battleships" on patrol in the region,
"and more importantly, the lives of American military
personnel on the front lines."
     Domestic coal needs a greater role in U.S. energy
policy, Lawson said. Coal, along with energy
conservation, domestic oil, natural gas, nuclear
energy and alternative energy sources are "imperative
to assure energy independence and self-determination,"
he points out.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

UFI signs coal car deal

     Utility Fuels Inc. has signed a $25 million deal
with the Chicago Central & Pacific Railroad to supply
and maintain 220 coal rail cars in the West.
     The cars, a combination of rotary and bottom dump
units, will transport coal from the Hanna Basin of
Wyoming east to power plants around Chicago. UFI,
based in Houston, is a subsidiary of Houston
Industries Inc.
     This deal moves UFI, which owns the third-biggest
private fleet of rail cars in the U.S., into new
territory. The company owns and operates 2,300 cars
that run 17 million tons/yr of coal and lignite from
Wyoming to six Houston Lighting & Power units in
Texas.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

Inter-Mountain clarifies identity

     As of the first of August, Inter-Mountain Coals
Inc. passed into coal industry history and a new
entity began taking its place.
     Parent AMVEST Corp. decided, due in part to
Inter-Mountain's increasing production and size, to
clarify its identity, so Inter-Mountain's name has
been changed to AMVEST Coal Sales Inc.
     "The adoption of the new name," said William
Dickey, executive vice president of Inter-Mountain,
"should clearly communicate both our production
capabilities and our relationship to AMVEST."
Privately held AMVEST Corp. is also involved in oil
and gas exploration and merchant banking.
     Dickey told Coal Outlook that in the past two
fiscal years, Inter-Mountain has produced about 4.5
million tons each year. In the 1991 fiscal year, which
began Aug. 1, he hopes to push that to 5 million tons
from existing operations, which encompass two mines in
Virginia and one in West Virginia.
     Also, said Dickey, the company has a "relatively
aggressive acquisition program," which is looking for
coal mines/properties in the same region as current
operations. All qualities of coal are being
considered, he said, though the ideal properties would
fit with their existing production, including a large
output of high-vol metallurgical coal.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

Carboex positions for Ashland buy

     Carboex International, Ltd., the Spanish
coal trader, has notified the Securities and
Exchange Commission that it may increase its
stake in Ashland Coal from 9% to 11.87%.
     This is not exactly a major surprise. David Todd,
a spokesperson for Ashland, notes Carboex was given a
warrant to purchase 450,000 shares of common stock
when the company was restructured two years ago (CO
8/22/88).
     Carboex has not yet exercised the warrant
but has merely informed the SEC that it may do
so, Todd said. The shares would be issued by
Ashland, Todd added.
     The warrant permits Carboex to buy the
shares during the six-month period from Sept. 1,
1990, through Feb. 28, 1991 at a price equal to
two times the price the stock sold for in the
1988 public offering. The 1988 sale price was $11
per share; last week the stock was trading for
about $24/share.
     One Wall Street coal analyst doubts Carboex wants
to up its stake in Ashland. But he suggests Carboex
may be tempted to buy shares if it can "dump" them in
the market for a profit.
     In selling 4.6 million shares of Ashland
Coal common stock to the public in 1988, the
three principle shareholders decreased their
stake. Ashland Oil now owns 46%, Saarbergwerke
A.G. has 14%, and Carboex 9%.
     Saarbergwerke is a West German coal
producing, coal trading, and electricity
generating company owned by the government.
Ashland Oil also owns 50% of Arch Mineral.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

     Island Creek has tightened its belt,

     Island Creek has tightened its belt,
eliminating 13 positions in its Lexington, Ky.,
office and 21 positions in its two West Virginia
divisions.
     The reductions include two positions at the
sales account level at Island Creek Coal Sales.
The company has also transferred seven
Lexington-based employees to the operating
divisions.
     Chairman S.O. "Bud" Ogden said the
reductions and transfers follow a corporate
strategy "to maintain a competitive position in
today's coal market and to place more decision-
making responsibility with the operating
divisions."
     The move is not related to last spring's
reorganization that separated operating and
marketing functions, the company said (CO 5/14).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

      Diane Bunton, manager of marketing research

      Diane Bunton, manager of marketing research
for Arch Mineral, has been named a sales
representative for the St. Louis-based company.
She will handle utility and industrial accounts
in the East, reporting to Patrick Panzarino,
assistant vice president of eastern coal sales.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

     Peter Rumsey, former vice president of sales

     Peter Rumsey, former vice president of sales
for Ingram Barge, is a new vice president of Pen
Transportation, an affiliate of Pen Coal of
Nashville, Tenn. He has 23 years of experience in
rail, barge and truck transportation, as well as
terminal operations.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

     A.G. "Tony" Fernandes, previously controller

     A.G. "Tony" Fernandes, previously controller
of Atlantic Richfield Co., has been named
president of ARCO Coal, succeeding H.L. Bilhartz,
who moves to ARCO's Alaskan oil unit. The change
is part of an ongoing program to expose the
company's younger executives to a variety of
managerial experience, ARCO said.
     With ARCO for over 20 years, Fernandes has
no prior coal experience, although he has worked
in minerals.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

     Meanwhile, Mark Baylor has been named ARCO

     Meanwhile, Mark Baylor has been named ARCO
Coal's manager of contract administration,
replacing Jerry Biggs, who left the company.
Replacing Baylor as manager of coal sales for the
north central region is Paige Beville, who was
previously in market research.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

     David Hemenway, formerly Peabody Holding's

     David Hemenway, formerly Peabody Holding's
senior litigation counsel, has joined a regional
St. Louis law firm, Thompson and Mitchell, and
will practice primarily in the firm's litigation
department.
     Hemenway, who had served in Peabody's law
department since 1973, said he will continue to
handle coal industry matters.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

TVA to buy Kingston coal

     The Tennessee Valley Authority will buy
about 16,000 tons of coal per week under three
new contracts to be reviewed this week by the
federal utility's board of directors.
     The purchases come under its Requisition 23
for the Kingston steam plant. No purchases were
made for John Sevier (see separate brief).
     Manalapan Mining will supply about 23,500
tons/mo via CSX Transportation to Kingston for a
delivered price of $31.06/ton,
136 cents/mmBtu (evaluated), and
124.24 cents/mmBtu (actual). The total term
is six years, but either party can reopen the
contract for any reason after three years.
     Manalapan's agent is Pincelli and
Associates. Its sources are its various mines in
Harlan County, Ky. Specs are 12,500 Btu/lb (as
received), 1.63% dry sulfur, 2.34 lbs/mmBtu of
SO2, and 9.2% ash (as received).
     Bell County Coal Corp. and U.S. Coal Inc.
will each receive 10-year contracts with mutual
reopeners after the first five years.
Norfolk-Southern railroad will deliver the coal.
     Bell County, a unit of James River Coal,
will furnish 7,500 tons/wk for $31.14/ton,
136.32 cents/mmBtu (evaluated), and
124.54 cents/mmBtu (actual). Specs are 12,500
Btu/lb, 1.6% sulfur, 2.3 lbs/mmBtu, and 9.2% ash.
     U.S. Coal will supply 2,500 tons per week
from its Scott County, Tenn., mine for
$31.47/ton, 137.40 cents/mmBtu (evaluated),
and 125.88 cents/mmBtu (actual). Specs are
12,500 Btu/lb, 1.84% sulfur, 2.6 lbs/mmBtu of
SO2, and 9% ash.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet
August 13, 1990

TVA reworks Sevier coal pacts

     The Tennessee Valley Authority has
renegotiated one coal its John Sevier steam
plant.
     The agency was able to negotiate prices that are
at least 50 cents/ton less than the best and final
offers it received for John Sevier under Requisition
23, said Greg Nicely, a TVA fuels official.    The
agency therefore "walked away" from the John Sevier
bids, Nicely said.
     Marion Duncan, another TVA official, said he
could only comment on one contract, an RBS Inc.
agreement with a new base delivered price in the
neighborhood of $30/ton, 134.5 cents/mmBtu
(evaluated), and 122.83 cents/mmBtu (actual).
     At the rate of 4,200 tons/wk, RBS will
supply coal from J.A.D., a Virginia supplier, and
Mountain Spur and Harlan-Kyvaco, both of
Kentucky. Guaranteed specs are 12,200 Btu/lb,
1.9% sulfur, and 9% ash, all as received. The
term is three years starting this month.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B34-6</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B029-133</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey90.html 205.156.212.5 19970114225745 text/html 72361
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:55:26 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:27 GMT
Content-length: 72174
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ey90.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
COAL UK via NewsNet <BR>
January 30, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>COAL PRIVATISATION ONE YEAR ON</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2727 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>THE MARKET: FLATTERING TO DECEIVE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(508 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>M & G TAKES MC PANAMAX</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(574 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>EASTERN SEEKS 500,000T</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(108 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>OWENS STARTS NEWCARB</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(246 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>BUYING AGENCY SEEKS 25,000T</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(73 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>NW NHS SEEKS 26,000T</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(95 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>RJB BUILDS A POWER PLANT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(75 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>NP TURNS TO SELF-UNLOADERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(742 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>STRATHCLYDE SEEKS 90,000T</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(274 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>IMPORTS MOVE 7% AHEAD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(436 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>BRUNNER MOND DROPS COAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(48 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>OPENCAST NERVES FRAY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1712 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>GILLESPIE TO MINE EASTER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(78 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>MAIDENS HALL LOOKS HOPEFUL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(111 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>GOLIGHTLY MINES AT HOME</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(87 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>BANKS APPLIES FOR PITHOUSE WEST</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(122 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>EUROPE TIGHTENS EA NEEDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(101 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>COALCO CLOSES ON ALBION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(346 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>ASFORDBY: DELAYED TO SUMMER?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(238 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>RAIL-FREIGHT GOES FOR $400M</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(78 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>POWERCOAL FIXES 1996 FREIGHT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(79 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>PG PICKS HAULIERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(50 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>STERLING SUPPORTS SHORT SEA RATES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(388 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>CI WINS BANKS' SUPPORT?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(124 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>SHARES HOLD UP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(292 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>CELTIC GOES INTERNATIONAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(63 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>COALITE TALKS COLLAPSE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(52 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

COAL PRIVATISATION ONE YEAR ON

The privatised coal industry was a year old on January 1. Government
has been quick to claim plaudits for the completion of another
successful privatisation and not just because of the huge amount (#950m
for the mining assets alone) of cash that it generated. However, much
of what has happened in 1995 that has been positive has been by
accident (demand recovery for example) whilst there are policy
leftovers (on opencast) which are still hurting coal.

Coal minister Richard Page, speaking to the Coal Industry Society at
the beginning of January, said of the industry that "it is a good deal
bigger than many people forecast ... one year on, there are 29 former-
BC pits in operation (30 if you count Cwmgwili) in the private sector."

Paradoxically competition, which was supposedly at the heart of the
government's privatisation policy, has had a bad year with the
dominance of one company each in England, Scotland and Wales clearly
outweighing the influence of the small to medium-sized independent
mining companies. Perhaps the biggest source of grievance in the
industry at the privatisation is that only two companies in the UK were
able to benefit significantly from higher demand in 1995, each a
successor to BC. The others simply didn't have the resources to make
more than a token effort towards meeting the generators' needs.

At a January-November figure of 31.2mt deep mined output looked set to
be 10-12% ahead of year ago levels, suggesting a full year tally of 34-
35mt. Coal consumption for power generation in January-November was
53.3mt, 4.4% below year-ago levels but still way ahead of expectations.
This implies a full year burn of 58-59mt, split between Northern
Ireland, 1-1.5mt; Scotland, 4.5mt; and England/Wales, 52-53.5mt. In
1994 RJB Mining predicted 1995/96 coal-burn by the electricity supply
industry at 36-42mt, whilst Coal UK predicted 38mt.

In a declining trend the fiscal year figures ought to be lower than the
calendar year numbers, but even so the fiscal year predictions clearly
understated 1995's potential burn. Coal benefitted from nuclear
failures, from a better-than-expected electricity demand and from
failures at new gas-fired plant. Although nuclear generation recovered
later in the year and is now ahead of year-ago levels, these factors
combined to give extra coal demand of 4-6mt over the year.

The opencast sector had its worst year since 1987, in terms of
production, and since who knows when in terms of planning permissions.
Planners point out that 30% of planning appeals are still being won,
but so far the victor has always been the same company, RJB Mining. RJB
has also done well at securing planning permissions from local
authorities, an area where the rest of the industry has experienced
problems. Opencast output at 14.9mt in January-November was marginally
below year-ago levels despite reports from the opencasters that all
sites are working flat out at the moment.

For the housecoal trade, last year's mild winter, followed by a very
warm summer when stocks were high, came close to wrecking many
businesses. For importers, the stakes were pushed too high for most
when UK producers concentrated sales efforts on the markets that they
had won from BC and sized coal imports are lower than for many years.

RJB beats all expectations

Without a doubt the star of 1995 was a rampant RJB Mining. It started
the year having just taken over the mining assets of BC's English
divisions, complete with contracts to supply National Power and
PowerGen with 28-29mt/yr to March 31 1998. Although it lost industrial
sales during the year and, with everybody else, had a dreadful first
half in the domestic trade, the company has gone from strength to
strength.

The problems of the power industry led to frantic efforts by the
generators, particularly early in the year, to make up the shortfalls
left by nuclear and gas by burning coal. With additional sales of up to
3mt in its first quarter, RJB effectively kicked off from the penalty
spot and continued to enjoy the misfortunes of the power industry for
the rest of 1995.

Although other companies have complained that RJB was the chief
beneficiary of the increased burn, RJB's biggest achievement has been
the speed with which it adapted to its new position. As one important
source at a generator put it, "the transition (to private ownership)
has been seamless and RJB has been very responsive to our needs".

The vast bulk of the increase in deep-mined output came from RJB. By
May the company was announcing debt reduction well ahead of schedule
(Coal UK 42/9) and in September it confirmed good first half results
with a turnover of #740m on sales of 21mt and output of 18mt (Coal UK
45/17). Full results for 1995 will not be published before March but,
given further stock clearance to 5mt or less since June and more
additional sales to the generators, a turnover of #1,400-1,500m looks
to be on the cards, implying profits of #160m plus and presenting the
probability of almost complete bank debt recovery by the summer. Some
analysts have been upgrading their forecasts of turnover and
profitability to, respectively, #1,500-1,600m and #175m-plus. In
December 1994 RJB predicted pre-tax profits at #119m for 1995.

With another two years of lucrative contract tonnage ahead, RJB's
initial #914m gamble has clearly paid off. After getting a price
reduction of #100m, it paid #700m initially for its acquisition plus
#37m to the government at the end of last year. It will pay another
#77m at the end of this year, #40m six months later and a final #40m at
the end of 1997. It raised #494m in bank debt and #385m in equity while
c. #375m of the bank debt was acquisition finance. To have paid off so
much of the acquisition finance this quickly is a considerable
achievement.

Of the 20 individual pits, the best performers have been Riccall and
Wistow, which easily passed 3mt each for the year, Stillingfleet, which
hit 2.2mt; and Maltby and Welbeck, which both passed 2mt. At a smaller
scale, the Blenkinsopp drift apparently surpassed expectations of
250,000t. Problem mines were Asfordby (see separate story) and Point of
Ayr, whilst Daw Mill is understood to have been disappointing.

Celtic lays sound foundations

For Celtic Energy, progress has been less spectacular but nonetheless
just as encouraging. Last November (Coal UK 47/7) its chief executive
Bryan Riddlestone announced that 25% of the company's senior debt had
already been paid off. Given the heavy venture capital backing for
Celtic's takeover of BC's South Wales interests, a 25% payback was
probably in accordance with expectations. Celtic's financial year will
run from April to March, so the first year will last for 15 months. A
typical year, according to sources close to Celtic will gross turnover
of c. #120m.

Celtic won't say how its doing at the moment but sales are likely to
have been #110-125m in Calendar 1995; comprising those to National
Power, likely to have been 1mt and bringing in c. #35-40m; those to
industry, 750,000t earning #20-25m; exports, 200,000t for #5-10m; and
domestic sales of over 500,000t for over #50m.

Scotland braces for drivage

Scottish Coal was the least successful of the three successor companies
but, even so, sold more than it expected. It did not gain as much from
high generator demand because Scottish Power needed less than had been
expected, but English independent suppliers boosted demand by taking on
Scottish coal to make up for their own shortfalls.

The power link to the English grid remains hamstrung by planning
problems in the north of England and, until these can be overcome,
cannot function at full capacity. The ESI's burn struggled to get above
4mt. Scottish found new sales of low-volatile product to markets
overseas and re-established links with Ireland and Northern Ireland. It
sold significant quantities of industrial and housecoal grades to
English markets.

The company will not comment on its profitability. This is partly
because it, like Celtic, will work in future to an April-March
financial year so this year will last for 15 months. However, it also
has three PLC shareholders - Coal Investments, Savile Gordon and
Waverley Mining Finance - which means that disclosure of financial data
becomes an organisational nightmare. Coal UK's best guess is that the
company managed a turnover of roughly #150m over the 12 months with a
small profit.

It faces, shortly some fairly big investment decisions, funded from
within, because it has to complete converting Longannet to full retreat
mining and it has to access a new set of reserves. A decision to
develop westward under the Forth and north of Airth and Kincardine
looks imminent. Longannet had a poor first half to the year, hitting
geological problems in the late Spring, but has subsequently improved
steadily, particularly with the arrival of its first retreat face.
Scottish's opencast business continues to function smoothly, although
claims from before privatisation continue to divert attention.

Coal Investments' runs before it walks

For Coal Investments 1995 will not be remembered happily. It started
the year as a small scale operation that had failed to secure any of
the BC regions. It had six licensed mines, each in various stages of
development and a small contracts portfolio. It was sticking with its
avowed intention to work each pit as a bord and pillar operation using
continuous miners.

The scale planned had been surprising because BC pits were widely
believed to be expensive to run even before they had any mining
machinery put in them. However, Hem Heath got started early in the year
and looked to be going well, with a continuous miner producing at
200,000t/yr. Silverdale, meanwhile, discovered that it was a coking
coal mine and developed a longwall face aimed at British Steel.

At the same time chief executive Malcolm Edwards busied himself picking
up contracts; the trouble was that he picked up a few too many. By the
middle of the year CI had landed orders to supply: National Power,
2.8mt/yr; PowerGen, 500,000t/yr; Alcan, 200,000t/yr; British Steel,
250,000t/yr; Castle Cement, 400,000t/yr; plus AHS Emstar and NHS
Supplies with singles. CI thus found itself with over 4mt/yr of
business, all running to 1999, and output of less than 1mt/yr.

The development programme, essentially to switch all mine plans to
longwalls, that was then put in place made substantial demands on the
patience of shareholders who had already stumped up #48.5m in pursuit
of profits. Although the CI pits were running at 40-50,000t/week at the
time, they ran into major problems shortly after, with Annesley
Bentinck and Markham Main the main culprits. Having them down and
getting them back on line drained cash from the company just when it
should have been pouring funds into developing Coventry. Consequently
CI arranged a loan facility of up to #30m. In November it breached some
of the conditions of the loan and the banks withdrew their cooperation
and by the end of the year the company was in deep trouble. At the time
of writing Coal Investments looked set to retain the support of the
banks, but at the expense of another rights issue (see separate story).

Betws, Hatfield, Tower: the real niche miners

Three collieries are now run independently; Betws, Hatfield and Tower.
Each has its own management structure and each its own priorities. In
marketing they have each concentrated on specific sectors, aiming to
make a name in ways that the bigger companies cannot easily do. All
three did very well in 1995.

Betws is the oldest of the three and is approaching its second birthday
as an independent operation. It was taken on as a management buy-out
after BC closed it as one of the original 10 no-hopers announced in
October 1992. The mine produced ahead of budget at 110,000t last year
and by March will have mined 200,000t since re-opening. Its manager
Martin Cook says that Betws Anthracite is profitable and that it has
paid off 50% of its debt. Cook will not cite numbers but, at
110,000t/yr, turnover is likely to be #5-8m/yr.

Betws employs 110, working by shot-firing, and runs a prep. plant
supplied by Unifloc. According to Cook, it is likely to turn out the
same volume in 1996 and for the next seven to eight years will stick
with this annual rate. In three years time, Betws plans to start
development work on the Rock seam, which Cook says will add another 10-
15 years to the mine's life. Betws Anthracite has also seen its
marketing relationships change. Its contract with Coal Products for
washed duff remains the same, but CP is now responsible for marketing
the sized output as well, following its takeover of Anglo Coal.

Hatfield Coal Co. is another management buyout. It has rebuilt itself
by the simple expedient of offering the market what it always wanted.
Hatfield's output is very popular because of its high quality,
particularly in the sized grades. It shut, briefly, and had much of its
face gear removed by British Coal, partly because of an appalling
labour record and partly because BC's drive to increase efficiency also
increased the output of fines, which failed to pay their way.

Hatfield now produces much the same as in the days before BC attempted
to make it more efficient - 400,000t/yr (Coal UK 48/6). It works hard
to maximise sized output, using longwall techniques. It went into
profit very quickly, selling sized output through traders and fines
through Transcor. At 400,000t/yr, turnover ought not to be less than
#10m. Its financial year runs from July to June. Last year it made
#1.5m post-tax on an #11.5m turnover and 362,000t production.

Goitre Tower Anthracite is the example that is celebrated by all of the
pundits. With politicians queueing up to take credit for the workers'
buyout's success, the real plaudits should be showered on the workforce
itself. GTA recently announced pre-tax profits of #3.5m for 1995, which
it promptly divided between the work-force and its future investment
fund. It produced 400-450,000t and sold the lot, indicating a turnover
of #12-14m.

South Wales gains one, loses one

For the private mining industry in South Wales the most positive move
was the arrival of a new PLC, Consolidated Coal. This was launched to
run five Neath Valley drift mines, to develop a briquetting works
nearby and subsequently took over the Sarn Helen opencast mine from
Glotec.

Consolidated's arrival closely followed the loss of Ryan Mining. Having
failed to acquire a BC region, Ryan's parent Ryan Group finally
accepted that its debt burden was too high to sustain. It retreated
into Crouch Mining and sold Ryan Mining to NSM for #25m including debt
take-up.

NSM is still swallowing its mouthful and continues to develop the
Pentreclwydau mine that Ryan had driven as far as the pit bottom. Big P
starts coaling commercially in the summer, but it is already producing
development coal. It will be a bord and pillar mine.

The domestic trade turns upside down

The domestic solid fuel business had an awful year, with a warm spring,
very hot summer and mild autumn ensuring that merchant stocks stayed
high. Nevertheless, all of the leading distributors changed hands, or
are doing so.

First to go was Coal Products, sold by BC to its management. The new
company started lucky, having missed a mild winter and geared up to
endure the close season. Within months it bid for Anglo United's solid
fuel businesses and it acquired Anglo Coal, with Hargreaves. Anglo's
efforts to sell Coalite have failed for the time being (see separate
story).

Late in the year British Fuels was sold by BC to its management. It too
struck lucky. BC suffered the pain of a dismal heating year and, when
the management team's Heptagon team took over, the weather turned cold.
BF, like CP, has plenty of ambition and looks set to launch itself at
the domestic gas markets.

Finally, the year ended with the last of the major distribution
companies up for sale, PD Fuels. Its management has gained preferred
bidder status to buy the company from Powell Duffryn and is aiming to
complete within weeks.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

THE MARKET: FLATTERING TO DECEIVE

If 1995 was a great year for the UK coal industry, 1996 is the year
when the hangover starts. In England & Wales this year will see the
impact of the full operation of the gas stations that were delayed last
year. It will also be the year when the nuclear industry minces before
its prospective investors. Coal, as a consequence, will be squeezed
and, by the end of the year 12.5mtce of coal-fired power burn will have
been displaced.

As 1996 progresses, 5GW of combined cycle gas turbine (CCGT) plant will
start commercial operation. In the first half of the year Barking
Power's Barking Reach (IGW) station, which has already started working,
has an impact. National Power's Little Barford (680MW), one of the
chief problem stations, and Hydro/Norweb's Keadby (680MW), the other
which completes commissioning this month, also come on early in 1996.
Together they will displace 6mtce.

From the summer another 2.5GW will displace 6mtce of coal burn, taking
1995's 52-53mt power station burn down to 40mtce/yr by the end of the
year. The actual burn for the whole of 1996 looks as though it will be
between 42mtce and 46mtce. Assuming that Coal Investments is still
there, it is at about this time that RJB finds that its market is
shrinking but it does not appear to suffer until 1997. CI and the other
private miners will be supplying over 6mt to the generators who will be
importing at least 3mt, leaving RJB with 33-37mtce. Last year RJB
supplied 29mt under contract plus about 6mt of additional supplies.

In 1997 the pace of gas station construction slows, but the effects of
late-1996 stations building up to full power, plus the timing of
commissioning for the scheduled 1997 stations means that by autumn 1997
the full impact of 17.5mtce of lost burn will be felt.

Assuming rival suppliers remain at the same tonnage levels, implies a
demand from RJB's mines of 25mtce/yr, against contracted tonnages of 28-
29mtce/yr. With another 755MW station already under construction for
1998 and a further 2.6GW planned, negotiations on future contracts will
clearly be painful for the suppliers.

Current CCGT development

                      Commercial
Station/MW             operation  Company/Partners           Status

Barking/1,000           end-1995  Barking Power             Started
Little Barford/680    early-1996  National Power         Commission
Keadby/680              Jan 1996  Hydro/Norweb           Commission
Connah's Quay/1,400     mid-1996  PowerGen                 Building
Medway/660              Aug 1996  AES Medway             Commission
Citigen/60                  1996  Citigen                  Building
King's Lynn/340         end-1996  Eastern Group            Building
Salt Union/47               1996  Hydro/Salt Un.           Building
TOTAL 1996    4,867 MW - 12.5mtce coal-burn displaced by end-1996
Indian Queens/160     early-1997  Turb. Power              Building
South Humber/750      early-1997  Humber Power             Building
Didcot/1,350            mid-1997  National Power           Building
TOTAL 1996-97  2,260MW - 17.5mtce coal-burn displaced by end-1997
Avonmouth/755               1998  Hydro/British Gas        Building
Runcorn/700                 1998  InterGen                Firm plan
Enfield/280            late-1998  Indeck                  Firm plan
TOTAL 1996-98  1,735MW - 22.5mtce coal-burn displaced by end-1998
Winnington/300              1999  Brunner Mond            Firm plan
Teeside/800                 1999  Flotilla (Enron)        Firm plan
Staythorpe/1,500            1999  National Power          Firm plan

TOTAL 1996/99  2,600MW - 28.5mtce coal-burn displaced by end-1999
GRAND TOTAL   10,462MW.

Source: Power UK.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

M & G TAKES MC PANAMAX

M & G is negotiating to take a panamax-sized cargo of Colombian product
through the Redcar ore terminal. The shipment is expected to be
delivered in February-March and will comprise Carboandes material
loaded at Santa Marta. It is being shipped via MC Coal.

Neither buyer nor trader would comment on the deal, beyond confirming
that talks are underway, but its size has sparked plenty of excitement
and speculation in the trading community. A move up to panamax-sized
trades has long been a cherished ambition of UK importers, described by
one as "inevitable", who have found themselves squeezed by the low
price offers of local suppliers and by Sterling's weakness. Although
handy-sized shipments have come in this winter, for EH Bennett via
Shell and for MacPhail via MC Coal, there has been a growing body of
opinion that such trade is very risky.

Prices for Colombian screening product are unlikely to be below
$36.00/t FOB, basis 12,000Btu GAR. After freight in a handy of well
over $12.00, plus discharge costs, the shipment lands in a UK port at
#34-35.00/t and still has to be moved to a yard and screened. By fixing
a panamax MC will probably shave $3.00 off the freight price,
suggesting a landed #32.50/t.

For M & G, the timing of the deal is also significant because delivery
as late as March indicates that the buyer is not that worried about
missing the housecoal season. By the time that screening can be
completed at the Hartlepool yard the season should be over. There will
be demand from merchants for good quality Colombian material for
stocking but it will not be nearly as keen as during the season.

This suggests that M & G has a different customer in mind, whoever is
buying the fines. It had a major fines customer two years ago in
British Steel, when it sold on products generated by processing La
Jagua coal supplied by Bridge. However, BS presumably lived without
that when Shell and Phibro got the rights to the La Jagua product and
asked M & G a price it wouldn't pay. It also seems unlikely that BS
would be that bothered about securing large volumes of fines anyway
since it viewed the original M & G product as little more than filler
carbon.

Either M & G has a new customer in mind or the finance deal offered by
MC is such that M & G can afford to stock the sized coal for next
winter and let the fines take care of themselves. MC's parent
Mitsubishi has more than a little financial clout.

If it is a new customer then the three obvious choices are ICI,
National Power and PowerGen. ICI looks a good prospect, on the buyer's
doorstep and known to be fond of Colombian product. PG, with its own
supplies of Colombian, looks unlikely. NP is an avid collector of cheap
fines and has stations both north and south of the Tees, but they are a
fair-sized haul away.

PG subsidiary PowerCoal has meanwhile booked freight for its Carbones
del Caribe product (see separate story). One complaint of traders is
that any attempt to bring in alternative supplies of CdC product brings
instant complaints from the utility to its suppliers. Although CdC has
not apparently signed an exclusive deal, the PG business is big enough
it seems to make it effectively so in the UK.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

EASTERN SEEKS 500,000T

Eastern Group is on the verge of calling for offers of 500,000t for
delivery to Drakelow and High Marnham power stations in 1996/97. This
is additional tonnage to that supplied to the stations and is thought
to be partly a tester to see what is likely to be available in the
event that Eastern wins its bid for National Power's three station
disposals. It is looking for deliveries from both domestic and overseas
suppliers and is expected to prefer a low sulphur product.

Contact: Sally-Ann Weston, Fuels Trading Manager, Eastern Group,
Wherstead Park, PO Box 40, Wherstead, Ipswich, Suffolk, IP9 2AQ.
Telephone (01473) 554725. Fax (01473) 554678.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

OWENS STARTS NEWCARB

A new company has arisen from the ashes of MG Carbon UK. Using the same
telephone number as MGC, its name is Newcarb and its managing director
is Jeff Owens, former MD of MG Carbon.

The new company has bought the stocks left by MGC at Immingham and
Killingholme and it has bought some of the company's plant. It is
operating at the old MGC base in Sunderland. It will also import
through "Humberside", according to Owens, probably Killingholme where
there is the remnant of a stockpile bought by the company.

Owens' partners in the enterprise are David Horrocks, the financial
director, and Kevin Cornish, operations and industrial sales director.
Both were formerly at MGC.

Newcarb leaves behind the MGC base at Immingham, which was widely felt
in the trade to have been expensive.

MGC went into administrative receivership last October (Coal UK 46/14).
Its debts were described by the administrator as "substantial", albeit
owed primarily to its German parent companies. Other creditors were
expected to receive close to 100p in the pound, thanks partly to the
willingness of the German companies to write off what is owed to them.

Even so, one of the parents, MG Petroleum Coke, has angered traders by
offering product of its own throughout the administration period. It is
not known what MGPC's policy to sales in the north eastern UK will be
from now on.

Newcarb. Telephone (0191) 510 9752. Fax (0191) 510 1357.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

BUYING AGENCY SEEKS 25,000T

The Buying Agency is about to tender for 23,500-25,000t of coal for
July/June delivery. It needs the product chiefly to supply prisons. The
agency expects to pay #1.243m for the coal, indicating a delivered
price of c. #50/t. It will issue official documents early in February
and will award by late-spring.

Contact: Amanda Rummery, The Buying Agency, Fifth Floor, Liver
Building, Liverpool, L3 1PE. Telephone (0151) 227 4262. Fax (0151) 227
3315.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

NW NHS SEEKS 26,000T

The north western arm of NHS Supplies is seeking 23,500t of singles for
11 sites and 2,500t of smalls for one for delivery in financial year
1996/97. Bidders should express interest by February 3.

Supplies currently come primarily from PowerCoal, but also from Coal
Investments and RJB Mining. The north western NHS Supplies office has
acted independently of the national office, based in Reading, since
last spring.

Contact: Mark Bagshaw, NHS Supplies, North West Division, Third Floor,
Health Authority Headquarters, Watling Street Road, Fulwood, Preston,
PR2 8GD. Telephone (01772) 831147. Fax (01772) 712986.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

RJB BUILDS A POWER PLANT

RJB Mining is seeking bidders to supply and commission a 13.5MW
combined heat and power plant at its Monckton Coke & Chemicals works in
Royston, Barnsley. The station will be fuelled by coke oven gas from
the works. It will burn 10m therms/yr and will produce 8,400kg/hour of
steam. The plant must be working within nine months of the contract's
commissioning and the deadline for tenderers wishing to participate
must express interest by February 22.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

NP TURNS TO SELF-UNLOADERS

National Power's problems with its continuous unloaders at Tilbury
power station (Coal UK 48/16) forced it to switch to self-unloading
vessels during December and January. Although the Kone-built unloaders
looked set to restart at the time of writing, NP had taken at least
four Jebsen vessels through the terminal and almost certainly more.

NP's problems started when a belt serving the unloader failed. The
utility had thought that it could use some old grab unloaders still at
the port but this proved impossible. It subsequently hired Jebsen to
lift up to 150,000t and it almost certainly paid substantially more, at
least #2/t for Europoort loaders, for the privilege than it would have
done using its normal Stevie Clarke vessels.

NP also took the P & O cape Pytchley through Bristol from New Orleans
and is believed to have been the lead buyer behind the cape SCF
Endurance, which called at Immingham from Hampton Roads. Another cape
at Immingham from Hampton Roads, SKS Banner, may have been shared by
British Steel and NP.

PowerGen handled mainly local tonnage, with Lords Citrine and Hinton
trading to Kingsnorth from the Tees and the Tyne. In addition, Lord
Hinton made an unusual voyage to Kingsnorth from Poland.

Hunterston took a cargo of petroleum coke from Texas City, whilst
another petcoke cargo came into the Tees from Los Angeles. Hunterston
also took a cape for Nigen with Carbocol coal from Puerto Bolivar.

UK/Ireland shipping calls in December 1995/January 1996

Arrive/Sail    From           To          Ship               Report

Port Talbot    Xingang        -           Baia Noua         4/12/95
Immingham      Hampton Roads  -           British Steel    11/12/95
Liverpool      Ayr            -           Emerald          11/12/95
Port Talbot    Vancouver      -           Menites          11/12/95
Kingsnorth     Tyne           -           Lord Hinton      12/12/95
Immingham      Baltimore      -           Primo            13/12/95
Belfast        Durban         -           Cosa             14/12/95
Ayr            -              N. Spain    Franz Keller     15/12/95
Hunterston     Puerto Bolivar -           Mineral Century  15/12/95
Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Birling          15/12/95
Rotterdam      -              Liverpool   Ashington        15/12/95
Swansea        -              Immingham   Beli             15/12/95
Swansea        -              Aviles      Mary C           15/12/95
Amsterdam      -              Londonderry Lncing           16/12/95
Newport        -              Rouen       Gorch Fock       16/12/95
Ayr            -              Cork        Harting          17/12/95
Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Emerald          17/12/95
Immingham      Swansea        -           Sociality        17/12/95
Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Birling          18/12/95
Newport        -              Bilbao      Klazina C        18/12/95
Tyne           -              London      Donnington       18/12/95
Cardiff        Hampton Roads  -           Nordic Bulker    19/12/95
Arklow         Swansea        -           Gardwind         20/12/95
Bristol        New Orleans    -           Pytchley         20/12/95
Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Birling          20/12/95
Swansea        -              Spain       Natacha C        20/12/95
Belfast        Durban         -           Blue Sky         21/12/95
Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Emerald          21/12/95
Immingham      Baltimore      -           SCF Endurance    21/12/95
Szczecin       -              Ireland     Zwartemeer       21/12/95
Belfast        Richards Bay   -           Western Winner   22/12/95
Kingsnorth     Tees           -           Lord Citrine     22/12/95
Gdansk         -              Cork        Wielun           23/12/95
Swansea        -              Spain       Niquel           23/12/95
Tees           Los Angeles    -           Ever Blessing    22/12/95
Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Birling          24/12/95
Kingsnorth     Poland         -           Lord Hinton      24/12/95
London         Hunterston     -           Pamela Everard   24/12/95
Moneypoint     Santa Marta    -           Marine Courage   24/12/95
Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Emerald          26/12/95
Inverness      Szczecin       -           Short Sea Trader 26/12/95
London         Hunterston     -           Sagacity         26/12/95
Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Birling          27/12/95
Swansea        -              Bilbao      Breezand         27/12/95
Swansea        -              Spain       Polanco          27/12/95
Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Emerald          28/12/95
London         Europoort      -           Tinnes           28/12/95
Swansea        -              Immingham   Harting          29/12/95
Gdansk         -              Foynes      Speciality       29/12/95
Kingsnorth     Tyne           -           Lord Citrine     29/12/95
Ayr            -              Seville     Sian             30/12/95
Hunterston     Texas City     -           Giovanni Bottig  30/12/95
Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Emerald            1/1/96
Gdansk         -              Wicklow     Short Sea Trader   2/1/96
Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Birling            2/1/96
Port Talbot    Hampton Roads  -           Western Bridge     2/1/96
Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Emerald            3/1/96
Rotterdam      -              Londonderry Harting            3/1/96
Swansea        -              Calais      Caspic             3/1/96
Hunterston     -              London      Sociality          4/1/96
Kingsnorth     Tyne           -           Lord Hinton        4/1/96
Hunterston     -              Sligo       Bluebird           6/1/96
Kingsnorth     Tyne           -           Lord Citrine       6/1/96
Belfast        Ayr            -           Steyning           7/1/96
Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Emerald            7/1/96
Lerwick        Garston        -           Nautica            9/1/96
Swansea        -              Caen        Nancy              9/1/96
Tyne           -              Kingsnorth  Lord Hinton        9/1/96
Ayr            -              Drogheda    Arklow Abbey      10/1/96
Hunterston     -              Bilbao      Cornet            10/1/96
Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Emerald           10/1/96
London         Europoort      -           Tertnes           10/1/96
Immingham      Hampton Roads  -           SKS Banner        10/1/96
Ayr            -              Londonderry Harting           11/1/96
Belfast        Ayr            -           Lancing           11/1/96
Bristol        Antwerp        -           Storrington       11/1/96
Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Birling           11/1/96
Swansea        -              Ostend      Sea Merlan        12/1/96
Cork           Gdansk         -           Mielec            13/1/96
Swansea        -              Bilbao      Buxtehude         13/1/96
Clyde          -              Kilroot     Harting           14/1/96
Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Birling           14/1/96
London         Europoort      -           Trollnes          14/1/96
Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Birling           16/1/96
London         Hunterston     -           Sanguity          16/1/96
Belfast        Ayr            -           Lancing           17/1/96
London         Tyne           -           Trollnes          17/1/96

Source: Lloyd's List, Shipping Movements.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

STRATHCLYDE SEEKS 90,000T

Strathclyde Regional Council* has issued a tender for the supply of
45,000t/yr of sized product for 1996 and 1997. This is to supply
offices, schools, colleges and other council buildings with mainly
singles, but also doubles and trebles. Delivery is to be made within
four days of each order, primarily by pneumatic or tipper lorries.
Strathclyde is currently supplied by Scottish Coal via a contract
inherited from British Coal.

Meanwhile, Fife Regional Council has opted to stick with Scottish Coal
for its 3,750t (Coal UK 44/9) to be delivered over two years from
January 1996. It paid #165,000, indicating a price of #44/t for what
was primarily singles grade coal.

* Contact: Head of Purchasing, Strathclyde Regional Council, PO Box
462, Glasgow, G2 4PD. Telephone (0141) 227 3130. Fax (0141) 227 3869.

UK coal import values: #/tonne

                     Coking            Steam           Anthracite
                  Oct      Nov      Oct      Nov      Oct      Nov

Australia        38.17    39.16     -        -        -        -
Canada           37.16    37.34     -        -        -        -
China             -        -        -        -        -        -
Colombia         37.30     -       33.47    30.25    40.00     -
Estonia           -        -        -        -        -        -
Indonesia         -        -        -        -        -        -
Latvia            -        -        -        -        -        -
Lithuania         -        -        -        -        -        -
Poland           35.62     -       29.00    28.84    59.41    56.41
Russia            -        -        -        -       47.61    45.73
S Africa          -        -       32.80    32.35    63.59    67.78
US               39.97    38.37    27.82    26.56    42.35    66.04
Venezuela         -        -        -        -        -        -
Vietnam           -        -        -        -       59.87     -
Index (a)       101.7    102.5     88.4     84.4     83.3     87.7

(a) MCIS Import Indices; Indexed to average Q1 1992 values
Source: HM Customs & Excise.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

IMPORTS MOVE 7% AHEAD

Mistakes by HM Customs notwithstanding, steam coal imports of 5.4mt
were 7% ahead of year-ago levels in January-November. This figure could
have been higher were it not for the classification of 123,000t of
imports for PowerGen, through Kingsnorth, as a coking coal. Other
mistakes by Customs put 61,000t of Australian coking coal imported via
Avonmouth for Britannia Zinc at an average #42.31/t in as an anthracite
cargo, along with 71,000t of US coking coal delivered to British Steel
through Immingham and Port Talbot.

Steam coal imports from Colombia retained their leading position, at
2.1mt, but have slipped back to 21% behind year-ago levels. Those from
the US were up threefold at 1.5mt and South African arrivals up by 155%
to 890,000t. All of the other major suppliers are behind, though, with
Polish deliveries down 18% at 600,000t, indicating continued poor
demand for sized material. Russian imports were down 81% at 42,000t and
Australian down 65% to the one cape-load delivered to Hunterston for
Nigen early in 1995.

Coking coal imports, about which there is most confusion thanks to
Customs, are apparently 14% behind a year ago at 6.2mt. The only
exporter to see a rise in shipments to the UK was Canada, which in
January-November supplied 1.25mt and in November alone a panamax-load.
The US has apparently lost ground by 34% to 1.6mt and Australia by 7%
to 3.1mt. However, US supplies have been mis-classified by Customs most
often this year. A more realistic estimate for overall coking coal
imports was 7.9mt, up 6% from 7.4mt.

Anthracite imports were recorded by Customs at 2.6mt, up 77% from a
year ago. However, stripping out the mis-classifications changes the
figure to 860,000t, down 30% from 1.2mt. Imports from Vietnam were down
by 46% at 101,000t and those from South Africa by 18% at 201,000t.
Chinese arrivals grew 33.5% to 77,000t.

Import values continue to climb slowly, although a lack of sized
imports made them lower for steam coal than they should be in November.
Bennett took a 25,000t cargo of Chinese anthracite at an import value
of #62.43/t. A 5,470t cargo of Russian anthracite product, reportedly
landed at Immingham at #41.78, may have been sized bituminous product.
ICF took a 24,000t cargo from Poland at #29.98/t whilst 59,000t of
Colombian landed at Hunterston, presumably for West of Scotland Fuels,
came in at #30.97/t. Other values included a cape of US product at
Avonmouth at #28.99/t and a 115,000t landed through Immingham at an
average #27.05/t. US product coming through London averaged #26.59/t
whilst a Polish handy-sized cargo came through the same port at
#27.68/t.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

BRUNNER MOND DROPS COAL

Brunner Mond has abandoned plans to build a 300MW coal-fired power
station at Northwich in Cheshire. Its decision follows a collapse in
gas prices and the takeover by Scottish Power of one of its partners in
the enterprise, Manweb. The plant would have burnt 1mt/yr from 1999
onwards.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

OPENCAST NERVES FRAY

Fears are growing that opencast mining is becoming an impossible task
for the vast majority of its practitioners. The private opencast sector
that survived and grew through British Coal's dominance of the coal
industry has found itself in a much tougher world following the
corporation's privatisation. In particular, the disappearance of BC has
added to the pressures coming to bear on the opencasters from planning
authorities. With tightening UK power station fuel prices and growing
anti-development sentiment generally it is becoming more and more
difficult to justify and then proceed with projects.

The chief pressure on new opencast operators is competitive.
Ironically, having produced the cheapest available coal for many years,
opencast is now being undercut by deep-mined coals. More than one
opencaster has expressed the belief to Coal UK that life would be
easier without Coal Investments, for example, because of the latter's
highly competitive pricing strategies. It has won contracts at mine-
mouth prices of 95p-#1.10/GJ, beating many opencasters easily. At the
same time, RJB Mining's costs have come down at some pits to the point
where opencast costs are higher, so the opencasters can thank their
lucky stars that RJB is tied to contracts to March 1998.

Such a tight pricing environment makes it difficult for new operators
to establish themselves but those already strong in the industry are
also finding it tough. For them the situation is different because they
are trying to work to contracts granted them by the generators which
shadow those granted to RJB. The smaller operators get 9.5p/GJ less,
but they can work to these levels profitably, if they can get sites to
work. And it is here that the second biggest problem has surfaced.

For whatever reason, councils have become much more hostile to the
opencast industry. This has been especially the case since the
Heseltine pit closure announcements in October 1992 and since the
government revised minerals planning guidelines a year ago.

It became more than apparent in areas like Leeds and Barnsley where
Coal Contractors and Cobex in particular have had their fingers burnt
chasing what looked to be reasonable opencast proposals. One operator
told Coal UK last week, "South Yorkshire is effectively a no-go area".
Cobex's losses of three sites there in 1995, which had been viewed at
the time as racing certainties, effectively sterilised resources.
Northumberland, possibly the richest opencast county in terms of
reserves, took one look at the closure of its last colliery at
Ellington and announced that no more opencast approvals would be given.
It has calmed down following Ellington's re-opening by RJB but the
atmosphere is definitely cooler than before privatisation.

The thing that has opencasters tearing their hair out most with the
planners is a general sense that the dichotomy between the approaches
of the two sides to the mineral planning guidelines has widened since
MPG-3 was revised. Time after time the complaint to Coal UK is that
councils interpret the rules as they wish to and that, even when their
planning officials recommend approvals, they can and do find reasons to
reject proposals.

And the frustration does not end there. The opencasters complain that
the Department of the Environment is stonewalling them, refusing to
accept even that there is a problem. Environment tells Coal UK that
interpretation is a matter for local authorities.

The cost of submitting planning proposals has also risen sharply. Apart
from the expense involved in preparing environmental assessments
opencasters are still coming round to the likelihood that they will now
have to routinely hire consultants to prepare reports on dust, noise,
interaction with other workings, archaeological acceptability,
hydrology and potential effects on local flora and fauna. There have
even been instances where the local council has taken one look at the
reports prepared and opted to hire its own consultants and to charge
them out to the poor old applicant. Quids in for the consultants but a
terrible waste of the opencaster's resources.

Councils are also clearly a lot less trusting of opencast applicants
now that BC has gone. Here they have taken to asking what guarantees
there are that restorations will be undertaken as pledged when the
coaling has been completed. In the old days BC issued licences and
councils were able to accept the implied word of a state-owned company
that it was ultimately responsible for any clean-up costs. Nowadays
there is no guarantee that there will be anybody to clear up any mess
if an opencaster goes belly up half-way through a job. Coalpro, the
main representative body, is close to strengthening its position as the
industry's voice by approving a bond scheme that will pledge all of its
members to salvaging a site if one of them runs into trouble. Until
then, councils will remain distrustful.

The companies themselves will clearly have their work cut out to gain
planning permissions to meet their contracts with the generators. In
contrast with the three successors of BC, which look very comfortably
placed to expand opencast production, the private miners are looking at
a drastic cut in output unless planning permissions become easier to
win. Coal Contractors, for example, desperately needed to win approval
for the Albion site (see separate story) because its portfolio barely
scraped past the next financial year without it. Clay is chasing sites
well outside of its normal remit, in Scotland and Northumberland. Cobex
has done the same and has also bought a site from another company,
SAFE.

Opencast - Where's it going to come from?

                               Reserve Output  Remaining
Site          MPA     Contractor '000t 95/96  FY 96 1997  1998 1999

Major suppliers
Celtic
Brnhenllysa   Powys   Taywood   1,150         200   200   200   200
Derlwyn 2A    W Glam  Walters     250   100
East PitA     W Glam  RJB       3,700   350   350   350   350   350
Ffos LasA     Dyfed   Wimpey    5,650   625   625   625   100
Ffos y Fran   M Glam  None     10,000         300   800 1,000 1,000
Gilfach Iagoa Dyfed   Wimpey    1,200   150   100
Gt White Tip  M Glam  Wimpey      650   100
Kays & Kear   Gwent   Taywood     325   100
Llanilid West M Glam  RJB         700   175   175   175
Nant HelenA   W Glam  AMEC      3,500   375   375   100
Park Slip West Glam   None      1,000               200   250   250
SelarA        Glam    None      3,150         200   400   400   400
TOTAL                          21,750 1,975 2,325 2,535 2,300 2,200

RJB Mining
Arkwright     Derby   None      3,500   250   500   550   550   550
Bleak House   Staffs  Wimpey    2,700   700   700   700
Bleak House Ex Staffs None      2,200                     700   700
Broughton Ldg Cumbria RJB         850   190   190   190
Castle Farm   Durham  None        250    50
Club Room Farm Derby  None        180         120    60
Colliersdean  N'land  RJB       1,000   100
Hathery Lane  N'land  None      1,350         250   400   400   100
Herrington    Sund.   Tendered    550         200   200   150
Kirk          Derby   Miller    2,225   300   300   100
Minorca       Leics   None        750          50   200   200   200
Nadins        Derby   Taywood   2,450   550   550   350
Normanton Byp Wakef'd None        225    75
Orgreave      R'ham   None      3,865    50   350   700   700   700
Plenmeller    N'land  Mowlem    2,000   225   225   225   225   200
Priors Close N Durham None        650   165   165   165   165
Rockingham    Barns   CoalCo    1,050   150
Rye Hill      Durham  Wimpey      825   225
Shellbrook    Leics   None        210   100   110
Smotherfly    Derby   Kier      1,700   300   300   300   300   100
St Aidans     Leeds   None      2,850         100   500   750   750
Stobswood     N'land  Crouch   12,250 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000
White Lea     Durham  None      1,500         250   250   250   250
Whitwell      Durham  None        250    80    80    50
TOTAL                          48,075 4,510 5,440 5,940 5,390 4,550

Scottish Coal
Airdsgreen    Cumn'k  CoalCo    1,050   250   240   100
Blindwells    E Loth  AMEC      3,600   470   285
Chalmerston   Cumn'k  Crouch    2,750   240
Chalmerston   Cumn'k  None      1,000                      50   200
Dalquhandy    Clyde   Crouch   15,000   650   650   650   650   650
Damside       M'well  CL & M    2,500   230   230   230   230   230
House of Water Cumn'k Tendering 2,400         120   350   350   350
Lambhill      Perth   Crouch      725   230   230    70
Piperhill     Cumn'k  Fenton      765   200
Rosslynlee    Midlth  FJB       1,300   280   200
Westfield     Fife    Miller    3,550   390   390   100
TOTAL                          36,640 2,990 2,345 1,500 1,280 1,430
TOTAL BC Succesors                    9,475 10,110 9,975 8,970 8,180

Other substantial companies
Banks
Doe Hill      Derby   None        250    50   200
Foxholes Farm Derby   None        156          56   100
North Wood    Durham  None        190    95    60    60
Renishaw Park Derby   None        450          50   125   125   125
Others                            200   150   120
TOTAL                                   295   486   285   125   125

Clay
Candles       Shrop   None        250   100    50
Dost Hill     Staffs  None         86          86
Fordel Mains  Midlth  Faslane**   200         100    50
Odd House     Leics   None        200    80    70
Others                                  100    90    90    90    30
TOTAL                                   280   396   140    90    30

CoalCo/NSM
Ellwood       Cumn'k  None        100    90
Hecklers Yard M'well  None        150    60
Ireland Coll  Derby   Fitzwise*   200    80    80
Low Gordon    Durham  None        550    50   125   125   125   125
Park Hall     Derby   None                    125   100
Ravensworth   Gates   None        100    30    70
Others                                   80
TOTAL                                   390   400   225   125   125

Golightly
S Brandon     Durham  None        229   100   100
Bets Lane     N'Land  None        310   135   135    40
TOTAL                             539   235   235    40

LAW
Birnie Knowie Cumn'k  None        140    45
Wester Mosshat Clyde  None        210    90    90    30
Others                                   35
TOTAL                                   170    90    30

Millstone
Shortrigg    Falkirk  None         50    50
Threaprig Rd Falkirk  None        250    50   100   100
TOTAL                             300   100   100   100

Rackwood
Bag Lane     Lancs    None        230   135    20
Hannahston   Cumnock  None        216   108   108
Hawks Nest Wd Leeds   None        250    65   120    65
Old Leyland Gn Lancs  Cobex       115    40
Skares Road  Cumn'k   None      4,500               450   450   450
TOTAL                                   348   238   515   450   450

Others
Miller Moor Gn  Notts None        123         123
Miller Groce F                    100
Caledon Woodbk  Fife  None        235    60    60    60    55
C'Land Kidburn Cumbria None       170         100    70
Fenton Northrg W Loth None        160    80    80
D&S Blair Ford Perth  None        150    50    50
Procoal Culrose Dunferm None      150    50
Harrison Lowca Cumbria  None      500
Russell    2 sites   None         220   125   125    25    25    25
Grant New Farm  Midloth None      200    50   100
Brown Cairncub  Dunferm None      250    90    70
Cochrane Mossb  M'well  None      225    40    40
TOTAL                                   545   898   305   175    75

A - Anthracite, * Subsidiary of NSM working its own site. **
Subsidiary of Clay working its own site.
Source: The opencast iondustry, MCIS: Opencasting in the UK.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

GILLESPIE TO MINE EASTER

Gillespie Group has applied for permission to work a 600,000t site at
Easter Balbeggie Farm in Kirkcaldy. It will work the site over five
years and will reclaim a scrap yard on the site. Gillespie has been
marketing the coal for some time and is thought to have a sales
agreement with Transcor.

Also in Scotland, Procoal has applied for permission to work the
160,000t Devonside site near Saline in Dunfermline. It will mine for
three years.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

MAIDENS HALL LOOKS HOPEFUL

RJB's Maidens Hall planning application, submitted to Northumberland
County Council by British Coal before privatisation, goes before the
council's planning committee on February 5. This is for a 3.5mt site to
be worked over six years. The site is north of Stobswood and, in
planning terms, looks as though it should go through. It would feed its
output through the Butterwell disposal point. Maidens Hall is adjacent
to Colliersdean and will use the latter's void for its overburden. The
coal is of very high quality (26.6GJ/t, sulphur 1.2%) and will be
produced at low cost.

Maidens Hall coal specs

Moisture                  10.0%
Ash                        9.6%
Vols                      28.2%
Sulphur                    1.22%
CV                        26.61Gj/t



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

GOLIGHTLY MINES AT HOME

Golightly has applied for permission to work the West Lodge Farm site,
near its home base in Shildon, County Durham. This is a 10.5 hectare
site with 100,000t of reserves which will be mined over 12 months. The
land will be restored to agricultural use, apart from a one hectare
area which has been allocated in the Sedgewick district plan for
industrial use. Golightly will cite the industrial site as likely to
sterilise any coal deposits. The company will also stabilise ground
which has been mined previously.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

BANKS APPLIES FOR PITHOUSE WEST

HJ Banks has applied for permission to work a 280,000t opencast site
which includes 50,000t of fire clay, adjacent to its current 190,000t
North Wood site. If approved, work at Pithouse West will begin early in
1998, as North Wood finishes. The latter's void will take the
overburden of the former.

Pithouse West is a 73 hectare site, including the 42 hectares covered
by North Wood, and will be worked in the same way as its predecessor.
Banks will use the woodland in which the sites are operated to screen
off its working and will restore the whole area to commercial woodland
on completion. Coaling will take 26-29 months. The output will almost
certainly follow North Wood's product to the generators.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

EUROPE TIGHTENS EA NEEDS

The government has reportedly agreed to amendments to the European
Environmental Impact Assessment Directive, which will tighten the
planning requirements on UK opencasters.

At the moment only planners proposing sites which cover more than 50
hectares, c. 250,000t of reserves, are obliged to submit an assessment
of their proposals' impact on the environment. The new adoptions will
mean that sites covering 25 hectares and upwards will be obliged to do
this.

In practice, the legislation is merely catching up with current
professional practices since most opencasters have already accepted the
need to submit EA reports for sites this small.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

COALCO CLOSES ON ALBION

The plans of a joint venture of Coal Contractors, Hepworth and Leigh
Environmental to develop the 1.5mt Albion site, with a following
landfill operation, has been given the green light by Leicestershire
County Council's environment committee.

Albion is one of the most complex opencast sites to have emerged. It is
part of a long established clay exploitation region; Hepworth runs a
clay works on the site, which is close to Ashby de la Zouch. It has
been the subject of intense consultation between the county, British
Coal and assorted minerals exploitation companies.

The CoalCo plan, which goes before a full council meeting on January
31, envisages the exploitation of the coal over four to five years
followed by a landfill by Leigh over 17 years. It is the latter that
has aroused the most local opposition. There is, say council officials,
"major dereliction" in the area, and granting the planning permission
would entail its restoration, which will start very early in the site's
working. If the deal is rejected by the council, then BC and the DTI
stand to fork out #20m or more restoring the site, since BC created
much of the dereliction there. Given CoalCo's recent problems getting
permissions for sites, coaling is likely to start as soon as possible,
once planning permission is granted. (Although there are stocks of clay
still on the site, the mineral is largely worked out. There is only a
small amount of muck to be shifted to expose the first coal and mining
can begin within months of gaining permits from the relevant
authorities.)

As a part of the deal the main land-owner, British Coal, will
relinquish interest in other reserves in the area at Hanging Hill and
Pick. RJB Mining's former Moira interest has also been bought by Leigh.

RJB's nearby Minorca site, 750,000t, is unaffected by the likely Albion
approval and is expected to go before the county planning officers
early in the summer. There are also thought to be other reserves close
to Moira which are unaffected by the Albion site.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

ASFORDBY: DELAYED TO SUMMER?

RJB's Asfordby mine looks as though it could be virtually out of action
for up to six months. The pit has been having problems since last
spring when a roof fall took out the main conveyor belt. Now it is also
suffering from compression problems and, apparently, from water. The
flooding has been beaten back but the other problems remain.

Asfordby has long been viewed as a potential problem pit, but more
because of the poor quality of its coal, barely 22GJ/t net, and
prodigious ash levels, than engineering. Although the mine itself was
never envisaged before privatisation as likely to be problem-free, its
developers were always confident that technology could overcome any
problems before production began. When the 530 metre shafts were sunk,
BC overcame the severe water problems associated with the Keuper
Waterstones and Bunter sandstones by constructing a freeze chamber.

Asfordby was developed by British Coal as a multi-entry retreat face
pit, to very modern standards, and RJB simply carried on with BC's
development plan. However, mining engineers that have seen the problems
that have developed there have likened the pit to "another Wistow".
Wistow is now RJB's star performer but it soaked up millions before BC
got it to its current state.

The Asfordby mine was initially planned as a 4-5mt/yr super-pit. BC
subsequently dropped plans to exploit the Parkgate seam and
concentrated on working the Deep Main seam at 2.2mt/yr.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

RAIL-FREIGHT GOES FOR $400M

Wisconsin Central has the lead in the race to take over the UK's bulk
rail freight businesses (Coal UK 48/7). It is the Department of
Transport's preferred bidder after making a combined bid of $400m
(#265m), including $47m (#31m) for the REs business that runs the mail
trains.

It is now circulating the US financial institutions seeking backing for
its bid. It beat a consortium of Loadhaul and Omnitrax for its prize.
Also-rans were Mainline and Transrail.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

POWERCOAL FIXES 1996 FREIGHT

PowerGen subsidiary PowerCoal has covered the bulk of its freight
requirements for deliveries of the Carbones de Caribe product that it
imports from Colombia through Liverpool. It will pay $10.50 to French
shipowner Cetragpa for six 55,000t shipments of screening/washing
product from Cartagena and Santa Marta. It also has the option, at
$10.80, to load in Cartagena only. Shipments will be spread evenly
through 1996 and there may be one or two additional cargoes fixed later
in the month.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

PG PICKS HAULIERS

PowerGen has chosen four hauliers to transport coal to its Cottam,
Ferrybridge, Fiddlers Ferry and Ratcliffe stations. Anglo Distribution
of New Ollerton will serve Cottam and Ferrybridge. LCT Transport of
Wigan and JWG Graham Transport of Penrith will serve Fiddlers Ferry. K
& M Hauliers of Hucknall will serve Ratcliffe.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

STERLING SUPPORTS SHORT SEA RATES

A slow short sea freight market saw little movement in rates in dollar
terms but the weakness of Sterling meant that UK importers ended up
paying slightly more in January than in December.

London broker Galbraith reports: "if anything, a slight downward trend"
in rates at the moment. This has been caused by severe ice conditions
in the Baltic Sea which has forced tonnage south in search of cargoes.
According to Galbraith, "fresh coal business is in very short supply".
Rates are expected to remain static while the severe weather retains
its hold. When the thaw starts, though, a rush of tonnage northwards is
likely to spark a recovery.

In the deep sea sector, freights are still very soft. London broker
Clarkson says that a cape can be hired for Rotterdam discharge at $6.10
from the US east coast, for $6.00 (#4.00) from Puerto Bolivar in
Colombia and for $5.15 from Richards Bay in South Africa. In each case
these rates are about the same as month ago levels but a good $1-2
lower than three months ago.

Deep sea shipments booked to the UK and Ireland included the PowerGen
tonnage which is detailed separately. Amongst the individual shipments
in January, a Mitsui vessel was booked by Korean company Keoyang from
Puerto Bolivar to Moneypoint with 130,000t at $5.50. A Keoyang vessel
was later let to Ireland's Electricity Supply Board for a journey from
La Cienaga (Drummond's La Loma) in Colombia at $5.85-5.90 for a
110,000t cargo. Cobelfret booked a panamax from Santa Marta to
Hunterston, presumably residual 1995 Phibro business, at $9.50 for end-
January loading. A British Steel-bound panamax was booked by Lorentzen
from Roberts Bank to Port Talbot at c. $12.00, at least $1.50 down on
last done business and a panamax was taken from Gladstone to Immingham
at $12.95.

Typical short sea freight rates: #/t

Route                        Shipment  Jan 95 Nov 95 Dec 95 Jan 96

Rotterdam-Thames             5-6,000t    4.90   7.30   5.50   5.60
Rotterdam-Immingham          2-2,500t    6.30   8.90   8.15   8.25
Rotterdam-S Wales            5-6,000t    7.40   9.85   8.10   8.25
Rotterdam-Irish Sea          2-3,000t    9.15  10.65  10.40  10.60
Russian Baltic - WCUK        5-6,000t   11.60  13.00  12.00  12.25
Russian Baltic - ECUK        5-6,000t    9.75  11.10  10.50  10.60
Poland - ECUK               10-13,000t   8.00   7.60   7.80   7.95
Poland - WCUK               10-13,000t  10.05  10.30  10.05  10.25

Source: Galbraiths.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

CI WINS BANKS' SUPPORT?

Coal Investments looks as though it will live to fight another day. At
the time of writing, its three main bankers looked set to maintain
support for the company but also to insist on a rights issue. This can
probably not happen until March. The company got great support from its
work-force who turned out to cut coal during the Christmas holiday.

It is expected to make some personnel changes. Former-ICI Paints chief
executive Herman Scopes joins the company as a non-executive director
and a new chief executive has apparently been lined up. It is not known
what current chief executive Malcolm Edwards' future position will be,
but the company has apparently successfully argued that there is still
an active role for him.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

SHARES HOLD UP

Coal company shares continue to behave as though the problems of Coal
Investments did not exist, assuaging fears that they might be tripped
up by a knock on effect. Shares in RJB Mining traded at 555-560p
throughout the month, although brokers expectations of the company's
results appear to be improving.

Smaller company equity values hardly changed, with NSM steady at 77p,
Rackwood at 47p and Consolidated Coal at 50-60p. Waverley Mining
Finance, which recently put a financial package together to take over
Monktonhall Mining, saw rises in January from the low 100s to 110-115p.

Other energy shares were quiet, with the exception of Scottish Power
and Powell Duffryn. SP's price recovered to 385p after bullish news
about its takeover of Manweb was released. PD saw shares recover from
their recent low levels, rising from 430p to 450p on prospective
subsidiary disposals.

UK coal-linked share price movements

                                  1995              1996
Company          Sector          Jan 23    Jan 8   Jan 15    Jan 23

FT All Share                    1,469.2  1,821.1  1,795.3  1,8354.5
Anglo United     Chemicals          1.8      0.8      0.8       0.8
British Steel    Metals           147.5    166.5    164.5     167.0
Coal Inv.S       Mining            85.0     25.0     25.0      25.0
Cons. Coal       Mining             -       60.0     50.0      55.0
Dobson Park      Engineering       70.0    130.0    130.0     130.0
Mowlem           Construction      98.0     59.5     67.0      64.0
National Power   Electricity      477.0    443.0    434.0     439.0
NSM              Construction      98.0     76.0     77.0      77.0
Powell Duffryn   Transport        508.0    429.0    423.0     450.0
PowerGen         Electricity      536.0    514.0    505.0     518.0
Rackwood         Mining            31.0     47.0     47.0      47.0
RJB Mining       Mining           318.0    558.0    556.0     558.0
Scottish Power   Electricity      324.0    384.0    377.0     385.0
Taylor Woodrow   Construction     124.0    117.0    115.0     125.0
Waverley Mng     Mining           106.0    105.5    113.0     111.0
Wimpey           Construction     118.0    138.0    141.0     142.0
Young Group      Mining             2.0      1.0      1.0       1.0

S - Shares suspended
Source: Financial Times.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

CELTIC GOES INTERNATIONAL

Celtic Energy has launched Celtic International Fuel Trading, to market
its exports in Europe. Simon Varley, formerly of PDIF, is the new
company's boss. It will operate from new offices, yet to be found, in
London and meanwhile can be contacted via Celtic's Aberaman head office
or PDIF's HQ at Mardell House, 9-11 Vaughan Road, Harpenden, Herts.
Tel: (01582) 461000 Fax: (01582) 460535.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
COAL UK via NewsNet
January 30, 1996

COALITE TALKS COLLAPSE

Anglo United and Apax Partners have stopped negotiations that would
have taken Coalite into the hands of a management team backed by Apax.
Anglo is now apparently refusing to discuss the company with
prospective buyers. The talks stalled on price but all prospective
buyers had also expressed concerns about potential environmental
problems.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B34-7</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B029-181</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey77.html 205.156.212.5 19970114225825 text/html 57048
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:56:24 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:19 GMT
Content-length: 56861
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ey77.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
COAL WEEK via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>MARKET DEVELOPMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(310 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>SAN ANTONIO SIGNS TERM DEAL; KENNECOTT WRAPS UP ALL PRB SUPPLIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(210 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>BROWN STEPS DOWN AS CONSOL CEO; KARIS TAKES ON GENERAL OPERATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(254 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>TAX CREDITS PUT FIRE UNDER BRIQUETTES; COVOL TARGETS UTILITIES, STEEL&nbsp;MILLS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(552 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CURRENT STEAM COAL MARKER PRICES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>CURRENT STEAM COAL MARKER PRICES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(871 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>US MARKER METALLURGICAL COAL PRICES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>US MARKER METALLURGICAL COAL PRICES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(91 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CURRENT ANTHRACITE PRICES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>    CURRENT ANTHRACITE PRICES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(71 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MARKET PERSPECTIVE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>MARKET PERSPECTIVE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(299 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RECENT TRANSACTIONS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>TU ELECTRIC</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(132 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>KENTUCKY UTILITIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(97 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>SOUTHERN ILLINOIS POWER COOPERATIVE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(102 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>PUBLIC SERVICE NEW HAMPSHIRE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(94 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>ORLANDO FL UTILITIES COMMISSION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(160 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>NEW YORK STATE ELECTRIC & GAS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(95 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>PENNSYLVANIA POWER & LIGHT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(120 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>NEW ENGLAND ELECTRIC POWER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(180 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>WEST VIRGINIA PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(34 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>APPALACHIAN POWER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(156 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>MONONGAHELA POWER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(284 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INTERNATIONAL</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>ENEL, THE ITALIAN ELECTRIC UTILITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(205 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>CHILE'S COMERCIAL CATUMUTUN S.A.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(155 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>TMT COAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(148 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PEOPLE IN COAL</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>TEXAS UTILITIES ELECTRIC</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(64 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>DRUMMOND COAL SALES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(69 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>WASHINGTON WIRE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>DOE SPONSORED CLEAN COAL PROGRAM FOR STEEL INDUSTRY MOVES TO TEST STAGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(574 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>WASHINGTON WIRE: FEDERAL BRIEFS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>MSHA EXTENDS COMMENTS; ROYALTY RATE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(82 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(108 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MARKETS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>WEPCO NEAR SUPPLY DEALS WITH KENNECOTT, PEABODY, CONSOL, WRI</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(193 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>BALTIMORE GAS SIGNS 7 CONTRACTS; DEALS COVER 4.5 MILLION TONS OVER 2 YEARS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(193 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>LANSING, GM INK 10-YEAR STEAM PACT; DEAL WILL BOOST MUNIS COAL BURNS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(233 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>EFC BUYS 90,000 TONS FOR JANUARY; DIAMOND MAY, CONSOL, RIVERWOOD WILL SHIP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(263 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INDUSTRY</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>PACIFICORP IN TALKS WITH BIG RIVERS; WOULD OPERATE PLANTS FOR 25 YEARS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(220 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>CONSOL BUYS RESERVES FROM PP&L; GREENE HILL BLOCKS UP AGAINST BAILEY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(117 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#34"><LI>BIG RIVERS SEEKS TO CANCEL PACT; SAYS GREEN RIVER WON DEAL BY FRAUD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(256 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

MARKET DEVELOPMENT

   On other fronts, Southern Company Services was watching waiting, a
spokesperson said last week. In early December, an Alabama Power
spokesperson said that the utility would probably solicit for first quarter
coal supplies. Georgia Power has had bids in hand since mid-November for
all of its plants except Scherer. But last week, the SCS spokesperson said
fuels officials were evaluating the weather, the load and powerplant burns
before taking action for either utility. In addition, a spokesperson for
Mississippi Power said the utility still has not decided on a term coal
supplier for its Watson plant.
   Maple Creek Mining is continuing to make progress in the Pittsburgh
seam, said MCM's president Robert Murray last month. Last year, sales agent
American Coal Sales circulated sheets of specifications developed by former
owner U.S. Steel Mining but Murray said quality has been far better. The
mine has produced metallurgical and steam coals of 1.1-1.2 percent dry
sulfur, 5.5 percent dry ash and 4-5 percent moisture.
   The key to Maple Creek's high quality is it's management's decision to
concentrate on coal in the main bench of the Pittsburgh seam, Murray said.
Costs, too are lower than expected, largely because of the 2,900 feet of
continuous haulage MCM installed in the old mine. Murray said the mine's
productivity will soon improve again as it installs bridge continuous
haulage system for the mines continuous miners.
   ``It's a real complement to our workforce,'' who installed the mine's
longwall and haulage systems, cleaned up the mine and got into production
in 73 days, Murray said.
   While Murray has said that the target for Maple Creek's coal is the more
lucrative metallurgical market rather than the utlity market and the mine's
base contract is with USX Corp., the coal has appeared on the steam coal
market including a test cokntract with PSI Energy.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

SAN ANTONIO SIGNS TERM DEAL; KENNECOTT WRAPS UP ALL PRB SUPPLIES

   The San Antonio City Public Service Board has signed a five-year,
roughly 2.6 million t/y coal supply agreement with Kennecott Energy to
cover the balance of the utility's 5 million t/y burn not covered under a
separate, pre-existing contract Kennecott inherited in its purchase of the
Cordero mine from Sun Coal.
   Although declining to discuss coal pricing beyond that which was
available at the formal bid opening (10-16-95 Coal Week), an official said
that the award was made as per the bid, which would mean that the Cordero
coal is priced at $3.45/t FOB the mine. The new contract does not include
price reopeners. Deliveries begin this month and continue through 2000.
   While the Cordero contracts seem to close the door to spot coal ventures
by San Antonio, there are provisions giving the utility some flexibility in
the event of delivery -- or other -- problems. Additionally, San Antonio
plans to continue its alternative coal testing program, which included the
delivery in December of 45,000 tons of coal from the Kennecott-managed
Colowyo mine in Colorado. The test coal resulted from a ``special
arrangement'' and was not a purchase off of the October bids, he said.
   Delivery of the Cordero coal is by Union Pacific.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

BROWN STEPS DOWN AS CONSOL CEO; KARIS TAKES ON GENERAL OPERATIONS

   Twilight fell on an era in the U.S. coal industry Jan. 1 when B.R. Brown
stepped down as chief executive officer of CONSOL Inc. in favor of 
William G. Karis, CONSOL's president. Brown remains CONSOL's chairman,
focusing on ``selected strategic issues.''
   A year earlier, Karis moved up from a position as executive vice
president - administration to president. Karis has been gradually adding
functions over the past several years and by January 1995, he supervised
most functions except for marketing and planning, which Brown retained. As
CEO, Karis will be responsible for the general management of CONSOL Inc.
and its subsidiaries in the CONSOL Coal Group.
   Brown had been CONSOL's CEO since 1982. He presided over four contract
negotiations with the United Mine Workers of America, a number of major
acquisitions including Island Creek Coal Corp. and the installation of
high-productivity longwall mines.
   Brown's tenure also saw DuPont sell a 50 percent interest in CONSOL to
Rheinbraun A.G. of Germany. DuPont considers CONSOL to be a non-core
business and officials have said in the past that DuPont would entertain
offers for its remaining interest.
   CONSOL declined to elaborate on either Brown's or Karis' duties and said
neither man was available for interview.
   With Karis moving up, CONSOL Inc. announced Dec. 20 that it had named
Michael F. Nemser senior vice president-administration, over financial and
general administrative activities at the CONSOL companies. Nemser will be
effectively replaced by Karen L. Musial as vice president and treasurer of
CONSOL Inc.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

TAX CREDITS PUT FIRE UNDER BRIQUETTES; COVOL TARGETS UTILITIES, STEEL
MILLS

   Armed with a favorable ruling by the Internal Revenue Service, COVOL
Technologies Inc. announced Dec. 19 that it had formed a partnership to
build a coal briquetting plant in Utah, designed to produce 250,000-1
million t/y of reprocessed coal fines.
   Spokesperson Alan Ayres said the partnership, Utah Synfuel #1, would be
the first of up to 20 such ventures scattered around the U.S. They will use
COVOL Technologies' patented briquetting system which features a special
binder that forms a chemical bond with coal particles, he said. Because the
binder bonds chemically with coal fines and changes their structure, the
COVOL's briquettes qualify as a synthetic fuel.
   Separately, COVOL has two projects to use its briquetting process to
combine iron-bearing mill wastes, and limestone with coal fines or coke
breeze -- coke fines not generally usable in steel making -- to produce a
feed stock for electric arc furnaces. One project is with Gulf States Steel
to recycle coke breeze and mill wastes. The other is located at Vineyard
UT.
   In September the IRS issued a letter ruling that, as a synfuel producer,
COVOL is eligible for Alternative Energy Production tax credits under
section 29 of the Internal Revenue Code. As a result, briquettes produced
by Utah Synfuel #1 ``investors in the partnership will receive
approximately $25 of tax credits for every ton of coal briquettes produced
by the partnership,'' COVOL announced. COVOL has not yet decided on a site
for Utah Synfuels #1, Ayres said.
   However, in November, COVOL agreed to buy the Wellington Loadout in
Carbon County UT from Nevada Electric Investment Co. Wellington also was a
the site of a wash plant and COVOL announced at the time that the area
contained at least 5 million tons of coal fines which it planned to convert
to briquettes. Ayres said coal fines at the site are low in sulfur content
and would lend themselves easily to most utility uses.
   Utilities have shown themselves resistant to synthetic fuels outside of
the testing phase, but COVOL plans to market its all-coal briquettes
anyway. The firm may have found a better market for its briquetting process
in the steel industry, Ayres said.
   COVOL found that steel mills produce a large volume of waste materials
that now must be stockpiled or disposed of in landfills. COVOL developed
the idea of briquetting iron oxide materials to produce a material that can
be melted in an electric arc furnace with traditional ferric scrap.
Briquettes of coal fines or coke breeze mixed with limestone and iron
wastes can be used as a direct charge in blast furnaces, reducing the need
for coke, he said.
   COVOL first built a miniature electric arc furnace at its Price UT
research facility to prove out their iron-rich briquettes. Ayres said COVOL
iron-rich briquettes were the principle material in a commercial-scale melt
at a mill in the southeast. COVOL and Geneva Steel have built a briquetting
plant at Vineyard UT to produce the coal-iron briquette. COVOL also is
considering a commercial electric arc furnace mini-mill in Utah. COVOL and
a steel mill which has requested anonymity have agreed to build a coke
breeze briquetting plant at a southeastern mill. Gulf States Steel and
COVOL have a letter of intent for a briquetted iron reduction facility in
Alabama.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

CURRENT STEAM COAL MARKER PRICES

Coal Week's contract and spot market price listings follow ``marker''
specifications determined on a combination of acknowledged transactions and
confidential state-of-trade discussions with buyers, sellers and coal
traders. These prices reflect only coals bought and sold for the purpose of
generating electricity. Metallurgical and industrial steam coals are
reflected elsewhere in Coal Week. Prices are updated as warranted and
exclude distress transactions. Some specifications may be changed
periodically.

Price ranges reflect differences in current conditions for similar coals
caused by quantity, term or transportation arrangements. Spot prices cover
transactions of 12 months or less. Contract prices reflect current quotes
for contracts of one year or more and include renegotiated prices based on
market price reopeners. Prices are listed in US dollars per short ton FOB
mine site, ``in the car'' or ``in the barge.'' Prices include severance,
Black Lung and other applicable taxes. Producing districts are as defined
in the Bituminous Coal Act of 1937.

Users of this table are reminded that coal prices vary for quality,
transportation and business considerations. Deviations from a marker coal's
specs for heat value, sulfur, ash and chemical content should be considered
when making comparisons to coals of personal interest.

Escalations. Here are some indices used in coal contract escalation
clauses. Other escalators may be used.
Producer Price Index. All commodities (1982 = 100) 6/95-125.3, 7/95-125.3,
8/95-125.0
PPI, Mining Equipment: 6/95-139.1, 7/95-139.1, 8/95-139.1.
PPI, All Coal Rail Transportation: (12/1984 = 100) 6/95-107.6, 7/95-107.0,
8/95-107.1.
PPI, Bituminous Coal Rail Transportation: (12/1984 = 100) 6/95-107.7,
7/95-107.1, 8/95-107.1.
PPI, Diesel Fuel: 6/95-58.9, 7/95-54.2, 8/95-56.0.
Labor (UMWA National Bituminous Coal Wage Agreement): General wage
increases -- 12/15/95-$0.40.

PENALTY PROVISIONS
Sulfur penalties range from 25 cents - $1.00/t for each 0.1% deviation from
guarantee. Some contracts use SO2 allowances or EPA penalties to compute
penalties or downward adjustments.
Ash penalty provisions are quite prevalent with 30 cents/t or more for
each full 1% deviation over guarantee are not unheard of.
Contract penalty/premium provisions for Btu/lb. deviations generally are
based as shown below:
1) Deviation in Btu/lb. x FOB contract price per BTU/lb. = adjusted price.
2) As received Btu/lb./guaranteed Btu/lb. x contract price = adjusted
price.

CURRENT STEAM COAL MARKER PRICES
                                 Specifications
Producing districts    Btu/lb.   Sulfur     Ash

1) Central PA,        12,300     2.0        13.0
parts of VA & MD      12,500     1.8        10
                      12,500     1.0        10.0

2) Western PA         12,200     1.5        14.0
                      12,500     2.5        10.0
                      13,200     1.7         9.0
                      13,000     1.0         9.0

3) Northern WV        12,300     3.0        13.0
                      12,300     1.0         8.0
                      13,000     2.5        10.0
                      13,000     1.0         9.0

4) Ohio               11,000     2.6        14.0
                      11,800     3.0        11.0
                      12,200     4.0         6.0

7) Southeastern WV    12,000     1.2lbs     10.0
parts of VA           12,500     1.5        12.0
                      13,000     1.0         8.0

8) Southern WV,       11,900     1.1        12.0
Eastern KY,           12,500     1.0        10.0
parts of VA &         12,500     1.2lbs     10.0
Northern TN           12,500     1.5        13.0
                      13,000     1.2lbs     8-9
                      13,000     1.0        9-10
                      13,000     1.1lbs     9.0

9) Western KY         11,000     3.6        14.2
                      11,800     2.6        13.0
                      12,300     2.5        10.0

10) Illinois          10,500     3.5        13.0
                      11,700     2.5        8.5
                      12,000     1.2        10

11) Indiana           10,500     3.0        12.0
                      11,000     3.0        12.0
                      11,300     2.5        9.0

12) Iowa               9,500     4.0        15.0

13) AL & Southern TN  12,000     1.6        13.1
                      12,500     0.75       10.0

15) KS, MO, &         11,700     4.5        12.0
parts of OK           12,000     4.5        11.0
                      13,000     1.2lbs     9.0

16 & 17) Colorado     10,700     0.5        9.1
                      11,300     0.75       9.0
                      11,600     0.5        9.0

18) Parts of NM & AZ  10,800     0.5        10.5

19) Wyoming            8,400     0.5        6.0
                       8,800     0.5        7.5
                      10,000     0.6        6.5
                      10,500     0.6        8.5

20) Utah              11,500     0.6        9.0

22) Montana            8,600     0.7        8.0
                       9,300     0.4        6.0

                            Price--$/t FOB mine
Producing districts        Term            Spot

1) Central PA,             26.00         23.50   -24.00
parts of VA & MD           24.00         22.50   -25.00
                           24.50         23.40   -24.48

2) Western PA                           18.25   -20.22
                           28.00        17.00   -18.50
                   22.00   25.00        21.50   -26.40
                           24.50        22.00   -24.00

3) Northern WV     20.00  -22.00        16.90   -19.18
                           18.00        21.35   -24.43
                  23.00   -23.60        16.50   -22.60
                  24.00   -25.00        23.30   -28.00

4) Ohio                  --             22.00
                           20.49        19.45   -22.50
                  21.90   -24.20        17.50   -20.10

7) Southeastern WV         21.25        21.50   -22.00
parts of VA       23.25   -25.00        21.90   -24.50
                          --                 --

8) Southern WV,   23.50   -25.00        18.20   -23.00
Eastern KY,       22.50   -26.50        21.75   -23.23
parts of VA &     25.50   -27.00        24.50   -26.00
Northern TN       25.00   -28.00        20.64   -24.45
                  25.25   -28.00        27.00   -30.00
                  24.00   -25.00        25.00   -28.00
                  28.90   -34.25            --

9) Western KY     17.95   -19.50        16.50   -18.50
                  20.00    22.00        18.00   -20.05
                  19.65   -21.00        19.50   -23.00

10) Illinois      21.00   -22.30        14.00   -17.00
                           23.50                -21.25
                                        23.00

11) Indiana                15.90       15.00    -16.00
                           18.50       20.00    -21.50
                           19.00       18.05     20.00

12) Iowa                    --                 --

13) AL & Soutouthern TN     --         23.00    -25.00
                  31.50   -44.50       23.00    -25.00

15) KS, MO, &               --                 --
parts of OK                 --                 --
                                               --

16 & 17) Colorado 12.00   -14.00     10.00      -11.50
                           13.50     11.75      -14.00
                  14.50   -15.75     12.50      -15.50

18) Parts of NM & AZ        --                   15.50

19) Wyoming        3.30    -4.00      2.90       -3.75
                   4.25    -4.48      4.10       -4.48
                         --          12.00
                           17.50     11.30      -13.50
20) Utah          14.50   -15.00     11.00      -16.00

22) Montana                 6.25      4.75       -5.50
                   5.95    -7.20      5.06       -6.50


Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

US MARKER METALLURGICAL COAL PRICES

               US MARKER METALLURGICAL COAL PRICES

                 Volatile                    Price FOB
                 Matter     Sulfur   Ash     prep plant
Origin              %         %       %      $/t Spot

North            17-22      1.0     7-9     --
Appalachia       23-30      1.0     7-9     30-32
(PA, N. WV       33-35+     1-1.5   7-9     29-31
and MD)

Central          17-22      1.0     6-8     35-37
Appalachia       23-30      1.0     6-8     35-38
(S. WV, E. KY    33-35      1.0     6-8     30-32
N. TN and VA)

South            17-25     <1.0     5-7     --
Appalachia       26-30     <1.0     5-7     33-34

Prices are shown  on an ``as received'' not ``dry'' basis.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

    CURRENT ANTHRACITE PRICES

Anthracite prices at the breakers, subject to negotiation and contracts,
are as follows:

Size Standard $/t FOB Breakers
    Ash Max % Low High

Egg 11 70.00 75.00
Stove 11 72.75 75.00
Chestnut 11 72.75 74.00
Pea 12 65.50 72.00
Buckwheat 13 61.00 64.50
Rice 13 68.00 72.00
Barley 15 61.00 65.00
#4 16 mid-40s mid-60s
#5 16 low-30s mid-40s
#6 18 18.00 38.00

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

MARKET PERSPECTIVE

   Activity in the coal markets at year's end was mainly the wrapping up of
1995. There were simply no solicitations to report east or west of the
Mississippi. Most purchases reported last week had been in the works for
some time and surprised few people. Prices were reported flat to weakening
despite what most observers believes is pretty good production discipline
in Appalachia.
   If December was slow, sources expect January to be slow as well, despite
cold weather that dipped down to south Florida. ``A lot of people are
trying to push inventories down,'' one sales executive said in
mid-December. While temperatures were cold through most of the East, there
has been no severe cold snap that would push burns way up. And, without
some sort of significant development, prices will not move much one way or
the other.
   By the same token, small stockpiles carry the threat of price
volatility. During the severe winter of 1994, utilities found that they had
to move quickly to keep their inventories in the safety range and prices
soared.
   Sources agreed that A.T. Massey has made major inroads into the market
for quality high-volatile metallurgical coal. The steel mills are being
squeezed between flat prices for their products and higher costs for
low-vol coals. Massey, which has improved its productivity and cut costs,
has been selling its high-quality met coals at $30-$30.50/t to meet the
mills' demands, the sources said.
   One development that could affect the eastern markets is the decision of
Italy's Enel electric utility to pick up options on more than 900,000 tons
of coal for delivery in early 1996 (see item below.) With plans to buy
another 2.7 million tons this year, Enel could have an effect on the
overall steam coal market.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

TU ELECTRIC

   TU Electric will rely on three Powder River Basin producers to supply
its Monticello power plant in 1996 with some 500,000 tons of subbituminous
coal as a supplement to Texas lignite. Competing offers out of the San Juan
Basin had been called for (10-16-95 Coal Week) and at least one coal was
tested (10-23-95 Coal Week) at the three-unit station, located near Mt.
Pleasant in northeast Texas. Rail transportation contracts were still under
negotiation last week.
   The half-million tons will be purchased by TU Electric on a spot basis,
with the coal to be supplied from Kennecott Energy's Cordero mine, from
ARCO Coal's Black Thunder mine, and out of Cyprus Amax Minerals' Belle Ayr
mine. The Monticello plant uses about 11 million tons of fuel annually.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

KENTUCKY UTILITIES

   As of late last week, Kentucky Utilities had not signed contracts aimed
at supplying its Ghent station with a million tons of coal annually over
the next three years; however, an official said the contracts have been
approved. Once the contracts are signed, Knott-Floyd Land will supply Ghent
with 300,000 t/y of coal from the Mott's Branch job in Knott County KY,
Ashland Coal will supply 400,000 t/y from its Dal-Tex operation, and Cyprus
Amax will supply 300,000 t/y of Kanawha County WV coal produced by
Cannelton Industries, the official said.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

SOUTHERN ILLINOIS POWER COOPERATIVE

   Southern Illinois Power Cooperative has signed a two-year coal supply
contract with Jader Fuel and may sign a two-year agreement with Arch Coal
Sales, contracts which together could supply the utility with 500,000 tons
of truck-delivered coal in total.
   Jader already supplies the utility under an existing contract which
expires in May, 1996. The new two-year agreement will then kick in, with
Jader to supply 100,000 t/y out of its mine near Harrisburg IL.
   A 150,000 t/y agreement with Arch depends on successful test burns. The
coal is to be supplied out of the Captain mine.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

PUBLIC SERVICE NEW HAMPSHIRE

   Public Service New Hampshire has split awards under Northeast Utilities'
November solicitation for the Schiller station evenly between domestic and
foreign suppliers, according to an NU official, who said last week that the
coal will be supplied out of Colombia South America and ``probably West
Virginia.'' Each unnamed source will be called on to supply ``at least
100,000 tons, plus or minus 20 percent each,'' he said. As reported
previously (11-20-95 Coal Week), NU expects to return to the spot market,
probably in the second quarter of 1996.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

ORLANDO FL UTILITIES COMMISSION

   Based on a solicitation issued to its list of domestic suppliers by FAX
on Dec. 12, the Orlando FL Utilities Commission announced the purchase of
four unit train-loads of coal on the spot market from Blue Diamond Coal,
according to OUC spokesman Sheridan Becht. All of the coal is for burning
at OUC's 460 Mw Stanton No. 1 generating unit. Sealed bids from the
solicitation, which sought up to six unit train loads, or about 57,000
tons, were due Dec. 21. OUC received a total of 17 bids.
   Two train loads of coal will be delivered each month in January and
February 1996, on rail lines owned by CSX Transportation.
   The specs on the Blue Diamond coal, which will come from its Leatherwood
mine in eastern Kentucky, were 12,600 minimum Btu/lb., a maximum ash
content of 8.5 percent, 40 percent maximum fines, 8 percent maximum
moisture, and a maximum sulfur content of 1.3 percent.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

NEW YORK STATE ELECTRIC & GAS

   New York State Electric & Gas has purchased 321,000 tons of coal for
delivery in January, with 285,000 tons of that purchased under term
contracts and 36,000 tons purchased off of the spot market.
CONSOL/Blacksville contract coal tonnages will go to the Kintigh station
(168,000 tons) and to Milliken (81,000 tons), while the Greenidge and
Goudey station each will receive 18,000 tons of contract coal from
Peabody's Federal mine. The Jennison station will receive 24,000 tons of
spot coal and Hickling station will receive 12,000 tons of spot coal.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

PENNSYLVANIA POWER & LIGHT

   Pennsylvania Power & Light stations will receive 760,000 tons of coal in
January, a figure which includes 160,000 tons purchased off of the spot
market and 700,000 tons purchased off of contracts. The Montour station
will receive 240,000 tons of contract coal and 120,000 tons of spot,
Brunner Island will receive 300,000 tons of contract coal, Martins Creek
will receive 60,000 tons of contract coal, and Sunbury will receive 30,000
tons of contract coal and 10,000 tons of spot. In December, Sunbury
received 45,000 tons of anthracite silt and 11,000 tons of petroleum coke,
while Holtwood received 15,000 tons of anthracite silt, 2,000 tons of
higher-grade prepared anthracite and 9,000 tons of petroleum coke.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

NEW ENGLAND ELECTRIC POWER

   New England Electric Power has renegotiated coal supply contracts with
Mingo Logan Coal Co. and A.T. Massey Coal Co. and is very close to signing
final agreements on a 1-3 year, 200,000 t/y deal with Crown Coal & Coke.
Both the Mingo Logan and Massey renegotiations were for possible tonnages
of 160,000-400,000 t/y.
   The Mingo Logan renegotiation covers 18 months, while the Massey
renegotiation is for a two-year period. Massey will supply the coal from
its Sidney and Sprouse Creek operations.
   The Crown Coal & Coke deal resulted from offers received in early fall
(9-4-95 Coal Week) on 180,000-720,000 tons of coal for delivery in 1996.
The coal will originate on a Norfolk Southern rail line and be delivered
initially to Lamberts Point.
   The coal will be delivered aboard International Shipholding's Energy
Enterprise, formerly owned by Keystone Shipping under the name, Energy
Independence. It recently was sold to NEPCO and resold the same day to
International. The Energy Enterprise, no longer dedicated solely to NEPCO
needs, has been drydocked for routine maintenance and epairs.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

WEST VIRGINIA PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION

   Reports filed with the West Virginia Public Service Commission for the
month of September show that coal prices remained fairly stable through the
first three quarters of 1995.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

APPALACHIAN POWER

   Appalachian Power reached a nine-month supply agreement with Cyprus Amax
Coal for 12,400 Btu/lb. coal from Cannelton Industries Lady Dunn
preparation plant. The price for a blend of Fayette County and Kanawha
County WV coals was $23.23/t FOB barge for a 0.7 percent sulfur, 11.2
percent ash product. Deliveries were to begin in September 1995 and end in
June 1996.
   For the Sporn plant, APCo has a one-year contract with Anker Energy
Corp. and Camelot Coal for mid-sulfur coals from Monongalia County WV. In
September Anker delivered 10,483 tons of coal from its Patriot divisions
for $21.33/t FOB barge of 112.7 cents/mmBtu delivered on specs of 12,108
Btu/lb., 1.6 percent sulfur and 13.7 percent ash. Also in September,
Camelot delivered 20,761 tons of coal from Mepco Coal operations for an FOB
barge price of $21.35/t or 111.8 cents/mmBtu on specs of 12,213 Btu/lb.,
1.y percent sulfur and 13.4 percent ash.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

MONONGAHELA POWER

   Monongahela Power reached four-month contracts with American Coal Sales,
CONSOL Inc. and American Carbon & Minerals for high-sulfur coal for the
Pleasants power plant, the West Virginia PSC report shows. In September,
American Coal Sales shipped more than 84,000 tons of coal from Ohio Valley
Coal Co.'s Powhatan No. 6 mine for $18.75/t FOB mine or 79.8 cents/mmBtu
delivered on specs of 12,728 Btu/lb., 4.3 percent sulfur and 9.5 percent
ash.
   CONSOL `s shipped but 4,792 tons to Pleasants in September from its
McElroy and Shoemaker mine in Marshall County WV for $16.90/t FOB mine or
75.4 cents/mmBtu delivered on specs of 12,248 Btu/lb., 3.8 percent sulfur
and 10.3 percent ash. American Carbon & Minerals shipped a Washington PA
coal from the Donora Dock in September $15.87/t FOB barge or 78.8
cents/mmBtu delivered for coal speced at 11,974 Btu/lb., 2.5 percent sulfur
and 11.8 percent ash.
   For the Albright plant, MonPower bought three-month spot supplies from
Anker Energy, Mepco and Bridgeview Coal, with supplies starting August 1
and ending October 31. Anker Energy supplied mid-sulfur coal from its
Patriot affiliate's Fairfax No. 9 mine in Preston County WV at $20.67/t FOB
or 93.5 cents/mmBtu delivered on specs of 12,456 Btu/lb., 1.6 percent
sulfur and 13.5 percent ash. A second shipment of 12,416 Btu/lb. coal cost
$20.22/t.
   Mepco Coal delivered 19,434 tons of 12,130 Btu/lb., 1.7 percent sulfur
and 13.6 percent ash coal from its Mays Run mine in Monongalia County WV
for $21.28/t FOB mine or 93.9 cents/mmBtu delivered. Bridgeview Coal
shipped 4,655 tons of Fayette County PA coal for $20.67/t FOB or 93.5
cents/mmBtu delivered on specs of 12,127 Btu/lb., 1.5 percent sulfur and
13.4 percent ash.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

ENEL, THE ITALIAN ELECTRIC UTILITY

   Enel, the Italian electric utility, has declared options on 850,000
metric tons (934,700 st) of coal from seven U.S. suppliers and is preparing
a solicitation for up to 2.5 million mt more for delivery in 1996. This is
in addition to 500,000 mt that Peabody and Drummond are each scheduled to
ship to Enel during 1996 under their long-term contracts.
   Enel is unusual for an international customer in that it holds
transportation contracts with U.S. railroads, primarily the Norfolk
Southern. Although it effectively buys coal at the mine, Enel evaluates it
on a loaded basis in ocean-going vessels. Enel also buys premium U.S. coal
of at least 12,500 Btu/lb. and pays well for the quality. The utility's
1995 ``spot'' contracts were for $41-$41.50/mt..
   Enel has exercised options with AMCI Coal Export for 170,000 mt at a
price of $41.05; with CONSOL on 70,000 mt at $41.25/mt; with Peabody on
170,000 mt at $41.35; with Franklin Coal Sales on 120,000 mt at $41.40/mt;
with A.T. Massey for 120,000 mt at $41.45/mt; with MAPCO Coal for 170,000
mt at $41.50/mt, and with Pittston for 30,000 mt at $41.55/mt. Enel's
original tender called for a combined base tonnage of 2.5 million mt.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

CHILE'S COMERCIAL CATUMUTUN S.A.

   Chile's Comercial Catumutun S.A., which buys coal for Chilean industrial
and utility accounts, has arranged to buy two cargoes of test coals from
U.S. shippers, CCSA director Frederick J. Murrell said at year's end.
Murrell declined to name the suppliers, but he said one will ship a
handymax cargo of about 40,000 mt from a U.S. West Coast port and the other
will ship a 30,000-mt cargo from ``another U.S. port.''
   In June, CCSA tendered for four 35,000-mt cargoes to be delivered to the
firm's port at Las Ventanas beginning in November 1995 (CWI 6-26-95).
CCSA's tender specifications were 6,700 kcal/kg or 12,060 Btu/lb. GAR, 35
percent volatiles, 1 percent sulfur preferred (2 percent maximum), 14
percent ash and 12 percent moisture. CCSA's total 1995 sales will be about
600,000 mt of imported and domestic coal. In 1996, the firm said it expects
total sales of about 900,000 mt.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

TMT COAL

   TMT Coal, the joint venture of Transmar Coal and Tomen America, will
supply Savannah Electric & Power with about 36,000 mt of South American
coal to test the new coal unloading pier at the utility's Kraft power
plant. A spokesperson for Southern Company Services Inc., which acts as
SE&P's coal supplier, confirmed the purchase last week.
   SCS tendered Oct. 11 for 30,000 mt of coal to test the new unloading
facility under construction at MP 20 on the Savannah River (10-24-95 Coal
Week). The plant has no unloading facilities, so the tender specified that
the coal be delivered by a belt self-unloader. The SCS spokesman confirmed
that the coal will have specifications of 12,300 Btu/lb., 1.1 percent
sulfur and 6 percent ash and will be loaded at the port of Palmerejo. The
coal will be a blend of Colombian and Venezuelan coals.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

TEXAS UTILITIES ELECTRIC

   Texas Utilities Electric has created a new position, coal acquisition
and transportation manager, to be filled by Thomas R. Jacobsen, who has
been Burlington Northern Railroad's assistant vice president/marketing and
strategic planning since 1990. From 1978-1984, Jacobsen was a
transportation consultant with R.L. Banks & Associates, and before that he
was a transportation market analyst for Norfolk Southern.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

DRUMMOND COAL SALES

   Drummond Coal Sales has announced new telephone numbers for West
Boettger and Jim Sobule, who have been the sales and marketing staff for
Caballo Rojo, Inc. Sobule and Boettger have moved from Denver, where they
had been located when the Caballo Rojo mine was owned by Mobil, to
Birmingham AL. Boettger's number will be 205-945-6434; Sobule's is
205-945-6436. Their telecopier number is 205-945-6415.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

DOE SPONSORED CLEAN COAL PROGRAM FOR STEEL INDUSTRY MOVES TO TEST STAGE

   The U.S. Department of Energy's partial support of an innovative
technology that could sharply reduce future air pollutant emissions from
the nation's iron-making industry recently moved into full test operations,
approximately five years after DOE initially approved the project.
   The project is the 25th to begin operations in the DOE's Clean Coal
Technology Program, a joint government-industry program designed to
demonstrate environmentally clean ways to use the nation's coal reserves.
The 32-month testing program will be carried out at the Bethlehem Steel
Corp. Burns Harbor plant in Chesterton IN. Commissioning and start-up
testing was completed last November.
   The project involves retrofitting existing iron-making blast furnaces
with a technology that injects crushed coal directly into the furnace.
Conventional iron-making requires that coal first be converted into coke, a
process that can release significant emissions of airborne toxic impurities
along with nitrogen and sulfur based pollutants.
   Because the ``granulated coal injection system'' can replace up to 40
percent of the coke required in a blast furnace, it has the potential for
significantly lowering air emissions while enhancing blast furnace
production, according to a DOE description.
   To prepare for the test operations, Bethlehem Steel retrofitted two high
capacity blast furnaces at Burns Harbor with the new technology. Each unit
can produce 7,000 net tons per day of hot metal. Currently the plant is
processing more than 225 pounds of coal per each net ton of hot metal, an
amount which could be increased to as much as 400 pounds per ton during the
test program.
   Bituminous coals from West Virginia, Pennsylvania, Illinois and Kentucky
will be tested along with possibly a subbituminous coal from the western
U.S. The direct coal injection process allows the use of a wide range of
relatively inexpensive coals, in contrast with coke, which can be made only
from certain high-quality coals.
   Sulfur from the coal is removed by the limestone flux added to the blast
furnace, and is retained by the slag, which is a marketable by-product. In
addition to replacing the coke, the new technology can also improve
performance of the blast furnace. In conventional blast furnaces, natural
gas or oil is used as a fuel supplement. Because coal contains less
hydrogen than either gas or oil, it does not cause as severe a reduction in
temperatures in critically important zones inside the blast furnace. The
higher, more stable temperatures in the furnace improves the efficiency of
the iron-making process, noted DOE.

DOE agreement calls for technology sharing
   If successful, the granulated coal injection system can be applied to
essentially all U.S. blast furnaces. The technology should be applicable to
any type of coal commercially available in the United States with the
exception of various high moisture coals.
   As part of the agreement with the DOE's Morgantown WV Energy Technology
Center, which oversees the project for the federal government, Bethlehem
Steel will share the results of the project with other steel companies. The
Clean Coal program requires that at least 50 percent of the cost of a
project be shared by the private sector, with the Energy Department
contributing the remainder. In this project, Bethlehem Steel is providing
more than 80 percent of the total cost of $191.7-million, with DOE
providing about $30-million.
   The project was first approved by DOE in December 1989. Design of the
retrofit technology was started in November 1990 when a cooperative
agreement was signed. Construction began in September 1993.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

MSHA EXTENDS COMMENTS; ROYALTY RATE

   The U.S. Labor Department's Mine Safety & Health Administration has
extended the comment period to February 5, 1996 on a proposed rule dealing
with the requirements for approval of flame resistant conveyor belts to be
used in underground mines. Last October MSHA reopened its rulemaking on the
matter and issued a new proposal. As a result of the response from the
mining community, MSHA decided to extend the comment period. Contact:
Patricia Silvey, MSHA (Tel. 703-235-1910).

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT

   The U.S. Interior Department's Bureau of Land Management has extended
until the year 2000 the designation of a nine country area in Oklahoma for
a Category-5 rating for federal coal royalty rate purposes. The region was
granted such a federal royalty rate reduction status in 1990, and BLM has
determined that the coal market in the region is essentially unchanged. As
a result, holders of federal coal leases in the region will pay reduced
federal royalty rates of two percent for underground coal and four percent
for surface mined coal. The notice was published in the Federal Register of
Dec. 4, 1995.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

WEPCO NEAR SUPPLY DEALS WITH KENNECOTT, PEABODY, CONSOL, WRI

   Wisconsin Electric Power Co. is close to contracts on subbituminous and
bituminous coal supplies for its Oak Creek power plant.
   Meanwhile, for its Presque Isle plant, the utility has worked up a 1996,
300,000-ton supply contract with Peabody Western for coal from the Big Sky
mine in Montana. WEPCO also revised its contract with Westmoreland
Resources for coal from the Absaloka mine to run through 1997 at 300,000
t/y, said a utility official.
   The not-yet-finalized Oak Creek contracts include a likely 4-year,
600,000 t/y agreement with Kennecott Energy from the Antelope mine in the
Powder River Basin, which could increase to roughly 1 million t/y if WEPCO
is successful in burning a 50-50 blend of subbituminous and bituminous coal
at the plant.
   For bituminous supplies at Oak Creek, WEPCO and CONSOL are working
toward finalizing a one-year, 500,000-ton minimum agreement, under which
CONSOL would supply Pittsburgh No. 8 seam coal from the Bailey-Enlow Fork
complex, the official said. The still-pending agreement would supply all of
the utility's Oak Creek bituminous coal needs which exceed the 800,000 t/y
supplied by Pittsburg & Midway from its York Canyon complex.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

BALTIMORE GAS SIGNS 7 CONTRACTS; DEALS COVER 4.5 MILLION TONS OVER 2 YEARS

   Baltimore Gas & Electric has signed seven coal supply contracts which
will supply its three coal-fired stations with 4.5 million tons of coal
over the next two years. Eight coal companies will furnish the coal from
eight mines under a series of two-year agreements.
   For its Brandon Shores plant, BG&E signed a 300,000 t/y contract with
Ashland Coal, which will fill the order with coal from its Hobet 21 and
Dal-Tex operations. Also for Brandon Shores, a partnership involving PBS
Coals Inc. and Southeast Fuels Inc. will supply 400,000 t/y from the Holden
22 mine.
   The Wagner station will receive 300,000 t/y of coal from the Juliana
mine under a contract with Anker Energy, while Coastal Coal Sales Inc. will
supply 200,000 t/y from the Brooks Run mine.
   The utility's Crane station will receive 300,000 t/y from the Sentinel
mine under a contract signed with a partnership involving Anker Energy
Corp. and Courtney Foos. Peabody COALSALES will supply Crane with 200,000
t/y under a contract to be filled from the Federal No. 2 mine, and CONSOL
will supply the station with 150,000 t/y from its Blacksville operation.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

LANSING, GM INK 10-YEAR STEAM PACT; DEAL WILL BOOST MUNIS COAL BURNS

   The Lansing (MI) Board of Water & Light and General Motors have agreed
to a 10-year deal which will provide steam to three GM auto plants, in
addition to one already serviced by the utility. A two-mile, 20-inch steam
main, paid for by GM, should be completed by November 1996, connecting
Lansing's Eckert and Moores Park plants to the auto maker's steam
distribution system.
   Earlier (10-23-95 Coal Week), an official estimated that the Lansing/GM
arrangement then under study would increase the coal burn by some 70
percent at Moores Park, going from 50,000 t/y to 85,000 t/y. Lansing's
Moores Park coal contract with Costain Coal for coal from the Ramsey mine
runs through 1996.
   Lansing has been supplying steam to GM's Plant No. 1, near downtown
Lansing. The new deal will provide steam for heating and manufacturing
processes at GM's nearby body and fabrications plants, as well as the
Crafte Centre. Lansing's steam sales will be returned to levels not
required since the late 1960s, before the loss of downtown buildings,
before the construction of more energy efficient buildings, and before
recessions of the 1970s and the introduction of more efficient power
production technologies.
   For the first five years into the arrangement, GM will be paying less
than the rate it now pays for steam; after that, GM's payment for steam
will be structured from published indices.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

EFC BUYS 90,000 TONS FOR JANUARY; DIAMOND MAY, CONSOL, RIVERWOOD WILL SHIP

   Electric Fuels Corp., which acts as the fuel-buying agent for Florida
Power Corp., announced the purchase of 90,000 tons of coal from three
vendors in four transactions on the spot market for delivery in January
under its monthly inventory true-up program.
   Transportation will be either direct to Crystal River by rail on lines
owned by CSX Transportation, or by river barge. Barge coal moves through
the river system down the Mississippi to EFC's International Marine
Terminals south of New Orleans, where it is transloaded on to oceangoing
vessels for the trip to Crystal River.
   Diamond May Coal Co. will provide 27,000 tons for Crystal River units
Nos. 1-2, which will be transported by rail from Yellow Creek. The specs
were 12,100 Btu/lb., 11 percent ash, a sulfur content of 0.9-1.2 percent,
and 8 percent moisture. Diamond May Coal Co. also will provide 30,000 tons
for Crystal River units Nos. 4-5, which will be transported by barge from
KMRD Dock on the Big Sandy River. The specs were 12,500 Btu/lb., 11 percent
ash, a sulfur content of 0.75 percent, and 8 percent.
   CONSOL Inc. received a contract for 27,000 tons of coal for Crystal
River units Nos. 4-5, which will be delivered by rail from Mill Creek. The
specs were 12,700 Btu/lb., 9.5 percent ash, 0.75 percent sulfur, and 8
percent moisture. Riverwood Coals Sales Inc. will supply 6,000 tons, barged
from River Eagle Dock on the Big Sandy River. The specs were 12,300
Btu/lb., 11 percent ash, a sulfur content of 0.75 percent, and 7 percent
moisture.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

PACIFICORP IN TALKS WITH BIG RIVERS; WOULD OPERATE PLANTS FOR 25 YEARS

   PacifiCorp would assume responsibility for coal buying, power plant
operation and surplus power marketing for Big Rivers Electric Corp. under a
25-year contract it is negotiating with the co-op. Big Rivers confirmed
last week it is negotiating with PacifiCorp in an attempt to resolve
longstanding financial difficulties. The co-op is about $1.2 billion in
debt. The two companies said they hope to sign a letter of intent within
two to three weeks.
   Unlike several other offers for ``business arrangements'' received and
ultimately rejected by Big Rivers, PacifiCorp is proposing only a
management agreement. Big Rivers would remain locally owned and its
headquarters would stay in Henderson.
   PacifiCorp would take over Big Rivers' coal-buying activities. ``One of
the contingencies we have is we're either going to renegotiate or find new
coal contracts for those power plants'' so their fuel costs can become more
competitive,'' said PacifiCorp spokesperson Dave Kvamme. Big Rivers owns
D.B. Wilson, Green and Coleman plants and operates the Station Two plant
for the city of Henderson KY.
   Big Rivers' past coal-buying practices have been criticized by its major
customers, the Kentucky Public Service Commission and others. Thus far,
three individuals and a major coal supplier have been convicted in
connection with a bribery/kickback scheme to win lucrative coal contracts
from the co-op.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

CONSOL BUYS RESERVES FROM PP&L; GREENE HILL BLOCKS UP AGAINST BAILEY

   Two CONSOL subsidiaries have acquired Greene Hill Coal Co., comprised of
about 31,000 acres of Pittsburgh seam coal and 4,000 acres of surface
property near Waynesburg PA from PP&L Resources for about $52 million.
   PP&L Resources, the parent of Pennsylvania Power & Light, has owned the
property since 1974. Earlier this year it decided that it would not use the
coal to generate its own power and asked for bids from interested parties,
a spokesperson said. The spokesperson declined to comment on any
connection, but Pennsylvania state regulators have forced PP&L to divest
itself of its Pennsylvania Mines division.
   Industry sources said the Greene Hill reserves abut CONSOL's Bailey mine
reserves.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK via NewsNet
January 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No

BIG RIVERS SEEKS TO CANCEL PACT; SAYS GREEN RIVER WON DEAL BY FRAUD

   Big Rivers Electric Corp. is redoubling efforts to cancel a
controversial long-term contract with Green River Coal Co. following the
recent conviction of Green River and its majority owner, Clyde Brown Jr.,
on charges they procured the high-priced agreement through fraud (12-18-95 
Coal Week).
   In late December, Big Rivers filed motions in U.S. District Court and
U.S. Bankruptcy Court to set aside the 1984 contract which runs through
2004. Green River, undergoing Chapter 11 reorganization, supplies about 1
million t/y of high-sulfur coal. The utility buys the coal for $31/t. Green
River, purchases the coal from Andalex Resources for $22/t.
   Big Rivers asserted that Green River ``is not an innocent party; it is a
convicted criminal ... equity should not permit Green River Coal to
continue to profit from a contract which a jury has determined was procured
by fraud and commercial bribery.''
   Big Rivers officials say the spot market price for comparable coal is
$18.41/t. Green River is paid about $780,000 per month in excess of the
Andalex price and nearly $1.1 million a month in excess of the spot market
price, according to the utility.
   Green River and Brown were found guilty of paying more than $200,000 in
bribes and kickbacks to former Big Rivers general manager William Thorpe to
win the lucrative contract. Thorpe, who faces similar charges, is expected
to stand trial next summer.
   Green River and Brown are expected to appeal their recent convictions.
They also are expected to oppose the latest Big Rivers' motions.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B34-8</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B029-212</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey78.html 205.156.212.5 19970114230045 text/html 41110
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:58:16 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:20 GMT
Content-length: 40923
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ey78.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet <BR>
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>CURRENT PETROLEUM COKE PRICES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>CURRENT PETROLEUM COKE PRICES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(57 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CURRENT TYPICAL SPOT FREIGHT RATES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>CURRENT TYPICAL SPOT FREIGHT RATES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(266 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CURRENT STEAM COAL PRICE TABLE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>CURRENT STEAM COAL PRICE TABLE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(443 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CURRENT COKING COAL PRICE TABLE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>CURRENT COKING COAL PRICE TABLE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(355 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MARKETS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>STEEL INDUSTRY OUTPUT GAINS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(114 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>BRAZIL'S CST SEEKS DOWNWARD REVISION OF COAL PRICES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(243 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>PHILIPPINES, AUSTRALIA AGREE TO INCREASE COAL TRADE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(228 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>ISRAEL COMPLETES COAL SUPPLY DEALS FOR 70 PERCENT OF REQUIREMENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(262 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MARKETWATCH</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>ENEL ARRANGES 1996 CONTRACT SUPPLIES WITH SOUTH AFRICA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(200 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>JSM/AUSTRALIAN TALKS TO RESUME NEXT WEEK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(129 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>TAIPOWER SETS TENDER FOR LOW-CV COAL SUPPLY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(278 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>CHILEAN INDUSTRY TO TEST TWO U.S. COAL BRANDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(155 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>NEPCO COOLS ON IMPORTS; FOCUSES ON U.S. COALS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(177 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>NAPOCOR DELAYS COAL TENDER BY THREE MONTHS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(116 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>TMT TO DELIVER SOUTH AMERICAN COAL TO KRAFT POWER PLANT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(136 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>CODELCO BUYS INDONESIAN, CANADIAN AND COLOMBIAN COAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(72 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>UKRAINE TRADER SEEKS TO IMPORT COKING COAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(77 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>ATIC SERVICES APPOINTS ARNOLD TO CHAIR BOARD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(96 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INDUSTRY</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>U.S. UTILITY PLANS COULD IMPACT COAL EXPORT CAPABILITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(526 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>POLICY</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>POLAND BEGINS TO NARROW SCOPE OF COAL MINING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(196 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CURRENT VESSEL FIXTURES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>CURRENT VESSEL FIXTURES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(125 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No

CURRENT PETROLEUM COKE PRICES

CURRENT PETROLEUM COKE PRICES

Origin                 Sulfur     HGI   Current Price
                         %              (US$/MT-FOBT)
United States
Gulf Coast               4.0     50        18-24
                         6.0     70        16-18
                         6.0     30        11-15
West Coast               2.0     50        41-44
                         3.5     50        32-36

Venezuela                4.0     45        Not quoted

Argentina
(calcinable)             0.5    120        70-80

Kuwait
(semi-calcinable)        3.0     80        45-50

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No

CURRENT TYPICAL SPOT FREIGHT RATES

            CURRENT TYPICAL SPOT FREIGHT RATES
Origin/              Volume       Rate       Discharge
Destination           (mt)       ($/mt)        terms

Australia-Queensland
Load: Cape-35,000 SHINC/Panamax-25,000 SHINC
Rotterdam             140,000     $9.00     20,000 SHINC
                       60,000    $13.50     20,000 SHINC
Iskenderun            110,000    $10.25     20,000 SHINC
                       60,000    $13.90     20,000 SHINC
Japan                 120,000     $5.25     25,000 SHINC

Australia-New South Wales
Load: Cape-30,000 SATPMSX/Panamax-20,000 SATPMSX
Rotterdam       120,000 $10.00  25,000 SHINC
                       60,000    $13.50     20,000 SHINC

Canada-Roberts Bank
Load: Cape-35,000 SHINC/Panamax-20,000 SHINC
Rotterdam             140,000       NA      25,000 SHINC
                       60,000     $13.00    20,000 SHINC
Japan                 120,000      $6.25    30,000 SHINC
                       60,000     $10.50    20,000 SHINC

China-Qinhaungdao
Load: 11,000 SHEX
Rotterdam              60,000     $13.25    20,000 SHEX

Colombia-Puerto Bolivar
Load: 45,000 SHINC
Rotterdam             130,000      $5.95    20,000 SHINC
Milaki                110,000      $8.90    12,000 SHINC

South Africa-Richards Bay
Load: Cape-50,000 SHINC/Panamax-34,000 SHINC
Rotterdam             140,000      $5.25    25,000 SHINC
                       60,000      $9.00    20,000 SHINC
Spanish Med.           60,000      $9.05    10,000 SATPMSHEX
Hong Kong             110,000      $6.50    20,000 SSINC
                       60,000      $7.90    15,000 SSINC

South Africa-Durban
Load: 7,000 SATSHEX
Antwerp                40,000     $10.20    20,000 SHINC

US-Hampton Roads
Load: Cape-3 Days SHINC/Panamax-20,000 SHINC
Rotterdam             110,000      $5.90    25,000 SHINC
                       60,000      $7.75    20,000 SHINC
Italy                  90,000      $6.75     3 Days SHINC
Japan                 120,000     $12.50    25,000 SHINC
(& Richards Bay)

US-Mobile
Load: Cape-30,000 SHINC/Panamax-20,000 SHINC
Rotterdam              60,000      $8.65    20,000 SHINC
Italy                  60,000      $9.20    15,000 SHINC
Taiwan                 60,000     $25.50    20,000 SHINC

US-Baltimore
Load: 96 hours SHINC
Rotterdam          90/110,000     $6.25     25,000 SHINC

Data supplied by Simpson, Spence & Young. Freight rates estimated on spot
rates believed fixable at time of submission. Explanation of load discharge
terms: SHINC-Sundays & holidays included; SHEX-Sundays & holidays excluded;
FHINC-Fridays & holidays included; SATPMSHEX-Saturday afternoons, Sundays &
holidays excluded.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No

CURRENT STEAM COAL PRICE TABLE

              CURRENT STEAM COAL PRICE TABLE

ORIGIN               Btu/      Kcal/      Sulf.      Ash        Current
Price
                     lb.        kg.         %         %       US$/MT-FOBT
Pier
United States (GAR)
Hampton             13,000     7,200      1.0        10.0      
41.70-43.25
Roads               12,500     6,950      1.0        10.0      
40.10-41.55
                    12,000     6,700      1.5        12.0      
37.00-38.70
Baltimore           12,500     6,950      1.0        10.0      
40.20-40.55
                    12,000     6,700      1.0        12.0      
37.00-37.30
                    12,000     6,700      1.5        12.0      
32.40-34.00
Gulf Coast          12,500     6,950      1.0        12.0      
37.75-38.50
                    12,000     6,700      1.5        15.0      
33.10-34.00
                    11,500     6,400      1.5        15.0      
31.60-32.50
                     8,800     4,900      0.4         5.0      
23.00-24.00
West Coast          12,000     6,700      0.6        10.0      
40.00-42.00
                    11,500     6,400      0.7        10.0      
38.00-40.10
Canada  (GAR)
Vancouver           13,000     7,200      0.7        10.0      
43.00-45.00
                    11,500     6,400      1.0        14.0      
34.00-38.00
Poland   (NAR)
Baltic ports        12,200     6,800      0.8        8.5       
41.00-42.00
                    11,500     6,400      0.8       11.5       
37.60-38.55
                    10,800     6,000      0.8       15.0       
35.12-35.30
South Africa (GAR)
Richards Bay        11,500     6,400      1.0       16.0       
34.35-35.15
                    10,800     6,000      1.0       16.0       
32.40-33.05
Australia   (GAR)
Newcastle/          12,000     6,700      0.8       14.0       
38.10-41.45
Port Kembla         11,700     6,500      0.8       14.0       
36.90-40.65
                    11,000     6,200      0.8       14.0       
35.20-38.75
Gladstone           11,700     6,500      0.6       14.0       
38.10-41.80

China  (GAR)        11,200     6,200      0.8         8.0      
36.75-37.20
                    10,800     6,000      1.0        12.0      
34.60-36.60
Colombia (GAR)
                    12,000     6,700      0.7         8.0      
37.00-38.70
                    11,800     6,550      0.8         8.0      
33.65-37.65
Europe (GAR)
ARA (FOB Barge)
                    11,500     6,400      1.0        16.0      
47.90-48.90
                    10,800     6,000      1.0        16.0      
45.10-46.10
Russia  (GAR)
Pacific             11,500     6,400      1.0        15.0      
37.90-38.60
Baltic              12,250     6,750      1.0        16.0      
34.45-37.70
                    11,500     6,400      1.0        16.0      
32.60-35.75
Black Sea           11,500     6,400      0.5        13.0      
36.75-39.80

Venezuela  (GAR)
                    12,600     7,000      0.8         7.0      
36.40-37.70
Indonesia   (GAD)
                    12,800     7,100      0.8         3.0      
38.10-43.30
                    12,500     6,700      0.8         2.0      
35.80-37.40
                    10,000     5,500      0.1         1.0      
25.50-27.00

ORIGIN               Fourth            Third              Second
                   Quarter 1995      Quarter 1995      Quarter 1995
                      (Average of quarterly high and low range)
United States   (GAR)
Hampton             42.95            44.26            46.38
Roads               41.30            42.68            44.75
                    37.49            39.40            41.31
Baltimore           40.18            40.84            42.75
                    37.10            37.10            37.77
                    33.70            34.75            35.96
Gulf Coast          38.84            39.95            40.95
                    33.52            33.25            35.73
                    32.03            31.60            32.07
                    23.50            23.50            23.75
West Coast          41.13            41.58            38.74
                    39.19            39.99            34.87
Canada  (GAR)
Vancouver           44.35            44.21            41.75
                    36.90            36.81            32.83
Poland   (NAR)
Baltic ports        40.50            40.48            42.42
                    37.20            36.52            39.48
                    34.35            34.61            36.69
South Africa   (GAR)
Richards Bay        35.54            35.78            34.92
                    33.31            33.74            33.05
Australia   (GAR)
Newcastle/          40.45            41.37            39.62
Port Kembla         39.20            40.14            38.04
                    37.33            36.45            36.26
Gladstone           40.68            41.29            39.26
China  (GAR)
                    36.95            36.76            35.52
                    35.52            35.45            33.90
Colombia   (GAR)
                    37.98            37.46            38.35
                    35.11            35.57            36.99
Europe   (GAR)
ARA (FOB Barge)
                    48.63            48.33            47.11
                    45.60            45.36            44.10
Russia  (GAR)
Pacific             38.10            37.80            36.12
Baltic              34.49            35.31            36.26
                    33.95            33.45            34.36
Black Sea           37.42            35.73            35.39

Venezuela   (GAR)
                    37.01            36.68            36.70
Indonesia   (GAD)
                    40.70            42.00            40.53
                    37.76            39.67            37.39
                    26.13            25.77            24.19
NOTE:  Terms of trade are published monthly.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No

CURRENT COKING COAL PRICE TABLE

               CURRENT COKING COAL PRICE TABLE

ORIGIN              %VOL.      %SULF.       %ASH         Current Price
                                                       Per MT/FOBT Pier
                                                          in US$
United States
Hampton        17-22            0.6           7.0        49.50-53.00
Roads          23-30            0.6           7.0        54.00-55.00
               31+              1.0           7.0        45.90-49.10
Baltimore      17-20            1.0           8.0        47.00-50.00
               21-28            1.0           8.0        47.50-52.20
               29-33            1.5           8.0        45.50-46.00
East Coast
(Blend)        23-30            1.0           8.0        49.00-49.50
(Semi-soft)    35               1.0           10.0       46.00-47.00
Gulf Coast     17-22            1.0           7.0        48.50-48.90
               23-30            1.0           7.0        44.55-47.00
               31+              1.0           7.0        44.00-46.00
Canada
West Coast     <19              0.5           7.0        47.00-48.00
               19-22            0.5           7.0        45.50-46.00
               23-27            0.5           9.0        46.00-49.35
East Coast     33-35            1.5           4.0        47.99-49.50
Australia
Port Kembla    21-24            0.5           10.0       48.00-49.00
               27-28            0.5           8.5        48.00-49.25
Newcastle
(Semi-soft)    31-37            0.4           9.0        41.50-42.40
Hay Point      17-22            0.7           9.0        43.25-49.00
               23-30            0.6           7.0        48.00-49.00
Gladstone      31-34            0.7           7.0        43.30-48.50
Poland
               25-31            0.7           7.0        50.10-50.90
(Semi-soft)    32-37            1.0           9.0        43.00-44.50
Russia
Pacific Coast  17-19            0.6           9.0        46.50-47.50
               19-21            0.4           9.0        47.70-48.50
Baltic         28-30            0.6           9.0        46.90-48.50

South Africa
(Semi-soft)    28-30            0.6           10.0       34.75-35.75
(Soft)         32-35            0.5           7.0        35.50-37.00
Colombia
(Injection grade)30-35          0.7           8.0        38.50-39.50

Venezuela
(Injection grade)30-35          0.8           7.0        36.70-38.00


ORIGIN              Fourth            Third             Second
                  Quarter 1995      Quarter 1995     Quarter 1995
                   (Average of quarterly high and low range)
United States
Hampton              51.42            53.71            53.85
Roads                54.25            54.25            54.94
                     48.20            48.59            51.28              
Baltimore            48.08            50.88            52.48
                     49.60            51.35            50.75
                     46.05            45.46            46.23
East Coast
(Blend)              49.40            49.50            50.13
(Semi-soft)          46.55            46.65            46.47
Gulf Coast           48.45           Not Quoted        47.00
                     46.32            49.05            48.58
                     45.50            48.12            50.55
Canada
West Coast           47.25            47.50            46.30
                     45.50            45.75            45.50
                     48.05            48.72            47.77
East Coast           48.50           Not Qoted         47.00

Australia
Port Kembla          50.18            50.70            49.63
                     49.35            51.14            51.10
Newcastle
(Semi-soft)          42.10            42.35            41.31
Hay Point            46.42            46.90            50.44
                     49.08            49.80            50.68
Gladstone            46.20            47.51            50.19

Poland
                     50.25            50.50            48.89
(Semi-soft)          43.50            43.88            42.47
Russia
Pacific Coast        46.93            47.18            46.23
                     48.30            47.73            45.50
Baltic               47.20            47.50            48.25

South Africa
(Semi-soft)          35.00            35.00            30.96
(Soft)               36.00            36.50            36.70
Colombia
(Injection grade)    38.54            39.00            39.50

Venezuela
(Injection grade)    37.31            37.50            37.42]

All quotes are for hard coking coal unless noted otherwise.  Terms of trade
are published monthly.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No

STEEL INDUSTRY OUTPUT GAINS

(BRUSSELS)
   For the first 10 months of 1995, production of crude steel has increased
in the 67 countries reporting to the International Iron and Steel
Institute. Total crude steel output reached 612.1-million mt from January
through October, a 3.8 percent gain versus the same period in 1994. IISI
reported that October 1995 output, at 61.9-million mt was at the same level
as last year for the month. North America showed a production gain of 6.7
percent for the 10-month period versus last year. Japan's 10-month output 
grew by 5.4 percent over the 1994 period. Western Europe showed a gain of 5
percent over the same period in 1994.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No

BRAZIL'S CST SEEKS DOWNWARD REVISION OF COAL PRICES

(RIO DE JANEIRO)
   Brazil's CST steel mill recently faxed messages to all of its current
contract coal suppliers asking them to cut prices on existing deals. The
mill was looking for a 10 percent price cut to become effective with
shipments this month. The mill said it was making its request in light of
the falling prices for its steel slab production. CST asked for a $4/mt
reduction in price for hard coals and for a $3/mt reduction in the price of
soft coking and pci coals.
   Thus far, sellers have not agreed to comply with CST's request.
   No reason for this has been given, but observers point out that on the
very day CST faxed the messages to suppliers, CST's market relations
director, Antonio Lima Filho, told Brazil's Gazeta Mercantil newspaper, the
nation's biggest business daily, that the company's January-November 1995
net profits were $222 million, up 4 percent on 1994's figures.
   CST is Brazil's biggest slab steel producer. Some 95 percent of its 3
million mt/y production is exported. CST claims that, with slab steel
prices falling and expected to fall further through 1996, many of its
overseas customers are threatening not to pay for slabs ordered unless they
get price reductions.
   In an unrelated development, Helio Sad, coal purchasing manager for
Usiminas, has been reelected to coordinate 1996 coal contract negotiations
for joint steel industry purchases. The negotiations are expected to begin
in March.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No

PHILIPPINES, AUSTRALIA AGREE TO INCREASE COAL TRADE

(MANILA)
   The Philippines and Australia have signed a memorandum of understanding
to increase the volume of Australian coal to be imported into the
Philippines, according to Filipino energy department officials. The accord
was signed in mid-December by visiting Australian minister for resources
David Bedall and Philippine energy secretary Francisco Viray.
   Australia vowed to ensure that its coal industry would continue to be a
``reliable, efficient and competitive supplier of coal products to meet the
ongoing needs of the Philippines,'' the department said.
   Manila agreed to give Australian coal suppliers ``access to contracts
and tenders on no less favorable terms than those available to other world
suppliers.'' Bedall said during the signing that ``The Philippines can
confidently rely on Australia as a key supplier of coal, infrastructure,
services and proven technology -- the complete integrated package at the
best price.''
   According to the official Philippine Energy Plan, coal is expected to
take up 25 percent of the country's fuel requirements by 2000, a leap from
the current 5 to 8 percent.
   Bedall said at current rates of production, world coal reserves would
last for 236 years compared to 43 years for oil and 65 years for gas.
``Unlike oil and gas, world coal reserves are spread relatively evenly
throughout the world. Security of supply for coal should not be a
concern,'' Bedall said.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No

ISRAEL COMPLETES COAL SUPPLY DEALS FOR 70 PERCENT OF REQUIREMENTS

(JERUSALEM)
   Israel's National Coal Supply Corp. has signed agreements guaranteeing
70 percent of its supplies for 1996, according to a senior company
official. The company plans to purchase 7.5 million mt this year. The
official said 50 percent of the supply would come from South Africa, 20
percent from the U.S., 15 percent from Colombia, 10 percent from Australia
and 5 percent from Indonesia.
   The actual percentage of South African coal is down from 55 to 60
percent in recent years. It appears that NCSC will not import coal from
China this year.
   According to the agreements being signed, options allowing for spot
purchases of 15 to 30 percent of the total supply are being arranged. This
is expected to give the NCSC maximum flexibility in the event of price
fluctuations.
   Meanwhile, Israel Electric Corp. has expanded coal unloading capacity at
Hadera where the first 575-Mw unit of a second power plant recently went
into service. With a second conveyor belt now in operation, Hadera port can
now unload 7,500 mt/h. IEC also has expanded its coal storage area at
Hadera.
   Hadera No. 2's second unit will come on line next fall. Once totally
operational, the two Hadera plants will consume 6.1 million mt/y of coal.
   And in an unrelated development, a senior Israeli energy ministry
official visited Nigeria recently to discuss energy cooperation.
Discussions were held on possible future Nigerian coal purchases by Israel,
but, because Nigeria has not yet developed its substantial coal reserves,
an agreement on supplies is unlikely in the near future.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No

ENEL ARRANGES 1996 CONTRACT SUPPLIES WITH SOUTH AFRICA

(LONDON)
   Italy's Enel has arranged to buy 2.5 million mt of South African coal in
1996. The national electricity generator has reached agreement with
long-term contract supplier Ingwe for 700,000 mt, with long-term contract
supplier Shell for 400,000 mt and with winners of its recent South African
tender for 1.4 million mt. The Ingwe and Shell deals are the second part
of a two-year arrangement set last year. At that time both suppliers
offered Enel a slight price reduction in return for a the two year term.
Price details on this year's deals are expected next week pending board
approval of the arrangements.
   Enel, which is projecting a 1996 coal requirement of 8.8 million mt,
expects to begin negotiations next week with Colombian suppliers who are
expected to sell at least 500,000 mt to the Italian company. In addition,
Enel will soon issue a spot tender for some 2.5 million mt of U.S. coal.
   The company recently declared options on some 1 million mt of coal
signed for under terms of last summer's U.S. tender. In addition, long-term
contract suppliers Peabody and Drummond are each expected to supply Enel
with 500,000 mt in 1996.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No

JSM/AUSTRALIAN TALKS TO RESUME NEXT WEEK

(TOKYO)
   Coal contract negotiations are set to resume in Tokyo next week
following the break in last month's deliberations when neither the Japanese
mills nor their Australian suppliers were able to establish common ground.
In addition to there being no agreement between the two sides on whether
there's room for a price increase, sources close to the talks say there is
also disagreement among the mills themselves on the appropriate volume that
should be purchased under terms of the joint purchasing agreement. Nippon
Steel, reportedly, would like to see a reduction in the tonnage taken on
joint purchase. Disagreements also seem to be emerging on how to go about
increasing the volume of semi-soft coal purchased as part of the joint
buying program.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No

TAIPOWER SETS TENDER FOR LOW-CV COAL SUPPLY

(TAIPEI)
   Taiwan Power Co. has tendered for April 15 to April 24 delivery of a
panamax of subbituminous material for its Taichung power plant. The
deadline for bids into this tender is 4:30 PM in Taipei, January 16. Bids
will be opened at 9:30 the next morning.
   Taipower seeks one 57,000-mt delivery of coal with a cv of 4,500 to
5,500 kcal/kg GAR; maximum total moisture of 30 percent as received;
maximum ash content of 10 percent air dried; maximum sulfur content of 0.65
percent air dried; minimum volatiles of 24 percent air dried; maximum fixed
carbon of 60 percent air dried; minimum grindability of 45 HGI, and minimum
ash fusion temperature (under reducing condition, H=W) of 1,150 C. Sizing:
50x0 mm, with allowance for 5 percent overs and 30 percent fines below 2
mm.
   The ash analysis is important in the tender. If the aggregate of CaO and
MgO is equal to or less than the Fe2O3 content, then the Na2O should not
exceed 2 percent. If the aggregate of CaO and MgO is greater than the Fe2O3
content, then Na2O content should not exceed 5 percent.
   Bidding documents are on sale through January 15 and can be purchased
with a $60 check made out to Taiwan Power Co. or for NT$1,200 that can be
deposited directly into Account No. 034001900023 at the Bank of Taiwan,
Kung-Kuan Branch. A bid bond of $57,000 or NT$1,480,000 is required.
   For more information, write to Director of Fuel Department, Taiwan Power
Co., 9th Floor, 242 Roosevelt Road, Section 3, Taipei 100, Taiwan.
Telephone: (886-2) 366-6752 or (886-2) 366-7399. Fax: (886-2) 367-0597 or
(886-2) 367-8593.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No

CHILEAN INDUSTRY TO TEST TWO U.S. COAL BRANDS

(WASHINGTON)
   Chile's Comercial Catumutun S.A., which buys coal for Chilean industrial
and utility accounts, has arranged to buy two cargoes of test coals from
U.S. shippers, CCSA director Frederick J. Murrell said at year's end.
   Murrell declined to name the suppliers, but he said one will ship a
handymax cargo of about 40,000 mt from a U.S. West Coast port and the other
will ship a 30,000-mt cargo from another U.S. port.
   In June, CCSA tendered for four 35,000-mt cargoes to be delivered to its
port at Las Ventanas beginning in November 1995.
   CCSA's tender specifications were 6,700 kcal/kg or 12,060 Btu/lb GAR, 35
percent volatiles, 1 percent sulfur preferred (2 percent maximum), 14
percent maximum ash and 12 percent maximum moisture. CCSA's total 1995
sales will be about 600,000 mt of imported and domestic coal. In 1996, the
firm said it expects total sales of about 900,000 mt.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No

NEPCO COOLS ON IMPORTS; FOCUSES ON U.S. COALS

(KNOXVILLE)
   New England Electric Power Co. has renegotiated coal supply contracts
with Mingo Logan Coal Co. and A.T. Massey Coal Co. and is very close to
signing final agreements on a one-to-three year, 180,000 mt/y deal with
Crown Coal & Coke. The development continues a trend in which Nepco has
concentrated more on U.S. domestic coals, which currently carry lower
prices than South American supplies.
   Both the Mingo Logan and Massey (Sidney/Sprouse Creek) renegotiations
were for possible tonnages of 145,000 to 360,000 mt/y. The Mingo Logan
renegotiation covers 18 months, while the Massey renegotiation is for a
two-year period.
   The Crown Coal & Coke deal resulted from offers received in early fall
on 163,000 to 650,000 mt of coal for delivery in 1996. The coal will
originate on a Norfolk Southern rail line and be delivered to Lamberts
Point.
   The coal will be delivered aboard International Shipholding's Energy
Enterprise, formerly owned by Keystone Shipping under the name, Energy
Independence. Keystone recently sold the ship to Nepco which resoldit to
International Shipholding.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No

NAPOCOR DELAYS COAL TENDER BY THREE MONTHS

(MANILA)
   The Philippines' state-run National Power Corp. has postponed to March
its 180,000-mt tender to supply coal to its two unit Calaca power plant.
Originally scheduled for December, the March tender will seek coal with a
cv of 5,500 to 6,500 kcal/kg GAR, sulfur content of 0.7 percent, ash
content of 16 percent, moisture content of 12 percent and volatility of 22
to 41 percent. The tender is being delayed because Napocor has yet to
determine the actual tonnage needed. It appears that more local coal will
be available for the first unit of the Calaca plant, but the forecast of
local product availability is being questioned by Napocor officials.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No

TMT TO DELIVER SOUTH AMERICAN COAL TO KRAFT POWER PLANT

(WASHINGTON)
   TMT Coal, the joint venture of the U.S.'s Transmar Coal and Tomen
America, will supply Savannah Electric & Power with about 36,000 mt of a
Colombian and Venezuelan coal blend to test the new coal unloading pier at
the utility's Kraft power plant. Southern Company Services Inc., which acts
as SE&P's coal supplier, tendered October 11 for 30,000 mt of coal to test
the new unloader under construction at MP 20 on the Savannah River (CWI
10/24/95 p. 1).
   The electric generating plant has no unloading capability, so the
tender specified that the coal be delivered by a belt self-unloader. The
coal being supplied has speced out at 12,300 Btu/lb, 1.1 percent sulfur and
6 percent ash. It will be loaded at the port of Palmerejo in Lake
Maracaibo.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No

CODELCO BUYS INDONESIAN, CANADIAN AND COLOMBIAN COAL

(LONDON)
   Industry sources said in late December that Chilean utility Codelco has
arranged for coal supplies from Glencore, Fording and Intercor. Glencore
will supply an Indonesian coal produced by PT Kideco; Fording will ship
coal from its Coal Mountain mine, and Intercor -- the Exxon Coal and
Mineral's subsidiary which is a 50-percent partner in the El Cerrejon Norte
mine -- will ship its Colombian product.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No

UKRAINE TRADER SEEKS TO IMPORT COKING COAL

(LONDON)
   JV Everest, a Ukrainian export-import company, is seeking to import 1.5
million mt/y -- roughly a large panamax or small capesize delivery a month
-- of coking coal for Ukrainian steel mills. The company plans to import
the coal into a terminal located near Odessa. For more information, write
to JV Everest, Risheljevskaja str. 25, 270011 Odessa, Ukraine. Telephone:
(380-482) 22-3267 or (380-482) 22-24-63. Fax: (380-482) 22-43-85 or
(380-482) 26-3704.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No

ATIC SERVICES APPOINTS ARNOLD TO CHAIR BOARD

(PARIS)
   ATIC Services has named Thierry Arnold to succeed Pierre Verbrugghe as
chairman of the company. Other officers of the company are Michel Margnes,
president; Michel Bellissant, chief executive, and Gilbert Join,
secretary.
   ATIC Services was formed early last year as a commerical entity offering
a wide range of services to companies involved in importing coal and other
solid fuels into France. It took over functions previously performed by the
government agency Association Technique de l'Importation Charbonniere. That
agency now only tracks data and does not participate in commercial
activities.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No

U.S. UTILITY PLANS COULD IMPACT COAL EXPORT CAPABILITY

(WASHINGTON)
   Utility coal stockpiles throughout the U.S. remain low despite cold
weather that has reached, off and on, into Florida. Traditionally, U.S.
utilities built coal inventories before their peak generating months in the
winter and summer but this appears to have changed. As a result -- and
depending on the weather -- utility coal buyers and the state commissions
that regulate their activities may have built considerable price volatility
into the U.S. market, a volatility that could work its way into the
international coal market as well.
   Stockpiles at U.S. power plants and river docks appear to be at record
lows but utilities are doing nothing to rebuild them. Indeed, utility
buyers say they are under pressure to reduce the carrying costs of large
inventories. Coal buyers also currently are very sensitive to price
fluctuations and will defer purchases if bids are too high for their
liking.
   The trend toward maintaining lower coal stockpiles has been going on for
some time -- as long as two years in some cases. The Tennessee Valley
Authority, for example, has a stockpile policy that sets a target equal to
20 days' burn at each of its plants. While most utilities have higher
stockpile targets of 30 to 45 days, their inventories are far below those
of a few years ago when 90-day stockpiles were common and utilities built
inventories to 120 days if the United Mine Workers of America threatened to
strike.
   Electric Fuels Corp., in its role as coal buyer for Florida Power Corp.,
bought about 200,000 mt of coal on month-to-month purchases for December
and January, yet it said its purchase for December was the result of high
consumption during the summer, and was not an effort to rebuild a stockpile
as a cushion against unexpectedly high winter demand.
   Extremely cold weather in early 1994 forced utilities to buy large
quantities of coal and pushed prices up by as much as $5.50/mt for certain
grades. Mild summer and winter weather through mid-1995, coupled with clean
air issues, caused a collapse in prices. A hot summer in 1995 again raised
prices, but not nearly to the levels of 1994 as mines and docks worked off
inventory.
   Many coal producers and brokers have reacted to the utilities' price and
inventory practices by cutting back production.
   As a result, the U.S. steam coal market has split. Utilities are able to
obtain enough low-priced material to support their conservative buying
practices, especially from producers with high-volume mines.
   Brokers and traders report that they are having some difficulty finding
coal, especially at Big Sandy River docks and that prices have increased.
   All of this leaves the eastern U.S. coal market poised for either a boom
as it experienced in early 1994 or a bust similar to that of early 1995.
The question is: Will this winter's weather be mild enough to support the
utilities and their low-stockpile strategy or will a deep freeze trigger
panic buying that will push prices through the roof? From the international
standpoint, a sharp increase in U.S. domestic demand could strip U.S. coal
from the international trade and possibly boost prices.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No

POLAND BEGINS TO NARROW SCOPE OF COAL MINING

(WARSAW)
   Industry Minister Klemens Scierski said hard coal and lignite would
remain ``basic fuels'' in the Polish economy even while coal extraction
would be reduced for ``economic and ecological reasons.'' Poland's deep
mines would no longer work at depths below 1,500 meters and would only work
at depths below 1,200 meters ``in special cases,'' he said.
   Because of this ruling, the Halemba mine would be closed. Mining
operations would also be shut down under major population centers.
   Mine sections below towns like Rybnik, Katowice and Bytom will be
closed.
  The Budryk mine in Silesia and the Bodanka mine in eastern Poland, near,
Lublin, will be privatized following the government's acceptance of the
coal resturcturing program outlined by minister Markowski.
   Neither mine belongs to one of the seven coal operating companies. Their
shares are expected to be taken over by banks that financed their
construction.
   Meanwhile, Urzad Antymonopolpwy, Poland's anti-monopoly office, is
expected to rule on complaints against the government's giving only three
state-controlled companies -- Weglokoks, Weglozbyt and Kopex -- and
companies controlled by them the right to sell coal for export. Private
firms have criticized the rule as anti-competitive.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 2, 1996   Vol. 17, No

CURRENT VESSEL FIXTURES

                CURRENT VESSEL FIXTURES

Vessel *             Cargo Size    Orig/Destination

United States
Bona TBN             70,000        Davant/Taranto
TBN                  60,000        Hampton Roads/Trieste
Mineral Dragon      110,000        Hampton Roads/DKK

Australia
Ocean Conqueror     130,000        Dalrymple or Hay Point/
                                          S. Korea

Canada
Borzesti             57,000        Roberts Bank/Taranto
TBN                  60,000        Roberts Bank/Port Talbot

Vessel *             Loading              Rate            Charterer

United States
Bona TBN             Jan 7 - 15           $9.25            SIDEMAR
TBN                  Jan 9 - 16          $9.50            DEIULEMAR
Mineral Dragon       Jan 8 - 15           $7.00            CAPEKLAV

Australia
Ocean Conqueror      Jan 11 - 20          $5.15            YUKONG

Canada
Borzesti             Jan 10 - 20         $13.50            SIDEMAR
                     Jan 18 - 25         $12.50            BSC

Data is supplied by Lalemant (U.S.A.) and Rodriguez Sons.
*TBN - To be nominated.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B34-9</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B030-23</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey91.html 205.156.212.5 19970114230207 text/html 145306
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:59:36 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:28 GMT
Content-length: 145118
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ey91.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
January 22, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>UNIPETROL SET FOR DEBUT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(626 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>CHERNOBYL CLOSURE AGREEMENTS SIGNED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(551 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>GERMANS PAY TOP PRICES IN HUNGARY AS EDF DIVERGES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(752 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>EDF SECURES MOCHOVCE ROLE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(650 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>NEW LAW COULD BOOST ROMANIAN OIL SECTOR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(453 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>HUNGARIAN POWER DEMAND RISES 2.5% ON 1994 FIGURES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(473 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>LUKOIL CONTINUES TO HARBOUR KAZAKH PIPELINE AMBITIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(860 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>RENEL RAISES PRICES ON BACK OF DEVALUATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(383 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>UNOCAL BRIEFS PAKISTAN ON TURKMENIAN PIPELINE PLANS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(474 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>POLES MAKE MORE COAL MOVES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(408 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>RUES STRUGGLES WITH SALE AMID CONTINUED PAYMENT PROBLEMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1158 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>POLES SEEK POSTPONEMENT OF FUEL IMPORT LIBERALISATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(442 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>ROMANIA AND GAZPROM ESTABLISH JOINT VENTURE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(438 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>BULGARIA TO TEST REACTOR VESSEL AND GO AHEAD WITH STORAGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(704 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>MOL FIGURES FAIL TO DAMPEN OPTIMISM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(560 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PUBLICATIONS REVIEW</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>WORLD BANK ENVIRONMENTAL OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1001 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>POLES RAISE PRICES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(200 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>HUNGARY SECURES 1996 SUPPLIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(299 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>OILGATE ENQUIRY CLEARS MINISTER OF TRADE AND MOL CHAIRMAN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(256 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT APPROVES FUEL AND ENERGY PROGRAMME</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(185 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>POLISH PARLIAMENT SENDS ENERGY LAWS FOR MORE STUDY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(213 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>WORLD BANK LAUNCHES $100M BOSNIA AID PLAN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(177 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>ENERGY PRIVATISATION FUND ESTABLISHED IN BULGARIA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(189 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>BLACK SEA ENERGY CENTRE OPENS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(290 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>FLOODS HIT ROMANIAN FACILITIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(188 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>RUSSIA'S 1995 CRUDE OUTPUT DOWN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(226 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>MOLDOVA COURTS CASH FOR OIL DRILLING AND EXPORT PORT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(260 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>RUSSIA-CHINA ENERGY DEAL ATTRACTS MOSCOW'S ATTENTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(217 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>UKRAINE CONFIRMS RUSSIAN OIL FLOWING VIA DRUZHBA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(505 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>CZECHS AWAIT INGOLSTADT SUPPLIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(162 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>RUSSIAN PIPELINES SPILL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(235 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>US COMPANY BACKS TALLINN PIPELINE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(174 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>MAZEIKAI HIRES US COMPANY AS FINANCIAL ADVISOR FOR MODERNISATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(268 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#34"><LI>CZECH REFINER PAYS NO DIVIDEND</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(214 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#35"><LI>SLOVAK REFINER PLANS MAINTENANCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(228 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#36"><LI>LATVIAN PETROL TAX TO FUND ROADS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(153 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#37"><LI>UKRAINE NAMES IMPORTERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(194 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#38"><LI>BULGARIAN/RUSSIAN GAS JOINT VENTURE ADMITS NEW SHAREHOLDERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(329 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#39"><LI>LATVIJAS GAZE SIGNS 1996 AGREEMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(272 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#40"><LI>MOL GIVES RIGHTS TO OPERATE TRANSIT PIPELINE TO PANRUSGAZ</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(267 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#41"><LI>NORWEGIAN DENIAL ON POLISH TALKS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(230 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#42"><LI>RUSSIAN GAS DELIVERIES CAUSE PROBLEMS FOR BULGARIAN INDUSTRY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(179 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#43"><LI>UKRAINE BEGINS RESTRUCTURING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(297 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#44"><LI>UKRAINE RECONNECTED TO RUSSIAN POWER GRID AFTER LEAK REPAIRS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(249 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#45"><LI>UKRAINE RADIOACTIVE LEAK UNDETECTED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(188 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#46"><LI>POLES SET FOR ROWS OVER COAL PRICING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(251 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#47"><LI>BELCHATOW CONSIDERS EXPANSION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(291 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#48"><LI>BULGARIA FORMULATES INVESTMENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(262 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#49"><LI>KRASNOYARSK SENDS POWER TO MONGOLIA VIA NEW LINK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(278 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#50"><LI>RADET PLANS PIPE OVERHAUL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(207 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#51"><LI>UKRAINE RAISES PRICES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(59 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#52"><LI>RUSSIA AWAITS IMF AGREEMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(83 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#53"><LI>AZERI 1995 OUTPUT DOWN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(37 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#54"><LI>UKRAINIAN OUTPUT DOWN ON 1994</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(55 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#55"><LI>FRONTIER OPTIMISTIC ON POLISH CONCESSION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(70 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#56"><LI>CONCESSIONS IN POLAND LINED UP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(77 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#57"><LI>SOCAR GETS PIPELINE CONTROL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(70 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#58"><LI>LUKOIL CONSOLIDATES MOST SHARES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(110 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#59"><LI>SLOVENIAN COMPANY STARTS SHARE SALE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(100 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#60"><LI>FIRST HYDRO-TEXACO STATION IN LITHUANIA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(98 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#61"><LI>RUSSIA REDUCES BELARUS PRICES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(109 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#62"><LI>RUSSIAN COAL PRODUCTION FOR 1995 TOTALS 250.1MT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(100 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#63"><LI>MAJOR RUSSIAN SHALE PRODUCER FACES CLOSURE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(81 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#64"><LI>US SUPPORT FOR ARMENIAN COAL INDUSTRY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(85 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#65"><LI>RUSSIAN PLANT OPERATORS WARN OF PROTEST ACTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(93 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#66"><LI>OBJECTIONS TO RUSSIA'S FAR EAST NUCLEAR PLANT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(94 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#67"><LI>CERNAVODA EXPECTED TO START THIS MONTH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(72 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#68"><LI>CZECH DRAFT LAW ON NUCLEAR TAX</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(105 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#69"><LI>IGNALINA PLANT IN FINANCIAL TROUBLES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(106 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#70"><LI>POWER PRODUCTION DOWN AT ARMENIAN NUCLEAR PLANT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(77 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#71"><LI>NO POWER CUTS FOR BULGARIA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(102 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#72"><LI>BULGARIA TO SET UP AN INSURANCE POOL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(104 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#73"><LI>SERBIAN ELECTRICITY UP IN 1995</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(37 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#74"><LI>SWISS AGREEMENT FOR UKRAINE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(30 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#75"><LI>SLOVAK DESULPHURISATION DELAY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(47 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

UNIPETROL SET FOR DEBUT

Unipetrol, the giant new holding company for the Czech petrochemical
and oil refining industry, is due to formally emerge on 29 January,
when it is expected that all hurdles relating to the break-up of the
two companies that currently control the industry will have been
overcome.

The holding company is due to replace Chemopetrol Litvinov and Kaucuk
Kralupy, the two partly-privatised companies that currently own
petrochemical and refining interests. Shareholders in Chemopetrol and
Kaucuk, which are both listed on the Prague stock exchange, will
eventually receive shares in the holding company in lieu, although the
state will remain the largest shareholder in Unipetrol.

The creation of Unipetrol coincides with a big restructuring of the
petrochemical and refining industry. This involves a merger of the
petrochemical divisions of Chemopetrol and Kaucuk, which will become
wholly-owned by Unipetrol; and a merger of their refining interests
into Czech Refineries Company.

The international consortium of Royal Dutch/Shell, Agip and Conoco has
taken a 49% stake in Czech Refineries, while Unipetrol will control 51%
for at least five years. The consortium has paid $173m for the stake,
part of a $480m investment undertaking at the refineries that is
expected to begin in the spring.

Unipetrol will also acquire full control of Benzina, the state-owned
petrol retailing company. Its three divisions - petrochemicals,
refining and retailing - will make Unipetrol one of the biggest Czech
companies. It will be partially listed on the PSE but the state will
remain its controlling shareholder until plans have been completed for
either a flotation or the sale of a stake to a strategic partner.
Analysts have said the former is a more likely option, involving a
possible international share offering. They stressed, however, that no
such offer is likely for at least 18 months and probably longer.

The most difficult aspect of the restructuring, according to bankers at
CS First Boston, which is advising the government and Unipetrol, is
placing a value on the shares of Chemopetrol and Kaucuk and matching
that to the shares of Unipetrol so that private shareholders in both
existing companies get a full and fair price for their shares.

The transfer of the refining interests to Czech Refineries and the sale
of the stake to the consortium have been completed, which will allow
the investment programme to begin once Unipetrol has been incorporated.
Sources close to the consortium said delays to the agreement on Czech
Refineries - talks on the acquisition by the consortium were on and off
for over three years before a contract was signed last November - meant
that the $480m estimate for restructuring may have to be revise later.

The sources said that any delay in incorporating Unipetrol would also
push back the start date for the investment programme, which involves
heavy capital spending on an environmental clean-up and new equipment
at the refineries, because the programme is being carried out by the
holding company, as the majority owner in the refining company, and not
by the consortium.

However, those involved in the creation of Unipetrol said they were
confident it would emerge on schedule, although Unipetrol executives
cautioned that private shareholders may not receive their entitlement
to shares in exchange for the stakes they hold in Chemopetrol and
Kaucuk until the end of the year. In the meantime both Chemopetrol and
Kaucuk will retain their stock market quotations.

Between them, Chemopetrol and Kaucuk have a market capitalisation of
about $650m. With the addition of Benzina, the presence of the
international consortium, and increased efficiencies resulting from the
investment programme, Unipetrol is likely to be the fourth largest
company in the country in terms of market capitalisation, behind SPT
Telecom, the electricity utility CEZ, and Komercni Banka.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

CHERNOBYL CLOSURE AGREEMENTS SIGNED

Ukraine on 20 December signed an agreement in Ottawa on the closure of
Chernobyl after seven years of protracted negotiations with the G-7
countries and the European Commission. The final text of the memorandum
of understanding (MOU) was agreed in Vienna at the end of November
after being stalled over two main issues: the date of closure and the
extent of Western financial support. Ukraine finally signed under
pressure after threats to withhold Western credits for economic
restructuring, say sources close to the talks.

The total on offer to Ukraine is $2.307bn in grants and loans and
represents only what had already been agreed. No new funding has been
made available. Ukraine had earlier rejected an offer of just over $2bn
in loans and grants made by the G-7 powers during talks in Kiev in
November as inadequate and continued to insist on a minimum of $4bn.

The MOU gives a financial breakdown including $498m in grants
comprising $43m for power sector restructuring, $102m for an energy
investment programme, $349m for nuclear safety and $4m for a social
impact plan. The $1.809bn in loans is to go to the energy investment
programme and includes Ecu400m from Euratom agreed at Corfu in 1994.
This programme will cover completion of Unit 2 at Khmelnitsky and Unit
4 at Rovno as well as rehabilitation of thermal and hydro plants,
pumped storage projects and energy efficiency.

The nuclear safety component is thought to comprise Tacis grants
already agreed at Corfu from the 1995 programme and Tacis 1996 as well
as $200m from the EBRD-administered Nuclear Safety Account agreed at
the Naples meeting in 1994. This may be used for preparatory work at
Chernobyl to pave the way for decommissioning, including the
construction of new waste treatment facilities. In principle, says the
MOU, revenue-generating projects will be considered for loans and non-
revenue-generating projects for grants.

The final wording of the MOU was "deliberately vague" to allow
different interpretations, say Western sources close to G-7. Ukraine
objected to the deadline of 2000 as the date for closure and this was
omitted from the title in the final version, although it remains in the
text which says decommissioning will be undertaken within the "shortest
practically achievable time". Ukrainian officials say this is unlikely
to be by 2000.

Ukrainian environment and nuclear safety minister Yuri Kostenko says
that by 2000 only reactor shutdown will be possible. "Removal of the
facility and ensuring its ecological safety will take over a decade.
Chernobyl will need tremendous sums for shutdown operations, running
into billions of dollars over many years. This is why Ukraine sees the
memorandum only as the beginning." he adds.

Chernobyl, which produces over 5% of Ukraine's power exceeded its
annual target in 1995 producing a total of 11.5 TWh of electricity -
some 5% above the planned figure.

* Goskomatom, the Ukrainian state committee for nuclear power, is still
without a head, after former chairman Mikhail Umanets was dismissed in
November. However he formally resigned in January which should ease the
way for appointment of a successor. Meanwhile his deputy Nur
Nigmatullin is carrying on with the day-to-day business and may
eventually take over. The other main contender is Valery Kukhar, head
of the Presidential committee on nuclear policy and ecology.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

GERMANS PAY TOP PRICES IN HUNGARY AS EDF DIVERGES

The German consortium RWE/Energie Versorgung Schwaben (EVS) paid a
total of almost $600m for stakes in two electricity supply companies
and Matra power station, the daily Magyar Hirlap reported on 8 January.
The sum included $358m for the Budapest supplier, ELMU, or 175% of book
value for the 46% stake, and $164m, 150% of book value, for the 49%
stake in the north Hungarian supplier, EMASZ.

According to the paper's figures, which have not been publicly refuted
by APV Rt, only Matra power station failed to meet its book value, the
38% stake selling at 77% of its nominal registered capital.

Shortly after the sale of EDASZ and DEMASZ stakes to Electricite de
France, the Hungarian press picked up on Austrian reports that EdF had
earlier made a secret agreement to pass on some of its shares to the
Austrian power company Verbundgesellschaft. The reasoning is that
tender rules restricted bidders from forming more than one consortium,
and EdF were formally part of the consortium bidding for the 24% MVM
stake. Thus EdF was unable to declare a formal consortium for the
supply companies.

The economic daily Napigazadasag quoted an unnamed spokesman of EdF as
saying that a 15% packet of the EdF-owned stake had been reserved for
Verbundgesellschaft. The spokesman is also quoted as saying a partner
is also being courted to take some of the stake in South Hungarian
supplier DEMASZ owned by EdF, although the French company intends to
remain the dominant partner in both supply companies.

Tender conditions restrict owners from selling any of the newly
acquired shares for five years, or from obtaining shares from any
source other than APV Rt, unless permission is received for such
transactions from the Hungarian Energy Office (MEH), the Competition
(Fair Trading) Office, and APV Rt itself.

The business bulletin Econews reported that APV Rt might be willing to
give its consent to bringing in other partners provided "the move
served Hungary's industrial policy". It also reported of a possible
linkage in the wrangle between MVM and Verbundgesellschaft over the
contract to export Hungarian electricity to Austria in return for the
debt incurred due to the now-abandoned Danube barrage scheme. Austria
has appealed to the courts over the matter.

An Austrian guarantee to drop the appeal "may be an important factor"
in any APV Rt decision regarding consent for a share transfer, Econews
quotes an APV Rt official as saying. EdF Budapest representative Pierre
Abou told EEE there are "several potential partners" interested in
cooperation in the two supply companies, but "nothing is decided in any
direction. We wish to keep it discreet. When [negotiations] are
completed we shall give priority to the Hungarian authorities. These
are sensitive issues". Abou said the route to EdF winning the two
tenders was "a long-lasting story. We have been working together in the
past with the two companies. It's not just a bid like that, for some
financial reasons. We didn't just decide to bid last October. You
cannot bid just like that, especially in the power sector, you must be
on the ground years before".

Asked if he was concerned about the pricing conditions, Abou said "we
are paying a big attention to this issue, that's absolutely normal, but
we are not that concerned. The principles in the law which state that
the costs of transmission, generation and distribution must be covered
by the tariffs at each step. Plus the decree with its formulae ensuring
normal earning to the investors. If we had not found it acceptable, we
would not have bid, of course. I don't know any country where this
pricing issue is not politically sensitive and can be left to its
normal course, not in Britain, nor the US, and certainly not in the
countries in transition. We are relatively confident in the good state
of mind of the Hungarian authorities. Of course it will be sensitive in
the future, but they realise in the future energy prices must be
consistent with costs, and provide normal earning to the operators".
* Contrary to information given to EEE last December (EEE 49/34), MVM
sources say there was no move by MVM to cancel the long-term power
purchase contracts. "MVM is very happy with these agreements," EEE was
informed, "it was Schroders who were pushing for changes because they
thought the bidders were not very happy with the contracts due to the
risk allocation. There have been no changes from the contracts signed
on October 10th".



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

EDF SECURES MOCHOVCE ROLE

Electricite de France (EdF) has finally secured itself a role in
Slovakia's drive to complete its controversial nuclear power station at
Mochovce, following the signing of an agreement in Bratislava before
Christmas that will see the French utility provide technical and
support services in the completion of the first two 440 MW reactors at
the plant.

Work on finalising Mochovce is expected to restart early this year
after months of delay caused partially by the row between Slovakia and
the EBRD over financing for the project. The signing of the agreement
between EdF and Slovak Electricity (SE) means that French expertise
will now be applied to the project, even though the Slovak government
rejected an offer of financing from the EBRD that involved EdF as a
main contractor (EEE 48/2).

It is still not clear whether the Slovak government has secured
definite financing from Russia to complete the Soviet- designed plant.
Moscow has offered $150m in technical and financial support to Mochovce
as an alternative to the EBRD proposal, which would have cost DM1.4bn.
The government rejected the bank's offer late last year in favour of an
alternative offer put forward by Slovak and Czech banks and engineering
companies which claims Mochovce can be completed for DM1bn. The Russian
offer of financing is a vital part of this alternative project.

SE said at the signing of the agreement with EdF that the plant will be
completed to comply with the safety standards of the International
Atomic Energy Agency. The involvement of the French company may help to
ease fears that safety would be compromised if Western companies were
not to be used to complete construction of the Mochovce plant.

Both the government and SE have stepped up their commitment to the
completion of Mochovce to meet a big rise in demand for energy as the
economy continues to expand. Electricity consumption has risen this
year by around 8%. SE said before Christmas that it hoped agreements
with its banks and contractors would be signed in the spring and that
production of electricity at Mochovce would begin by the end of 1997 or
early 1998.

Vladimir Grujbar, director of strategic planning at SE, said that
framework conditions for contracts with suppliers and banks would be in
place by the end of 1995 and that construction could be resumed in
March. He said the company aimed to have the first block ready for
commissioning by December 1997. The company is currently hoping that
the first reactor will become operational in the middle of 1998 and the
second reactor nine months to a year later.

Energoprojekt Praha, the Czech engineering firm, will be the general
designer for the project, while Skoda Praha will be the general
contractor for the supply of plant and equipment. The Slovak
construction group Hydrostav will be the main contractor for the civil
engineering works at the site. Safety improvement studies will be
carried out by Siemens of Germany and Framatome of France in
conjunction with Skoda Praha and experts supplied by the Russian
nuclear industry.

Apart from the Russian offer of $150m in financing, additional funding
will be provided by the Czech banks Komercni Banka and Ceska
Sporitelna, which are offering loans of around $200m and DM200m
respectively.

* Slovakia's only operating nuclear plant at Bohunice generated 11,437
GWh of electricity last year, exceeding its annual target by 0.33%, the
news agency TASR reported. The head of the plant's public and foreign
relations department, Dobroslav Dobak, said only four deviations from
standard operational procedures had been observed, none of which were
relevant to safety concerns. The four blocks at the plant account for
over half the country's generation which totalled 22,861 GWh last year,
with the rest being divided by hydro generation (22.5%) and thermal
generation (27.4%). Power imports increased to 3,786 GWh with domestic
sales up 9% in 1995.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

NEW LAW COULD BOOST ROMANIAN OIL SECTOR

Romania has issued its long-delayed petroleum law which Western
analysts say is satisfactory and expected to lead to an upturn in the
country's oil industry.

"I think the new law is workable. We can work with it," Jean Bernard
Siri, general manager of Shell Romania Exploration BVsaid. President
lon lliescu has promulgated the law, which will become effective
starting 28 March, the Official Gazette said.

The law defines Romania's oil resources as public property, covers
concessions, taxes and royalties and puts local and foreign oil
operators on an equal footing, enabling them to secure oil blocks
through public tenders. "It (the law) is a positive thing," a Western
analyst said. "I don't mean that Romania will now see thousands of
investors rushing to put money in the oil sector but many will find it
an incentive as they have solid legislation to deal with".

Under the law, profits are exempted from tax during one year following
start-up of production. Imported equipment and personal effects are
exempt from customs duties. Oil operators will deal directly with the
National Agency for Mineral Resources (ANRM), the licensing authority
in charge of mineral rights administration.

By mid-June, ANMR is expected to launch a tender offer for 14 onshore
and offshore blocks believed to contain hydrocarbons (EEE 50/22).
Facilities include the possibility for oil operators to negotiate
royalties with the ANRM on a case-by-case basis. Annual tax on
exploitation is set at some 3.0% of the value of output.

Foreign operators are granted a series of privileges, including the
possibility to export the oil produced and to keep their hard currency
earnings in accounts abroad. They are also allowed to convert local leu
currency earnings - from local sales of oil - into hard currency on the
inter-bank market and to transfer the amounts to foreign accounts.

Development of the bill, initiated in 1993, has been slow mainly
because of repeated reviews of its text following objections by both
government officials and oil operators. The final version gives local
and foreign oil operators equal access to the national petroleum
transport system. It makes no reference to international arbitration -
a concern of foreign executives in the past - saying disputes should be
settled by "competent courts, according to the law".

* Romania produced 6.7mt of crude in 1995, little changed from the
previous year, Mediafax news agency reported. It quoted a senior
industry ministry official as saying that natural gas production was
19.09bncm last year, compared to 19.6bncm in 1994. In 1995 the country
imported 8.36mt of crude, compared to 8.12mt in 1994, the official
said. Gas imports were put at 6.63bncm, a sharp rise from the 1994
total of 4.64bncm.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

HUNGARIAN POWER DEMAND RISES 2.5% ON 1994 FIGURES

Hungarian electricity demand grew by 2.5% in 1995 compared to 1994
figures according to provisional MVM figures obtained by EEE. Total
demand rose to 36,167 GWh, 897 GWh up from the previous year (35,270
GWh), and 1,167 GWh (3.3%) above the MVM business plan. Peak load of
5,731 MW occurred in the cold spell on 18 January.

MVM provisional 1995 figures show almost 300 MW of the year on increase
(and over 920 MW compared to the business plan) was produced by coal
and lignite-fired stations, and 115 MW (12.8%) by the hydrocarbon fired
plants. Imports increased by 381 MW. Commenting on the figures, MVM
director of power plant operation Karoly Gerse told EEE the 2.5%
increase in consumption could be put down roughly equally to increasing
industrial demand and colder weather in January and autumn last year.

Industrial demand has been showing growth since about mid-1994, with
both new industry and older sectors contributing to the increase. The
revitalisation of chemicals, aluminium industry and some older
factories such as the Raba engine plant in Gyor and light-engineering
around Szekesfehervar are all believed to have contributed to demand
growth. The service sector is also significant for the power sector,
Gerse said, as increased use of air-conditioning equipment has meant a
jump in demand of some 10 MW from 1993 to 1995 in the hot summer
months, resulting in a "much healthier [load-curve] for MVM".

Domestic demand levels off

Domestic demand is believed to have just about levelled off. While the
decline in average standard of living plus more modern machinery has
reduced demand in some ways, against this the new-moneyed class is
making more use of domestic appliances like air-conditioning equipment.
In addition, there has been increasing number of self-employed using
home-based machinery since 1989.

On the production side, the production manager said there is "a new
philosophy" regarding coal-fired stations. Integration of the coal
mines with the stations has resulted in higher fixed costs, while
variable operating costs have decreased. This makes it more economical
to increase utilisation of the coal-fired units in order to reduce the
effects of fixed costs. "In addition, although oil prices have not
risen so much, except for forint devaluation, gas prices have increased
significantly, so policy has moved more to coal, and somewhat more to
oil," Gerse said.

Questioned as to possible means of reducing production costs, he said
the most effective would be to change the fuel structure, switching to
imported steam coal, which would "significantly reduce prices".
Politically, however, this is currently not a practical solution. MVM
profited from an 8% price rise (a two-month lag on consumer price rise
due partly to slow bill-paying) on 1 January. A second 18% increase is
due in March, with a yet to be decided third hike in October or
November.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

LUKOIL CONTINUES TO HARBOUR KAZAKH PIPELINE AMBITIONS

Lukoil, Russia's largest oil producer, has confirmed an interest in
joining an alternative to the Caspian Pipeline Consortium (CPC), the
creation of which is currently being considered by the Kazakh
authorities. The existing consortium, set up in 1992 by Kazakhstan,
Russia and Oman with the aim of constructing a pipeline for the
transportation of oil produced by the Tengizchevroil (the joint venture
between Chevron and Kazakhstan) to Russia's Black Sea port of
Novorrossiisk, has failed to raise the necessary funds.

Alexander Vasilenko, a spokesman for Lukoil, said the company's
contribution to the new consortium came down to financing, offering its
construction facilities or crude swaps of early productions. The
spokesman said the latter option is the most acceptable for Lukoil. The
proposals are currently being considered by the Kazakh side.

According to Vasilenko, a Lukoil delegation was supposed to leave for
Alma Aty late last month to finalise the deal, but the trip was
postponed at the request of the Kazakh side. The spokesman refused to
name the approximate date of the next meeting, saying only that it
depends on the Kazakh side's decision. He added that an agreement has
been reached at an intergovernmental level on the subject, which was
formally initiated in a letter sent by Viktor Chernomyrdin to the
Kazakh president. Vasilenko said that his company's plans in no way
contradict the obligations Russia has undertaken in the CPC, but only
"makes them more detailed".

Lukoil is already participating in a number of projects in Kazakhstan
and the company's prime aim has always been to get a share in the
development of the Tengiz field. Lukoil's possible participation in the
new pipeline consortium is viewed by industry analysts as a step
towards satisfying this ambition. Vasilenko refused to talk of his
company's interest in receiving a slice of Tengiz project. At present
Kazakhstan is thinking of giving a part of its share in the
Tengizchevroil venture to some Western oil companies, with Mobil being
the prime candidate, with the intention of breathing new life into the
pipeline development by forming a new consortium for its construction
(EEE 50/5).

A meeting of the CPC directorate was scheduled to be held in Moscow
before the end of the month, a source at Transneft, Russia's state
pipeline operator which represents Russia's interest in the existing
consortium, told EEE. A possible agenda of the meeting is said to
include the restructuring of the consortium's membership in the light
of the Kazakh's intention to form an alternative consortium. The new
membership composition concerns first of all of Western oil companies,
such as Mobil and Chevron, but nothing was said about Lukoil's
participation. Earlier Chevron refused to enter the CPC on the terms
proposed by the consortium - ie. that it was supposed to provide a
lion's share of the financing only for a 25% stake in the CPC.

Chevron views stalemate

Chevron said on 19 January that it saw no end to the impasse in its
talks with the CPC, despite reports that a key stumbling block could be
leaving the consortium. The Wall Street Journal reported that Dutch oil
trader John Deuss had agreed to resign as president of Oman Oil Co and
appeared to be ready to leave the CPC as well. However, Chevron
spokesman Mike Libbey said "our problem wasn't with Mr Deuss but with
the unreasonable business terms of the CPC". However, the presence of
Oman in the consortium has long been seen as a key stumbling block by
many observers with the company standing to benefit considerably when
it was neither the source of the oil or directly involved in the
development of the fields concerned. However, Chevron has said that it
will no longer just rely on a single route to get its Tengiz production
out with Libbey stating "multiple export routes are going to be
needed".

Lukoil said on 12 January that it produced 57.5mt of oil in 1995, an
increase of 87,000t on 1994's level. A company release also said the
company refined 19mt of oil in 1995, an increase of 1.8mt on 1994
figures. The company produced 2.6mt of petrol, over 4.6mt of diesel and
about 5.3mt of mazut.

* Russia and Azerbaijan have signed a long-awaited oil transit
agreement, viewed as an essential step for developing the Caspian Sea.
The delay in signing the agreement, which had been finalised last
autumn, was causing concern among members of the international
consortium which is exploiting the Azeri oilfields. The signatories
blamed the delay purely on "technical problems". The Azeri government
has guaranteed that at least 5mt of oil a year will flow through the
Russian pipeline system by the year 2002 for export onto world markets.
The oil will flow through an existing pipeline infrastructure, which
runs from the Azeri capital of Baku through the troubled region of
Chechnya to the Russian Black Sea port of Novorrossiisk. Valery
Chernayev, the president of Transneft, the Russian pipeline operator,
said this route was the best option. But concerns about the political
instability in Chechnya have ensured other outlets are being developed
for Caspian oil, via Georgia and Turkey.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

RENEL RAISES PRICES ON BACK OF DEVALUATION

The devaluation of the Romanian Lev is the justification for an
impending rise in electricity tariffs, according to Romanian state
power company Renel.

Current prices of Lev46/kWh for residential consumers and Lev110/kWh
for commercial consumers were calculated last year on an exchange rate
of Lev1,910 to the dollar; due to depreciation towards the end of 1995
the currency now stands at Lev2,583 to the dollar. A Renel spokesman
said that any further fall would necessitate a price hike "sooner
rather than later".

Under an agreement with the IMF, electricity prices cannot be modified
more than twice a year. After the impending rise, prices are likely to
be Lev62/kWh for households and Lev150/kWh for commercial consumption.

Meanwhile, according to end-of-year statistics released by Renel this
month, domestic electricity consumption in 1995 rose by 7.4% compared
with the previous year, with the private commercial sector accounting
for half of the increase. The company's thermal energy deliveries in
1995 were up 5.6% from 1994. The residential heating share rose to 50%
last year compared with 30% in 1989.

To meet the mounting energy demand, Renel was forced to raise
production, particularly from coal-fuelled TPPs whose output was 3.8%
over 1994. With 1995 electricity imports totalling 130 MW (average
power), compared with total exports of 152 MW, Romania achieved an
electricity trade surplus, confining its external power dependence to
imports of primary resources, a senior company executive said. Renel's
emergency fuel stocks at the end of 1995 totalled 3mt of lignite,
250,000t of black coal and pitcoal within "normal limits".

Renel is set to increase its energy supply to Bucharest heating utility
Radet by 25%, to a total 12,600t calories, under a new contract to be
finalised shortly. Under the contract's liability terms the companies
will be entitled to exact penalties from each other for the potential
malfunctions of the heating system, Radet executive Gheorghe Dabela
told the press. Thus, Renel will incur penalties for failure to meet
the supply needs of Radet, while Radet will be liable for excess
heating agent amounts, water hardness etc. The companies have yet to
agree on payment terms, with Radet pushing to maintain the current
method of daily cheques due to unreliability. The contract will be
signed as soon as this matter has been resolved.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

UNOCAL BRIEFS PAKISTAN ON TURKMENIAN PIPELINE PLANS

A team from Unocal has updated Pakistani officials on its plans to
build oil and gas pipelines from Turkmenistan to Pakistan via
Afghanistan at an estimated cost of $8bn.

"There is developed gas in Turkmenistan with no market and there is a
ready market here in Pakistan," Richard Keller, president of Unocal
Pakistan, told Reuters on 17 January. "The project makes sense from
that point of view," Keller said. "We are working to finalise routes
from the technical and political perspective within the next few
months".

Unocal, in 60/40 collaboration with Delta Oil Company of Saudi Arabia,
plans to build a 1,271km gas pipeline from the Turkmen border to the
Sui gas fields in Pakistan's southwestern province of Balochistan.
Turkmenistan, which signed agreements on the projects with Unocal and
Delta in October (EEE 49/31), has earmarked the fully developed
Daulatabad field, 160km from the Afghan border, with reserves of 45
trillion cubic feet of gas - about double Pakistan's own official gas
reserves - to supply Pakistan.

The pipeline, with a capacity of 2bncf/d and six compressor stations,
is expected to cost $3bn. Fluor Daniel has been retained as consulting
engineers to establish a route, design and detailed cost estimate.
Unocal also plans to build a 1,800km oil pipeline from Chardzhou in
Turkmenistan to a marine terminal to be built at Gwadar on Pakistan's
southwestern coast. The pipeline will have a capacity of about one
million barrels per day and cost an estimated $5bn. A detailed project
analysis is due to be completed by November.

Keller said Unocal was interested in helping to plan the Gwadar
terminal, which could be used to export Turkmenistan's oil to growing
markets in South and Southeast Asia. He said the financing of the
pipeline projects had not yet been worked out, but financial
consultants JP Morgan would be talking with international lending
organisations.

Keller said Unocal would prefer to build both pipelines at the same
time to save construction costs. The pipelines would run parallel for
part of the route. Resource certification, planning and design would
take about a year, but he could not say how long it would take to
clinch agreements with governments concerned and business partners. It
could take a further year to complete financing and two years to
construct the pipelines.

These would cross Afghanistan, through territory now held by the
Islamic Taleban militia, which captured western Afghanistan up to the
Turkmen border from government forces last year. Keller said no
official talks had been held with the Kabul government led by President
Burhanuddin Rabbani and stressed that Unocal wanted to stay clear of
Afghan politics, adding that the Afghan imbroglio was "the big question
mark in the minds of lenders. There would have to be a political
settlement, or something that would satisfy lending institutions,"
Keller said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

POLES MAKE MORE COAL MOVES

The Polish government has abandoned the monopoly on coal trading
granted to Weglokoks, Weglozbyt and Kopex and their subsidiaries last
year (EEE 47/10). The decision came after pressure from the anti-
monopoly office. From 15 December last all "reliable" firms are allowed
to deal in coal.

Nevertheless, the new rules encouraged coal companies to have direct
contracts with power generators, district heating providers, coking
plants, cement works, steelworks, the state railways, and other large
users. These contracts were expected to define quantities, quality,
delivery dates, payment terms, and claims procedures, and they were to
be drawn up under Polish law. Reliable firms could act as
intermediaries in this trade. In addition, the rules did not apply
where purchasers paid prior to, or upon, delivery.

In an interview with the Rzeczpospolita newspaper, deputy industry
minister Jerzy Markowski noted that the ministry could afford to drop
the monopoly rules because they had done their job. He said that they
had persuaded the coal trading companies Weglokoks, Weglozbyt and Kopex
to guarantee bank loans needed to pay the miners in December, and had
encouraged a number of coal companies to sign agreements which did not
include any intermediaries.

Meanwhile, Poland's socio-economic strategy council, a body advising
the Cabinet, has approved subsidies of some Z8bn ($3.2bn), officially
for closing down uneconomic mines, contained in the restructuring plan
for the mines proposed by Markowski (EEE 50/11). There was, however, a
significant split between academics who favoured centralising the
mining industry, and those who argued that mines should be left largely
to their own devices to see which ones were viable.

The majority of the council favoured centralising. Neither was there
agreement over forecasts for coal demand; one professor warned that
demand could fall by 30% if users adopted more energy efficient
equipment; another set demand at 90-100mt/yr for the next few years.
Current production is 130mt/yr, and the Markowski plan envisages
cutting it to 110mt by 2000.

At the same time, Markowski noted that the Budryk and Bogdanka mines
were due to be privatised as soon as his restructuring programme came
into force. The two mines, which are the only ones not to be part of
the holding company structures, would be taken over by the banks that
had been lending them money - notably Bank Przemyslowo Handlowy w
Krakowie, and Powszechny Bank Kredytowy w Warszawie. The two mines are
considered to be the most profitable in Poland.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

RUES STRUGGLES WITH SALE AMID CONTINUED PAYMENT PROBLEMS

Only 0.62% of shares in the Russian Unified Energy Systems (RUES) were
sold off in October to December from the 4.5% stake offered at a
nationwide auction, a company statement said.

According to Aleksander Lopatin, deputy head of the RUES securities
department, the state, which is a main company shareholder (holding 60%
of the shares), initially intended to put twice as many shares up for
auction but the company's management succeeded in persuading it to
split the block into two lots. The second one of the same size will be
offered for sale in 1996. According to the auction, RUES received only
14% of the R130bn proceeds, the rest going to the federal budget.

The shares were offered for auction at their face value. At the same
time their price on the secondary market was 3-4 times lower than this
figure. The statement said that all the shares were bought off by the
company's employees "with their own savings".

Judging by the present price of shares on the OTC market, the cost of
each kW power capacity of the utility is valued at not more than $8.
But according to the company's management, its real value is over
$1,000.

Lopatin said that most of the preparatory work on the company's ADR
programme had been completed. RUES received the approval of the US
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) last May and from last
September, work has begun on putting all documents in order. Formally
it is necessary to collect the signatures of the RUES board of
directors to sign an agreement with the Bank of New York, the company's
partner in the programme. At the same time, Lopatin refused to name the
exact date of its official presentation, saying only that "it should be
fairly soon".

In 1995, the Russian power generating sector received $2bn in
investments, this year the figure is expected to grow up to $3-3.5bn.
Low electricity tariffs (2-3 cents per kWh) keep foreign investors from
putting money into the industry. At the same time, RUES own investments
are prevented by non-payments. In September, the government railed
against cutoffs to main RUES non-payers and since then the debt to the
company has increased by one third, reaching R32 trillion.

Emphasis on Russian supplies

According to Anatoly Dyakov, president of RUES, in 1995 the company
installed about 1m kW of generating capacity, and built 14,000km of
power transmission lines. "We've had no strikes or emergencies and
we've preserved all the jobs. We're operating on domestic equipment -
all spare parts are Russian-made".

Dyakov explains that, although new technologies are needed, the company
is insisting that everything should be produced at Russian factories.
"Western companies cooperating with domestic machine-builders have
understood us and accepted this condition," he notes.

Nonpayment is the weak point, Dyakov admits, with customers owing
R39,400bn and debts to suppliers totalling R31,200bn. "One of the
biggest nonpayers is the state itself in the budget-financed sphere,"
he says. "We suggested a mutual offset but everything depends on the
finance ministry, which does not want to lose tax receipts into the
treasury".

Dyakov adds that the power engineers were the main victims of a
government decision in autumn to freeze the prices of electricity,
natural gas and railway transportation. "On 1 October gas cost R257,000
per 1,000cm. but on 6 October the gas industry set a different price -
R275,000 excluding VAT. Overnight all our stations became unprofitable,
now we're loss-makers". The government agreed that RUES could pay
Gazprom at the previous price, but the gas company cut off supplies to
electrical stations, he explains. "But we have been strictly forbidden
to cut off supplies, and as soon as users realised that they faced no
penalty they ceased paying us altogether". Nonpayments in October-
November rocketed by R9,000bn, he complains.

The planned establishment of a Federal power commission should help to
solve these problems, Dyakov believes. "It will be concerned not just
with electricity, but also with gas, coal and oil. Let them calculate,
coordinate, harmonise the sectoral rates".

Nevertheless, construction of new plants is continuing. The electricity
rate includes an investment component of 13%. "But we don't have enough
funds. We already owe the builders about R100bn. At the Kolyma hydro
plant wages have not been paid for a year. They even introduced money
of their own. We paid them off by barter. We took foodstuffs from
Krasnodar (they also owe us for electricity, and they haven't got money
either) and delivered them by plane to Kolyma. But in spite of this,
the builders did get the fourth 180 MW power unit at Kolyma on stream".

Dyakov would like to see a change in the price structure. "Before 1992
the rate for the population was the highest at four kopecks per kWh
while industry paid 1.8 and agriculture one kopeck. Now the ratio is
reversed and industry subsidises the population". He hopes the payments
situation will be resolved this year and more investment attracted to
the industry. However he has no illusions about investment from the
West. "We've got controlled rates, and they'll always remain so and
will be lower than in the West. Investors must be Russian ones. But so
far the R500 shares of RUES are selling at a price below their face
value. I have suggested to the government that they should allow us to
buy the shares at face value, in payment of the budget debt. The
government will replenish the budget and we'll accumulate those shares
and, when the market changes, sell them at a profit. They'll become a
source of investment, I have no doubt". Dyakov says Russia's
electricity rates cannot be set at world levels and should take into
account the population's ability to pay. He also warns that if federal
power commission decisions go against the interests of the power
industry, the management of RUES will fight this in the courts.

While Dyakov acknowledges that each station under the RUES umbrella is
a separate stock company, he resents the go-it-alone attitude of some
of the more wealthy companies. Some Siberian companies are insisting on
operating independently. These companies run hydro plants which produce
cheap power. "The rates at our stations are totalled and an average
value is determined for power transfer to areas facing shortages," he
explains. "Irkutsk, Bratsk, and Ust-Ilimsk hydropower plants produce
the cheapest electricity. The whole country built them and their
inclusion in the general system undoubtedly would lower the general
rate". But instead they are selling electricity within the region
several times cheaper. In Irkutsk one kWh of electricity costs the
rural population R8, while the price in Moscow is R130. Dyakov says
that 52 member regions have electricity shortages, and only 20 have a
surplus. "What would happen if all of them operated in their own
interests?" he asks. "Tearing the power industry apart means tearing
the country apart".



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

POLES SEEK POSTPONEMENT OF FUEL IMPORT LIBERALISATION

The Polish government has asked the European Union for an extended
adjustment period for its oil refining and distribution sector (and its
agriculture), according to prime minister Jozef Oleksy. The government
expected neither to these industries to be in a condition to face
foreign competition soon and wants a postponement of a deadline for
liberalising fuel imports to 1999 from 1997.

"If the deadline is not moved the fate of our refineries will be under
threat" industry minister Klemens Scierski said on 11 January. Under
Poland's association agreement with the EU, Poland should lift barriers
protecting the fuel market, including duties and quotas, by the end of
1996. Foreign oil companies took the view that delaying the
liberalisation of the Polish refining and distribution sector would cut
down their interest in investing in the country.

Meanwhile, Poland's main refineries, Petrochemia Plock and Rafineria
Gdanska, were preparing to put up their petrol prices. They cited
higher oil prices, which had risen to around $18/bbl by the end of last
year. The government could delay the proposed price rises by a maximum
of three months.

The refineries argued that oil prices accounted for up to 90% of the
production costs of petrol, and said that they would consider
abandoning the increases if oil prices fell below $17/bbl. A
Petrochemia Plock spokesman noted that the average price for oil paid
by the refinery during the first nine months of 1995 was $16.99/bbl,
falling as low as $15.60/bbl during the summer.

At the same time, the Polish government has adjusted import tariffs on
petrol and diesel fuel. Duties on petrol imports from the EU, EFTA, and
the central European free market CEFTA (ie Czech Republic, Slovakia,
Hungary, and Slovenia, as well as Poland) have been set at 15% for
1996. This compares with 12% for the EU and EFTA in 1995, and 10% for
CEFTA countries. The rate for other countries - such as Russia - goes
back to 25%, having been temporarily cut to 15% last year. For diesel
fuel, the rate from EU, EFTA, and CEFTA countries is 25%, which is a
reduction from 28% for the EU and EFTA, and a rise from 23.3% for
CEFTA. The rate for other countries is 35%.

The target rates for 1996 contained in Poland's association agreement
with the EU were 9% for petrol, and 21% for diesel. But there are no
penalties attached to failing to meet those targets. What does need to
be discussed with the EU are import quotas, and concessions for
importers. Talks were scheduled for early December, but were put off by
EU officials until mid February.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

ROMANIA AND GAZPROM ESTABLISH JOINT VENTURE

Russian gas supplier Gazprom has drafted a bilateral Romania-Russia
government accord for the construction of a gas pipeline in Romania,
according to Interfax news agency.

Under the accord, Gazprom and Romanian counterpart Romgaz would set up
a 50/50 joint stock company to design, finance, build and operate the
line to carry Russian gas to consumers in Romania and neighbouring
countries. The 15-year deal gives the joint venture ownership of the
facilities it builds in Romania and provides for leasing and subsequent
purchasing of existing Romanian gas transport facilities, the report
said.

The Romanian government would exempt the venture and its founders from
customs duty, income and land taxes and other charges linked to
building and operating gas production facilities. The Russian
government would exempt Gazprom from export duty on equipment and
materials needed for the line. Natural gas exported to Romanian
customers could not be re-exported without Gazprom's consent.

Shortfall in supplies

Romania's supply of natural gas from the Russian Federation has been
short by 2mcm/d since 31 December, according to Romgaz executive Stafan
Man. Russian suppliers have blamed the reduction, which represents a
shortfall of 15% below contract levels, on extremely low outside
temperatures, Man said.

Romgaz delivers an average 38-40% of its total output to residential
consumers, rising to more than half of its output during peak times.
The company began drawing on underground reserves as early as November
and has had to raise daily deliveries by about 10% since the beginning
of January, Man said.

To add to the pressure, Bucharest's public finance board froze the
Romgaz account last month over the company's failure to pay Lev200bn in
outstanding taxes, with the result that Romgaz is unable to afford any
excess expenditure on its transport system whether for maintenance,
operation or spare parts. Romgaz itself meanwhile is unable to recover
Lev900bn in bill arrears, more than half of which is owed by state
power company Renel. Other major debtors include large plants in the
metal-processing, machine-building and chemical industries. Domestic
industries would virtually grind to a standstill should Romgaz cut off
supplies, Man warned.

A priority for the troubled gas company this year is the replacement of
pipeline. Nearly 40% of Romgaz pipes lack cathode protection, which
leads to early corrosion and could pose a serious blast threat,
according to company official Ioan Husu. At present Romgaz operates
only two mobile laboratories for the monitoring of cathode
deterioration, a wholly inadequate number given the size of the
country's gas supply system, he said. The company is scheduled to
replace 200km of a total 11,000km of pipeline this year.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

BULGARIA TO TEST REACTOR VESSEL AND GO AHEAD WITH STORAGE

Bulgarian officials announced in December that the country would agree
that three or four templets from the body of the controversial Unit 1
at Kozlodui could be taken later this year. However, the EU is still
urging Bulgaria to close the reactor as soon as possible.

According to Yanko Yanev, head of the national committee on the
peaceful uses of atomic energy, the tests will be done either by
Siemens or Westinghouse. The operation will continue for 5-6 months and
will cost about $500,000-600,000. The European Commission is planning
to cover these expenses. Speaking at a press conference, Yanev insisted
that Russian experts will be allowed to participate in all stages of
the tests.

National Electricity Company (NEC) acting chairman Trifon Tsvetkov said
"we decided to seek ways for an earlier closure for tests of reactor
number one and we may close it around 15 May if the weather is warm
enough". He said he had discussed carrying out the tests with EU
officials in Brussels and more talks were expected to take place before
the end of the month.

Unit 1 at the plant sparked international concern after it was
restarted by the Bulgarians in October last year (EEE 49/14) after
several months safety upgrading work. The EU urged the country to close
the 440 MW reactor in return for compensatory energy supplies. However,
the country is not currently linked to the Western European system
although it could receive power supply via the former Yugoslavia.

On 15 January Bulgaria added it would not allow safety checks without
the participation of its own experts. "We will not agree to additional
tests of the vessel's metal (of reactor number one) without Bulgarian
participation," Yanev told a news conference. "We also raised the
question of participation by the reactor's producer (Russia) in the
checks," Yanev said.

The EU Phare programme envisages aid of some Ecu40m for the Bulgarian
energy sector in the next four years, Yanev said, adding that half of
it would be allocated to nuclear safety upgrading. Yanev said a credit
for the modernisation of Kozlodui's two 1,000 MW reactors has also been
discussed in Brussels, adding Bulgaria hopes to receive a $150m loan
from the European Investment Bank for this.

Low radioactive waste storage approved

Meanwhile, the Energoproekt R&D institute has developed a final draft
for the construction of a large storage facility for low-radioactive
waste at the Kozlodui plant. The project has been endorsed by the
environment ministry and partial financing from the EU is already in
place. Construction should be completed in 18 months, according to
officials.

The project provides for building a storage facility for two bodies of
total capacity 10,000cm. It will hold 2,000 steel-concrete containers
made by the Bulgarian company Balbok. Six wells will facilitate regular
testing of the level of radioactivity of underground water.
Comprehensive safety measures against earthquakes and other accidents
have been provided for. Waste and refuse with low and medium
radioactivity will be kept in the storage, ie waste clothes and
instrumentation, oil, resins and valves.

For the present, no construction of storage facilities for highly-
radioactive waste has been planned. However, this may become necessary
if Moscow starts returning spent fuel from the Kozlodui plant. The
bilateral Bulgarian-Russian agreement on nuclear energy cooperation
contains such a clause. A plant for recycling radioactive waste is
already under construction at the plant. with technology supplied by
Westinghouse. The project is co-financed by the EU.

* Bulgaria has made progress in meeting recommendations of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in upgrading safety at four
reactors at Kozlodui, an IAEA representative said on 19 January. A five-
day IAEA mission has been visiting the plant to collect information on
the implementation of safety measures recommended by the agency in
1991. "We found that the plant feels very concerned with the resolution
of the safety measures and progress has been accomplished in several
areas of concern" said Georges Norvez, head of the mission. Norvez
stressed that there was still much work to be done to fulfils all the
IAEA requirements. "Completion of the modifications planned in 1996 and
1997 will be a very separate step" he added.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

MOL FIGURES FAIL TO DAMPEN OPTIMISM

MOL's three-quarter figures proved something of a disappointment when
announced last month. These were the first figures to be released
following the partial flotation of the company in November-December
(EEE 51/5).

MOL had nine-month net sales of Ft 231.7bn producing operating profits
of Ft6.8bn. Whilst third quarter revenues were normal given the
seasonal nature of gas sales, the operating profit was only Ft0.3bn up
on the six-month figure of Ft6.5bn. After tax profit figures, at
Ft3.2bn at the end of June, fell to Ft2.3bn at the end of September,
paint an even less rosy picture.

Despite the apparent poor three-quarter figures, MOL management
maintains year end after-tax projections of Ft6-7bn will be achieved.
(All these figures are to Hungarian Accounting Regulations, HAR) Three-
quarter natural gas sales stood at 8bncm, 3.8bncm from domestic
production, and MOL projects 1995 domestic production will be up on the
business plan, with 1996 production down some 9-11% on 1995 figures.
Petrol sales were 13% up on 1994 nine-month figures, with diesel sales
similarly 6% up.

MC Securities report

However, a report by the London based MC Securities chastises MOL
management for not showing better financial nouse prior to
privatisation. "A profits downgrade so soon after privatisation is not
a good way to begin life as a private company," the report concludes,
saying the revisions to forecasts were "both unfortunate and quite
probably avoidable". The report still maintains, however, that MOL
"remains a fundamentally sound company," and forecast 1995 after tax
(according to International Standards, IAS) profits at Ft6.9bn, rising
to Ft21.5bn in 1996. MC Securities puts the poor three-quarter figures
down to a number of factors, but highlights that between privatisation
and the publication of the nine-month figures, provisions were made for
bad and doubtful debts of some Ft3bn. In addition, MOL's increasing its
volume of stored gas, with 275mcm injected into storage before the
winter season.

In spite of the marginal increase in domestic production, MC predicts a
3% increase in gas imports in 1995 to fulfil the increased storage
demand. Both the gas and the storage means higher incurred costs, and
the additional inventory losses are not an allowable provision for tax
purposes in Hungary, the report states. It is the above two factors
which raise the ire of MC Securities' analyst, since both were clearly
known in advance. The report downgrades MOL 1995 earnings on an IAS
basis to Ft6.9bn, "a significant reduction from the Ft10.2bn forecast
at the time of the international offering".

The report, whilst noting increased export sales, also debunks
Hungarian press reports of "considerably improved" domestic sales
figures for the first nine-months compared to 1994 results. It points
out that Hungarian sales "rose by less than inflation over the same
period, indicating MOL continues to lose market share slightly or faces
margin pressure in the domestic market". MC Securities notes a number
of hopeful signs, including the stabilisation in the former Yugoslavia,
which is likely to lead to improved MOL revenues. Its conclusions,
written on 4 January, state "MOL remains an attractive European oil
company at its current price of Ft1,220 per share".

Somebody must have done some reading. Later in the month the price hit
Ft1,945, although this was seen as something of a technically freak
price. By mid-month, the price was at a more sustainable Ft1,400 plus
level.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

WORLD BANK ENVIRONMENTAL OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE

According to the World Bank's first progress report on its work to
protect the environment in Central and Eastern Europe* "it was clear
from the start in the region that environmental improvements would be
linked to economic and social changes, and solving the priority
problems had to be balanced with resources availability".

As a result, the report notes, when the World Bank, the European
Commission, the OECD and the environment ministers of Central and
Eastern Europe endorsed an Environmental Action Programme for the 25
countries of the region at a meeting in Lucerne in 1993, it was agreed
that the Programme would be based on two premises.

The first is that all investments made in the field assume economic and
environmental policies are complementary and not competing (for
instance it is understood that phasing out subsidies is good for the
economy, conservation and pollution). The second premise is that in
order to narrow the range of what the most pressing environmental
concerns are, attention should be focused on just those priorities that
have human health consequences - namely lead pollution, and pollution
caused by airborne dust and sulphur dioxide, and drinking water
contamination. The report says these "priority problems" have now
"largely been identified", but a considerable amount of work remains to
be done to solve them.

As a member of the task force implementing the Environmental Action
Programme, the World Bank has contributed in a variety of ways. It has
helped 11 countries draw up national environmental data actions plans,
beginning with Bulgaria in 1991, and most recently assisting the Kyrgyz
Republic and Moldova. It has also helped governments develop
appropriate incentives and regulatory policies as part of the Bank's
$5.7bn structural adjustment lending programme between 1990-1995.

For instance, a $300m World Bank structural adjustment loan to Poland
helped liberalise coal prices which, together with a decline in
industrial production, reduced demand for coal, and increased it for
environmentally preferable fuels. This fuel switching, in turn, was
linked to a reduction in CO2 emissions and emissions of other air
pollutants.

The report notes that sometimes structural adjustment operations
include explicit environmental measures. For instance, a $15m credit
for the Kyrgyz Republic approved last year lays down that highly
polluting companies must do environmental audits and provides local
banks with guidelines on how to screen companies to find out if they
are eligible for sub-loan applications.

$1.36bn in loan commitments

Turning to project financing, the report says the Bank has made $1.3bn
in loan commitments for 12 projects in the region that are specifically
environmental since 1990. Of these 12, five are in the energy sector
and account for 70% of the total. All five were meant to mitigate
industrial or "brown" environmental problems like air pollution and
urban environmental problems.

Another of the projects was for improvements in general environmental
management (10% of the total), and another for emergency oil spills so
that the region has a response capability. This last category amounted
to $99m or 8% of total environment project financing, and was entirely
absorbed by one project - the Komi oil pipeline spill in Russia (EEE
42/7).

The Bank has also supported 27 general projects that include
environmental components. One of these is the Czech Power and
Environmental Improvement Project which requires that CEZ, the
principal generator, undertake actions that should result in a 90%
reduction in sulphur oxides and an 80% reduction in fly ash by the year
2000.

The World Bank is also supporting environmental improvements in its
capacity as an implementing agency of the Global Environment Facility
(GEF). In one case, the World Bank is helping Poland prepare its
ratification of the Framework Convention on Climate Change with a $25m
GEF grant that will help reduce greenhouse gas emissions, particularly
those of CO2. The project will help finance the conversion of small,
coal-fired boilers in old residential buildings. Local air quality is
expected to vastly improve as a result of the project with the almost
total elimination of SO2 and particulate emissions in towns, and a
significant reduction in emissions of nitrogen oxides.

Meanwhile in regional programmes, at the request of the G-7, and
working with the IEA and the EBRD, the World Bank has prepared a study
on nuclear safety and electric power requirements in six countries -
Armenia, Bulgaria, Lithuania, Russia, Slovakia and Ukraine. The report
is part of an ongoing effort to help the region develop long-term
energy strategies and ensure that safety issues and energy issues are
addressed in a coordinated way.

Patterns of pollution changing

Looking ahead, the report notes that patterns of pollution are changing
in the region. It says, "With an increase in the number of cars in the
region, and a decrease in heavy industrial production, traffic is
becoming a main cause of lead pollution, accounting for as much as 84%
of lead pollution in Hungary, 61% in Bulgaria and 40% in Poland".

Indeed the Bank is now financing research on projected traffic growth
in Central and Eastern Europe and on traffic emissions and their
effects on human health. It is also researching the feasibility and
cost of reducing the lead content in petrol. The results of this
research will influence decisions on future investments by the Bank in
the region. For instance, a comprehensive pollution abatement project
is being prepared for Bulgaria that includes measures to reduce
emissions from a copper smelter, to substitute coal fuel for natural
gas in urban areas, and to cut down on airborne lead emissions by
promoting the use of unleaded petrol.

Finally, the report says the Bank will be increasing its role as a
broker of deals, and agreements to finance environmental projects. "For
example, the World Bank can provide guarantees to mitigate specific
political risks in countries, and in this way encourage private
investments in support of the environment".

* The World Bank and the Environment in Central and Eastern Europe 1990-
1995.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

POLES RAISE PRICES

Domestic prices of electricity and gas rose by an average of 14% from
the beginning of this year, according to calculations by Poland's
finance ministry, but this figure covers a reasonably wide range of
individual tariff changes.

Thus, the price of one kWh under one industrial night tariff rose by
25%, from Z0.04 to Z0.05 (from 1.6 to two cents), while under another
it was up by 20% from Z0.05 to Z0.06 (from two to 2.4 cents). An all-
day industrial tariff showed a 12.5% rise from Z0.08 to Z0.09.

Domestic tariffs generally showed smaller rises, though the prices were
inevitably higher. Thus, the price of one kWh for households in blocks
of flats rose by 12.5% from Z0.16 to Z0.18, while the tariff for
electrical heating rose by 11% from Z0.18 to Z0.20 for peak rate and by
12.5% from Z0.08 to Z0.09 for the night rate.

At the same time, from the beginning of this year, users of communally
heated water will be charged on the basis of water meters counting
their consumption, where these exist. The public works ministry has
estimated that use of hot water drops by approximately half when meters
are installed.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

HUNGARY SECURES 1996 SUPPLIES

Hungary has secured its gas and oil supply for 1996, Laszlo Pal,
chairman of Hungary's oil and gas monopoly MOL said on 11 January.

"Hungary's gas and oil supply for 1996 is already guaranteed, and we
are negotiating future deliveries," Pal told Reuters in an interview.
Hungary will buy seven billion cubic meters of gas from Russia this
year. "The contracts have been signed," Pal added. He said MOL had a
preliminary agreement with its Russian partner, Gazprom, which
guaranteed coverage of Hungary's gas needs until 2010. Talks have
already started covering the 2010-2015 period.

Pal said Hungary was presently getting all its gas from pipelines
directly from Russia, but a new pipeline connecting the western
Hungarian town Gyor with Austria's Baumgarten will open within the next
two years. Russian gas was also expected to be transported through the
new pipeline as it was cheaper than north European gas, Pal said. "As
long as our relations with Russian suppliers remain normal their
position will not be at risk," Pal added.

Hungary had preliminary agreements on all of its oil imports for this
year. "The contracts will be finalised within the next few days," Pal
said. The chairman declined to name Hungary's import partners but said
Russia would remain the main source, though oil has already arrived
through the Adria pipeline from Adriatic seaports. The mere existence
of the Adria pipeline had helped MOL to negotiate better terms with
Russia he added.

Hungary buys the Russian oil below the world market price at discount
levels similar to its neighbours, Pal said. Hungary's oil imports for
1996 will be 5.5mt (roughly equivalent to 110,000bbl/d), of which 1mt
are likely to arrive through the Adria pipeline. Hungary covers some
20% of its oil consumption from its own wells.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

OILGATE ENQUIRY CLEARS MINISTER OF TRADE AND MOL CHAIRMAN

The enquiry conducted by the Hungarian Prime Minister's office into the
affair dubbed "Oilgate" by the Hungarian opposition found
"shortcomings" in various activities of the people and committees under
investigation, but no evidence or even suspicion of illegal activity
(EEE 51/17).

The announcement, on 22 December, appeared to clear industry minister
Imre Dunai, and his predecessor Laszlo Pal, now MOL President, of
allegations of conflict of interests and of using their positions to
benefit private businessmen close to their party who are involved in
oil trading activities. But parliament has decided that a cross-party
committee will also launch an enquiry into the matter.

The report says the goals of those concerned were correct, but there
had been "faults in implementation", because even the appearance of
wrongdoing should have been avoided. The stated goal of the report was
to establish whether personal relationships existed which would have in
any way prejudiced the interests of Hungary. The committee of enquiry
conducted hearings with Dunai, Pal and Otto Hujber, chairman of the
entrepreneur group within the Socialist Party and former head of a
committee in charge of an operation to repay Russian debt to Hungary.

In a nutshell, the report notes a number of points regarding conflict
of interest issues which involve Pal, Dunai and Hujber, and their
activities to reduce Russian debt and the trade imbalance between
Hungary and Russia involving bartered Hungarian goods. But critics say
the report generously judges the dubious aspects of these activities as
"shortcomings" rather than irregularities or illegal activity.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT APPROVES FUEL AND ENERGY PROGRAMME

A federal programme for fuel and energy development up to 2000 has been
approved by the Russian government. Officials noted that the fuel-and-
energy complex is responsible for a quarter of Russia's industrial
output and exercises considerable influence over the budget as well as
accounting for more than a half of Russia's export potential.

The first stage of the programme for 1992-1995 focused mainly on the
denationalisation of power plants. A new legal basis for market reforms
within the fuel-and-energy complex is being developed.

However many problems still remain, officials admitted. Only 40% of the
funds set aside for the programme have so far been made available and
non-payments difficulties are blocking progress. In 1995, only 1.5% of
the finance allocated to the sector was made available and outstanding
debts to sector enterprises increased 3.8 times over 1994 to R89,500bn.
These enterprises in turn owe R99,600bn.

Customers pay only for 23% of the gas received, 40% of coal and 60% of
electricity. The government has also set a three-week period for an
improvement in the federal programme for exports within the sector.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

POLISH PARLIAMENT SENDS ENERGY LAWS FOR MORE STUDY

Poland's lower house of parliament on 11 January sent two draft laws on
energy production and sale, aimed at adjusting the sector to the market
economy, to committees for further study.

The bills, one prepared by the government and the other by a group of
deputies, envisage gradual liberalisation of energy prices, and provide
a legal framework for letting private investors buy into the industry.

The government-sponsored draft provides for creating an Energy
Regulation Office (URE) that would issue licences for energy
production, transmission, distribution and sales. The URE, together
with the anti-monopoly office, would also make sure that energy price
increases are justified. The bill proposed by the group of deputies
obliges energy producers to sign long-term contracts with end-users to
stabilise the market.

Under the drafts, the national grid is to remain state-owned, while
other energy companies could gradually be privatised to ensure much
needed investment. The grid will be obliged to connect to itself all
energy producers with URE licences.

The government-backed bill cedes control over the production and
distribution of heating from the industry ministry to the construction
ministry and local governors. Analysts said the parliamentary
committees were likely to merge the two draft laws into one bill in a
process that could last months.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

WORLD BANK LAUNCHES $100M BOSNIA AID PLAN

The World Bank announced a $100m "Emergency Recovery Project" for
Bosnia in December to jump-start the war-shattered country's
restoration in the first quarter of 1996.

The money, to be co-financed between the Bank and other donors, will be
targeted at key government agencies, medium and small enterprises and
severely disadvantaged residents. The programme was announced in
Sarajevo by Michel Noel, chief of the Bank's country operations
division, as NATO activated its peace mission to bring 60,000 troops to
Bosnia.

Bosnian officials said they hoped the project would be part of a $517m
request they will be making at a donor conference in Brussels to
support the government in the first three months this year. That sum is
only a fraction of the total $5.1bn the World Bank estimates will be
needed reconstruction over the next three years (EEE 50/7).

Noel said that about $4bn of that had been projected for territory
administered by the Moslem-Croat Federation. The balance would go to
the Serb republic which makes up the remainder of the post-war Bosnian
state.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

ENERGY PRIVATISATION FUND ESTABLISHED IN BULGARIA

At the end of December, 16 companies and 19 private investors in
Bulgaria registered a private energy privatisation fund with registered
capital of Lev10m.

The Energy Insurance company, Trade and Savings Bank, Risk Engineering,
7M Finance House and the two major national trade union amalgamations
are among the fund's shareholders. In a private capacity, leading
officials in the power industry are also shareholders of the fund. The
former director of the National Electricity Company, Dyanko Dobrev, has
been elected chairman of the governing board.

The managers of the fund have declared their intention to conduct
market studies in the companies from the energy sector included in the
government's mass privatisation lists, and to invest in at least seven
major companies. They will seek to attract the interest of the ordinary
investor to the energy sector, says Nikita Shervashidze, chairman of
the supervisory board of the fund.

Since it was constituted and until its court registration, the fund has
financed the privatisation evaluation of about 70 companies. Over
100,000 people are employed in the power industry or in related
industries, with their privatisation vouchers worth over Lev2.5bn.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

BLACK SEA ENERGY CENTRE OPENS

The 11 countries surrounding the Black Sea region took a major step
towards energy sector cooperation last month with the official
inauguration of the EU-funded Black Sea Regional Energy Centre (BSREC)
in Bulgaria.

The opening of the Sofia-based Centre underlines the increasing
importance of the region as a key transit area for energy supplies
flowing westwards into Europe, while for Bulgaria, it marks a step
towards future accession to the European Union.

The Centre aims to coordinate the energy sector activities of the
member countries and to act as a focal point for inward investment to
the region. Multinational cooperation from EU financing institutions,
local banks and private enterprises is being sought for the first 12
projects. EU support totalling Ecu2.5m for the first 2-3 years is being
provided through three funding programmes - Synergy (Ecu1m), Phare
(Ecu1m) and Tacis (Ecu0.5m).

The Centre's creation stems from an EU-sponsored energy conference held
in 1994 which stressed the need for energy-sector cooperation between
the EU and the Black Sea region to "strengthen political and economic
stability and promote peace and greater prosperity in the region".
These aims have now been backed up by the European Energy Charter
Treaty to which all BSREC members have signed and which provides a
framework for energy trade, cooperation, investment and joint ventures
where no legislative support exists.

Plans for the Centre to be used by a Balkan's Task Force to investigate
oil and electricity interconnections in the region, and the "pivotal
role" they plan in energy interconnections between Asia and Europe,
were also announced at the inauguration. An EU Ministerial meeting is
planned for spring-1997 to examine the BSREC region's importance for
oil and gas transit from the Caspian Sea to EU.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

FLOODS HIT ROMANIAN FACILITIES

Heavy flooding earlier this month caused extensive damage to low and
medium-tension overhead wires, natural gas pipeline and oilwells in
many parts of Romania. At Prahova, north of Bucharest on the main
Bucharest-Brasov road, a landslide severed the community's connection
to the main gas pipeline, with resulting gas leaks posing a severe
threat of blasts.

State company Romgaz said there was no stopgap solution and estimated
the broken pipe would take at least 20 days to repair. Several
communities in the area are currently without gas supply, while
consumers in Ploieste and Bucharest have been affected by lowered gas
pressure.

The floods, resulting from the sudden thawing of heavy snow, also
halted operations at eight oil wells in Olt County. Electricity lines
in several counties were severely damaged, cutting off supplies. Water
levels in hydroelectric plant reservoirs were up 3% to an average of
50.7% of total volume, with the highest rises reported in the east of
the country at Stejaru - 71% of total volume. The government has
submitted to parliament an amendment to the 1996 budget in order to
cover the cost of repairs.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

RUSSIA'S 1995 CRUDE OUTPUT DOWN

Russia's 1995 crude oil output slipped 4% on 1994 levels, state
statistics committee figures showed on 16 January. Russia's total
output of crude oil and gas condensate in 1995 was 307mt, according to
the figures.

Russia's total crude oil exports to countries outside the Commonwealth
of Independent States were 96.04mt in 1995, up from 91.9mt in the
previous year, the committee also said. Of this total over 81.97mt were
exported by Russian oil companies, over 6.49mt by joint ventures and
7.2mt under government contracts. The largest exporters were Lukoil,
Surgutneftegaz and Yukos which accounted for 13.89mt, 8.66mt and 7.8mt
respectively.

The committee, whose figures were quoted by Interfax news agency, said
the total figure included Russia's state and commercial exports, as
well as Russian oil shipped through Kazakhstan on the way to non-ClS
destinations.

Interfax news agency quoted committee figures as saying that Russia's
total crude exports in 1995 were 122.3mt, a fall of 4.6% on the 1994
total. Crude exports to members of the CIS totalled 25.5mt according to
the figures. Committee figures also showed that Russia refined 183mt of
oil in 1995, which it said was 2% below 1994's level. Total oil product
exports fell to 45.3mt in 1995 compared to 47.3mt the previous year.
Natural gas output in 1995 was 595bncm, it said, also a 2% drop on
1994's level.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

MOLDOVA COURTS CASH FOR OIL DRILLING AND EXPORT PORT

Moldova is courting foreign investors to help tap its crude reserves
and build an oil outlet to the West, a senior energy official said on
12 January.

Nikolai Chyorny, general director of Tiras-Petrol, the state oil
company, said that some oil from the project would eventually head for
European refineries, especially in Greece and Romania. "Both projects
are sure steps towards consolidating Moldova's economic independence,"
he said .

US Redeco Ltd won a 20-year concession last summer to begin drilling in
Moldova's southwestern Valeni oil field in the first quarter of 1996
(EEE 45/20). Chyorny said annual production from the venture could
reach 120,000t (roughly equivalent to an average 2,400bbl/d). Moldova
currently imports 98% of its crude and oil products. Moldova's known
oil reserves total an estimated 10.6mt, but the government hope
Redeco's exploration will lead to discovery of new reserves.

Terminal SA, a Moldovan-Greek joint venture, has said it will begin
construction of a $38m oil terminal with an annual capacity of 1.2mt on
southern Moldova's tiny Danube coast in Giurgiulesti later this year.
The terminal could berth oil tankers bound for the Black Sea and the
Mediterranean before the end of the year.

Chyorny said Redeco would invest $25m over each five year period of its
concession and give Moldova a portion of the crude extracted. Under the
terms of the deal, Moldova will receive 20% of the amount of oil
extracted each year for the first 10 years. Domestic annual consumption
has fallen to 2.5mt of oil from 4mt  a few years ago.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

RUSSIA-CHINA ENERGY DEAL ATTRACTS MOSCOW'S ATTENTION

Moscow has hinted that a giant oil and gas deal with China could be in
the pipeline, but industry analysts said that Russia faced a long,
expensive road to tapping the world's fastest growing energy market.

Interfax news agency said on 29 December Russian President Boris
Yeltsin may sign an initial $8bn deal to supply China with Russian oil
and gas during a visit to Beijing next spring. The deal could
eventually involve building pipelines through some of Siberia's and
Mongolia's most remote areas.

Investment bank ING Barinas said in a report this month that Russia was
ideally positioned to meet Asia's energy needs. It said China, which
became a net oil importer in 1994, might need to meet 45% of its oil
needs through imports by 2010. "Russia in the long run is strategically
positioned to become one of the major, if not the major, supplier to
some of the Asian markets," said Craig Kennedy, senior consultant at
Cambridge Energy Research Associates in Moscow.

Interfax said the project could send oil and gas from the western
Siberian regions of Sakhalin, Irkutsk and Yakutsk to China and beyond.
The deal could include construction of pipelines going as far as
China's Pacific Coast, which could allow Russia to export oil to other
countries in Asia.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

UKRAINE CONFIRMS RUSSIAN OIL FLOWING VIA DRUZHBA

A Ukrainian pipeline official confirmed on 10 January that limited
supplies of Russian crude had resumed flowing to the Czech Republic and
Slovakia through the Druzhba (Friendship) pipeline.

"Oil started flowing to the Czech Republic and Slovakia on Tuesday
evening. We have been paid to transport 125,000t of oil to these
countries," said Lubomyr Bunyak, director of Ukraine's part of the
pipeline.

Oil supplies through the pipeline were suspended on 1 January because
of a transit tariff dispute between Ukraine and Russia. The Slovak firm
Transpetrol, operator of the pipeline in Slovakia, said on 10 January
that oil supplies had resumed to both countries.

Slovnaft officials have said they plan to refine some 420,000t of crude
in January and about 5mt in 1996. In 1995 the firm refined some 5.1mt
of crude. Bunyak added that Hungary had paid Ukraine to transport
511,000t of oil, which would take about 20 days. Supplies to Hungary
resumed on 4 January.

Bunyak said future oil supplies through the pipeline were uncertain and
depended on talks with Russia on new transport tariffs introduced by
Ukraine on 1 January. Russia says the unilateral tariff rise violated
terms of contracts between Russia's producers and consumers. Anatoly
Kovtun, a senior official of state committee on oil and gas, repeated
calls for Russia to discuss the tariffs.

Ukraine has said it will stand firm by its new tariffs. Yevhen Dovzhok,
head of the state committee on oil and gas, also said representatives
of Russia's Fuel and Energy ministry had agreed to meet their
counterparts in Kiev in the week beginning 15 January. Dovzhok said
that Ukraine had signed contracts with 28 Russian exporters to
transport 7mt of oil through the pipeline to customers in Central and
Eastern Europe.

"This is probably the lowest transit tariff in Europe," he said. "If we
didn't raise it, there would be no sense in transporting oil because
prices for land and electricity have increased. The new tariffs are not
aimed at quick profits".

Ukraine increased tariffs on 1 January to $5.20/t transported via
Ukraine's 715km stretch of the pipeline, from $4.73/t. Last year 17mt
of Russian crude passed through Ukraine's section of the pipeline,
Dovzhok said.

* Slovakia is negotiating with unspecified producers to import crude in
the hope of ending its complete dependence on Russian oil, Slovak
industry minister Jan Ducky said on 15 January. "We have been in
negotiations about the diversification of our oil supplies, either from
the Ingolstadt or Adria pipelines, but I do not expect oil to come from
sources other than the Druzhba, due to several reasons, in the near
future," Ducky told a news conference. He did not say with which
sources Slovakia was negotiating. Ducky said that the main obstacle to
diversifying was price. "One tonne of oil coming through the Adria
pipeline would be, due to transport fees, more expensive by about $14.
On the other hand, oil via the Ingolstadt pipeline would be more
expensive by about 20-30%," he added.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

CZECHS AWAIT INGOLSTADT SUPPLIES

The Czech Republic should begin receiving some 140,000t of crude oil
through the Ingolstadt pipeline by the end of January, industry and
trade minister Vladimir Dlouhy said on 5 January.

Dlouhy said the Ingolstadt pipeline, linking the Czechs with the
Transalpine oil link in Germany, is currently being tested before
commercial opening in April. "The level of usage should range around
140,000t, or 170,000cm for January, and rise to around 300,000t in
February or the first half of March," Dlouhy told a news conference.

It is expected that the Czech Republic's two major refineries - Kaucuk
and Chemopetrol - will import 2-3mt of the country's annual consumption
of 7mt of crude oil through the new pipeline, ending virtually complete
dependence upon Russian supplies through the Friendship pipeline. That
supply has been subject to several interruptions including the most
recent which began on 8 January after an administrative row over
transport tariffs broke out between Russia and Ukraine (see separate
story).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

RUSSIAN PIPELINES SPILL

Workers have brought under control Russia's third publicised oil spill
in as many months, limiting losses from a pipeline near the Urals city
of Perm to 200t of crude, the emergency situations ministry said on 12
January.

The pipeline, in the Tyoplaya Gora village 170km northeast of Perm,
burst on 11 January at midmorning local time after a bulldozer carrying
out work in the area slammed into it, ministry spokeswoman Tatyana
Timoshenkova said.

"There are no threats to the environment and the situation is under
control," she said, adding that the spilled crude had been pumped back
into the Surgut-Polotsk pipeline, which she said was now functioning
normally. In a separate incident, about 100t of oil spilled on 8
January from a pipeline near the southern town of Saratov, the ministry
said. Workers were still cleaning up the area.

In late December, 100-460t of crude spilled from a pipeline under the
Belaya River in Russia's southern Ural Mountains and mixed with water.
The spill has not contaminated the Volga river, Itar-Tass news agency
quoted a local official as saying. Ice and water hampered efforts to
determine how much oil leaked from the pipeline.

Interfax quoted Bashkortostan region's environment and emergencies
minister Rustem Khamitov as saying the accident was worse than reported
by pipeline officials, and that 620-630t of liquid containing 100-150t
of pure crude had been cleaned up by 8 January.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

US COMPANY BACKS TALLINN PIPELINE

Coastal Corporation is backing the construction of an oil pipeline
linking the Tallinn port of Muuga with an oil depot located in the sea-
port town of Maardu, some 8km southwest of the Estonian capital,
economy ministry officials said 8 January.

The project is a joint venture between the state owned oil group Esoil
and Coastal Corporation. Financing from the venture, which will be
conducted by Esoil's subsidiary Termoil, will be supplied by the US
company via its Tallinn-based subsidiary Coastal Baltic Holding.

Economy ministry officials put the cost of the Muuga-Maardu pipeline
plan at between $18-20m. The pipeline will have a 1.2-1.5mt/yr
capacity, officials said. Under the plan, which was ratified by Esoil
and Coastal Corp in Tallinn on 14 December, the construction programme
will include a oil terminal, pipeline and oil tanks.

"We expect to have all the necessary approvals by the end of the month.
Working on this schedule, the pipeline, terminal and oil depot should
be in place and operating by year-end 1996" said an Esoil official.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

MAZEIKAI HIRES US COMPANY AS FINANCIAL ADVISOR FOR MODERNISATION

Lithuania's Mazeikai refinery has recruited the US firm Public
Resources Infrastructure (PRI) as its financial adviser ahead of the
state oil company's plan to raise $110m from overseas banks to part
finance a $250m plant modernisation programme.

According to officials, PRI was selected following a competitive
international tender which drew 11 candidates from seven countries. PRI
is tasked with raising $110m in two tranches over a two year period.
The first loan tranche, to be raised from banks in Europe and the US in
1996, will amount to a $30m ten year loan. The second tranche, also a
10-year loan, will comprise $80m and be raised in 1997, officials said.

At least 40% of revenues generated from the first tranche will be used
to strengthen Mazeikai's working capital base. The second tranche will
go to supporting the company's investment programme. Mazeikai Nafta,
the refinery's operating company, has confirmed that the company is
engaged in talks with London-based Nomura Europe. According to Mazeikai
Nafta, the company is interested in "exploring and exploiting" the
potential of raising additional funds via an international bond issue.

Mazeikai Nafta was hit by more than 20 stoppages in 1995, caused by
both technical problems and breaks in supply from its Russian partner
Lukoil, which holds concessions for 60% of the refinery's 10.8mt/yr
capacity. Managers are eager to replace outdated technology, much of
which was installed in the early 1970s, with modern Western oil
handling and processing systems. The company is also anxious to switch
to cleaner technology, and increase its ability to process unleaded
petrol for the home and export market.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

CZECH REFINER PAYS NO DIVIDEND

Czech oil refiner Chemopetrol Group will not pay a dividend on 1994
profits and is unlikely to pay a dividend until 1998 at the earliest,
company officials said at the end of December.

Company director Dusan Nepejchal said that on 29 December, shareholders
at an extraordinary shareholders's meeting had voted not to pay a
dividend on 1994 gross profit of K1.9bn. He said that shareholders had
also agreed to cooperate with the International Oil Consortium (IOC) in
Ceska Rafinerska (CR), which is to be created at the beginning of 1996.
The refining operations of Chemopetrol will be separated along with
those at Kaucuk to form CR.

A 49% stake in CR will go to IOC, the consortium comprising Royal
Dutch/Shell, Agip SpA and Conoco, which bought the shares for $173m
with an additional $480m in investment over the next five years
promised (EEE 50/23).

The remaining 51% stake will be held by Czech firm Unipetrol, a holding
of Chemopetrol, Kaucuk and petrol distributor Benzina. Chemopetrol
Group posted a K4.6bn crown gross profit for the January-November
period of which the firm's refining division accounted for more than
50%. The company expects its full year gross profit to reach K5bn. The
company intends to raise its basic capital up to K9bn next year.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

SLOVAK REFINER PLANS MAINTENANCE

Slovak petrochemical group Slovnaft said on 8 January its planned
maintenance for 1996 is considerably greater than last year, but the
effect on the market would be negligible.

Slovnaft spokesman Lubomir Zitnan refused to reveal exact details of
the refineries' maintenance plans, but said delays of planned
maintenance helped the company's 1995 bottom line. "This year's
maintenance volume will be considerably higher, because it will also
include some of the 1995 maintenance plans, which we had put off for
the year 1996 and obtained a profit from (the delay)," Zitnan told
Reuters.

"We plan to refine approximately 5mt of crude oil in 1996, out of the
company's installed capacity of 7.2mt/yr," he said. Slovnaft's
preliminary 1995 total volume of refined crude was 5.1mt.

* Slovnaft said on 5 January it had posted preliminary full year 1995
pre-tax profit of SK3.5bn, the firm's best result in its century-long
existence. "We expect the final figures in a few weeks, but we can say
now the year 1995 was the best in Slovnaft's 100-year history," company
spokesman Lubomir Zitnan said. He added that profits were boosted by an
increase in refinery products retail sales and a year-on-year increase
in petrol sales of 100,000t. In 1994, Slovnaft recorded gross profit of
SK3.14bn and a net result of SK1.58bn on sales of SK28.94bn crowns. In
1995, sales firmed to SK32.0bn.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "36"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

LATVIAN PETROL TAX TO FUND ROADS

Latvia's cash-strapped government has proposed increasing the excise
duty levied on petrol to fund a $1bn road and rail development
programme to begin mid-1996, the transport ministry said on 4 January.

The excise tax proposal was presented by the transport ministry to the
government on 21 December. The government hopes to rake in $20m/yr from
the increased tax plan.

The tax changes envisage a rise in gasoline and diesel related excise
duties of $0.4/t. This would lead to a 10% rise in the pump price on
petrol and 15% for diesel. Petrol pump prices would rise to $0.12/litre
and $0.8/litre in the case of diesel. "The tax will be of broad
advantage to all. The government plans to use 50% of taxes raised from
the scheme on road improvements. Latvia's roads are not in good repair,
and need new investment," said Vilnis Millers, deputy director of the
transport ministry's highways' department.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "37"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

UKRAINE NAMES IMPORTERS

Ukraine has authorised three commercial importers to buy gas from
Russia's Gazprom this year as part of a sweeping plan to reduce the
state's role in energy supplies, Interfax-Ukraine news agency said on 9
January.

It quoted sources as saying the firms - Yedyni Energetychni Systemy,
Interhaz and Ukrazakordonnaftahaz - had signed contracts with Gazprom
to buy a total of 37.6bncm of Russian gas in 1996. The importers will
pay wholesale prices of $80 per 1,000 cubic metres. Ukrainian state gas
company Ukrhazprom, which until this year had a monopoly on all gas
supplies, will itself import 10bncm this year.

The government, burdened by non-payments for gas by domestic consumers,
resolved last year to ease the state's responsibility for gas supplies
from 1 January. Ukrhazprom will supply gas only to organisations
included in the state budget and for heating homes - about 30% of
Ukraine's total gas use.

Ukraine plans this year to import about 70bncm of gas - 50bncm from
Russia and the rest from Turkmenistan. Domestic output is forecast at
about 18bncm of gas. Ukraine last year imported 66bncm of gas - 53bncm
from Russia and 12bncm from Turkmenistan.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "38"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

BULGARIAN/RUSSIAN GAS JOINT VENTURE ADMITS NEW SHAREHOLDERS

Topenergy, the Bulgarian/Russian joint stock company for exporting
Russian natural gas to the Balkans, changed its rules late on 11
January to open up to a wider range of stake holders.

"Now the formula of the company is ... an increase in the shareholders'
capital followed by the admittance of new shareholders," Gazprom's
representative in Topenergy, Bogdan Budzuljak said after the meeting.
Topenergy doubled its share capital to Lev120m in November (EEE 50/28).

Under the 11 January agreement, Gazprom will keep its planned 50% stake
and the other half will be distributed among Bulgarian participants.
These include a 25.1% government stake, down from an original 50%. Cash-
strapped Bulgargas could not raise the funds to buy the 50% stake.

Bulgarian government economic adviser Vladimir Zheglov said the
remaining stakes were distributed among the new shareholders who paid
for them on 8 January. They will assume full shareholder rights within
a week. Zheglov said the powerful business conglomerate Multigroup and
its gas arm Overgas Inc, which is half owned by Gazprom, will have
8.25% each. State-owned Bulbank and First Private Bank will have 3.2%
each and the private firm Himimport 2%.

"A three quarters majority will be needed for taking a decision for
liquidation of the company, while two thirds will be required for
increasing the capital," Zheglov said. Budzuljak said the Russian side
insisted on some easing of fiscal regulations, including taxation of
investments. "Otherwise we will need a long time to earn $300m, which
we must invest in the infrastructure, in widening the transiting gas
system, telecommunications, reconstructing the existing systems and the
compressor stations for regulating gas volumes," Budzuljak said.

Topenergy discussed its business programme, which includes the
registration of gas distribution centre for the Balkans, in Sofia
within a few months, Zheglov told reporters. "It will be the strongest
centre after the Russian one, which will distribute natural gas in four
directions - to Serbia, Macedonia, Greece and Turkey," he said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "39"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

LATVIJAS GAZE SIGNS 1996 AGREEMENT

Latvijas Gaze has signed a final agreement on procuring Russian gas
supplies covering 1996 with supplier Gazprom, officials of the Latvian
company said, describing the deal as a "good one for Latvia".

The deal follows four rounds of talks during the final quarter 1995,
which resulted in the signing in Riga on 17 December of a letter of
agreement, Latvijas Gaze said. Under the agreement reached, Latvia has
contracted to purchase 3.2bncm of gas at a price of $77.50 per 1,000cm,
2.95 cents per cubic meter more than the price of last year's supplies.

Latvijas Gaze's $16m debt to Gazprom proved a sticking point in pre-
agreement talks. An additional $5.2m in late payment penalties has been
added by the Russian supplier to the debt, which Latvijas Gaze has
agreed to repay in full during the first quarter of 1996.

The agreement will also permit Gazprom to use the Latvijas Gaze
operated Incukalns gas reservoir to store its gas, under a lease where
the Russian company will pay 5.90 cents per 1,000 cubic meters stored.
Currently, Incukalns stores 1.7bncm of Russian gas, and Gazprom plans
to increase this amount to around 2.5bncm by year-end, according to
Latvijas Gaze's CEO Adrians Davis.

Both sides also reached agreement on a transit price for natural gas
transit shipments via Latvia. Gazprom will pay a rate of 50cents per
100km.

The Latvian Privatization Agency (LPA), which has been tasked with semi-
privatising Latvijas Gaze, confirmed that Gazprom has "verbally agreed"
to acquire a stake in Latvijas Gaze when state shares come up for sale
during the first half of the year.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "40"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

MOL GIVES RIGHTS TO OPERATE TRANSIT PIPELINE TO PANRUSGAZ

MOL is to transfer the rights to build and operate the Hungarian
section of the planned transit pipeline linking Russia with Italy to
the Hungarian-Russian joint venture Panrusgaz, which is effectively
held 50:50 by MOL and Gazprom. The agreement to transfer the rights was
made during a visit by Gazprom President Rem Vyakhirev on 9-10 January.

Vyakhirev told the daily Nepszabadsag the results of his trip were
"good, at any rate significant. These were extraordinarily important
negotiations. Many questions over our joint operations have been
accumulating over the past six months. The most important concerns the
joint construction of the Hungarian section of the transit pipeline."
He said a tri-partite agreement had been signed to the effect that MOL
and Panrusgaz should sign a contract by 20 March on guaranteed
quantities of Russian gas deliveries to Hungary until 2010 in exchange
for the pipeline cooperation rights.

A MOL source confirmed the accuracy of the report to EEE. Vyakhirev, in
response to a question regarding any Gazprom interest in the
privatisation of the Hungarian gas sector, said his company "as good as
it is, was unable to buy up all of Europe's gas industry. If
distribution is in reliable hands, that is favourable to us as
producers and suppliers." Regarding the possibility of barter deals, he
said "We haven't ruled out the idea. We need to keep working on this
theme. Panrusgaz will work on evaluating the opportunities."

The proposed route for the pipeline will cross into Hungary from
Slovakia and run though east and southern Hungary for an estimated 220-
230km before entering Slovenia.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "41"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

NORWEGIAN DENIAL ON POLISH TALKS

The Norwegian state oil and gas company Statoil has said that there are
no negotiations between the Norwegian gas negotiating committee and
potential Polish buyers. The Norwegians added that they had not
received any bid to buy gas from Poland.

There had been suggestions that the completion of the NERTA pipeline
across northern Germany might bring Norwegian gas to within striking
distance of the Polish border, and that Poland could use this to
diversify its gas supplies (EEE 51/21).

According to an analysis by the newspaper Rzeczpospolita, access to the
NERTA pipeline would put Polish Oil and Gas (PGNiG) on the wrong side
of the battle in Germany between Ruhrgas (which owns the NERTA
pipeline), and Gazprom's allies around Wintershall. At the same time,
Gazprom and Wintershall are PGNiG's partners in Europolgaz, which is to
build the Polish section of the pipeline bringing gas from the Yamal
peninsula in Russia to the Midal-Stegal pipeline in Germany built by
Wintershall and Gazprom.

The newspaper further suggests that Wintershall and Gazprom may have
difficulty in selling all of the gas that they can pipe into Germany -
up to 57bncm/yr - unless third party access is introduced, or unless
Gazprom negotiates a suitable deal with Ruhrgas when the two companies'
existing agreement comes up for renewal in 2008. In these
circumstances, it suits Gazprom to sell gas to Poland.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "42"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

RUSSIAN GAS DELIVERIES CAUSE PROBLEMS FOR BULGARIAN INDUSTRY

The pressure in the gas pipeline bringing natural gas from Russia to
Bulgaria, via Ukraine, Moldova and Romania, dropped sharply at the
beginning of January causing widespread failures and problems for
industry across Bulgaria. At the gas control and distribution centre in
Kardam, near the border with Romania, the pressure fell from 36-36.5atm
to 19-20atm on 2 January.

Similarly, the pressure of the second pipeline, transiting Russian gas
via Bulgaria to Turkey, also fell considerably. Large cities like
Plovdiv, Velingrad, Bourgas, Tirnovo, Vratsa, Razgrad and others were
receiving between 50% and three times less than the normal quantities
of gas.

The Neftochim refinery in Bourgas received gas at 12atm instead of the
normal 20atm pressure, while heat-supply companies across the country
experienced difficulties and were compelled to reduce heat supply to
customers.

Romanian, Ukrainian and Russian officials maintained there was no
interruptions or decreases of gas supplies, but industry minister
Kliment Vouchev pointed out that the pressure of Russian gas had
consistently been supplied at a reduced rate for several years during
the peak demand season.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "43"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

UKRAINE BEGINS RESTRUCTURING

Following the dismissal of coal minister Viktor Poltavets in November
(EEE 51/23), Ukraine has wasted no time in beginning the restructuring
of its coal industry.

On 21 December the ministry's board meeting under the new minister,
Sergei Polyakov, decided to create 26 state-owned joint stock companies
based on existing mining and ore processing facilities and to establish
three state-owned mine-building companies on the basis of existing
combines. Shares in the new companies will be issued to a value
equivalent to the cost of the property of the businesses involved.

At least 51% of the shares will be held by the coal ministry.
Incorporation of these new companies will be approved by the anti-
monopolies committee and the economics ministry. The new joint stock
companies will be able to sell their products and draw up their own
investment policies.

Polyakov noted that much still needed to be done and the downward trend
of production was continuing. Only 77.1mt of coal were produced in the
first 11 months of 1995 - 15.6mt less than target and 9.9mt less than
in the same period of 1994. A review has also begun of wages in an
attempt to defuse growing tension over late payments and low production
rates.
* Ukraine is to increase imports of coal from Poland this year in an
attempt to reduce the power of the Ukrainian miners, according to the
ministry of foreign economic and trade relations. The Lvov railway in
western Ukraine is being modernised to cope with the extra load. It
brings in around 200 wagons of Polish coal a day and in the first six
months of last year handled 5.3mt compared with 2mt for the whole of
1994. This year Ukraine's imports of Polish coal are expected to total
15mt.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "44"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

UKRAINE RECONNECTED TO RUSSIAN POWER GRID AFTER LEAK REPAIRS

Ukraine was reconnected to the Russian unified grid system on 18
December, two weeks after the link was severed by Moscow following a
surge in Ukrainian consumption due to the shutdown of Unit 1 at
Zaporozhye (EEE 51/24). On 3 January all six units at Zaporozhye were
operating for the first time since Unit 6 was commissioned last
October. Since then one or more of the reactors has been closed down
for routine maintenance or following an accident.

The disconnection on 4 December was caused by a leak of radioactive
steam. A remote controlled monitoring system has now been installed in
Unit 5 at the workstation of the ministry of environment and nuclear
safety. The system, was provided by the German environment ministry.
Reconnection to the Russian grid pushed current frequency up to 49.7Hz
in the day and 50Hz at night. It had dropped dangerously low to 49.2Hz
after disconnection. Ukraine's nuclear plants would all be
automatically disconnected if frequency drops below 49.15Hz.

Ukraine's other nuclear plants have also had problems. On 19 December
fire caused closure of Unit 1 at Khmelnitsky while Unit 3 at Rovno was
closed for maintenance on 28 December. Unit 3 at South Ukraine was
disconnected from the grid on 21 December due to a fault in the safety
control system and then had its capacity reduced on 1 January after
reconnection. The capacity of Units 1 and 2 had been reduced on 13
December following problems with the turbine cooling system.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "45"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

UKRAINE RADIOACTIVE LEAK UNDETECTED

A radioactive leak at a Ukrainian nuclear power station which
contaminated a small area within the plant remained undetected for
weeks, an official at the plant said on 5 January.

Duty officer Vyacheslav Kruglov from the Southern Ukraine power plant
said that authorities had discovered the leak in a steam pipe at the
station's third reactor on 3 January. The reactor was shut down and
contaminated topsoil over an area of about 30 square metres collected
and buried.

The incident at the station, 350km south of Kiev, ranked one on the
international seven-point scale. Regulatory agencies said there was no
danger to local residents or the environment. "The leak of radioactive
water took place in mid-December, but on January 3 we found it and
cleaned it up. There was a hole in the pipe - the joint was poorly
soldered and the pipe was old," Kruglov said.

An official from the government nuclear regulatory agency said the
incident gave no cause for concern. "Such things happen at nuclear
stations. It's no reason for the world to worry," said the official,
who declined to be named.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "46"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

POLES SET FOR ROWS OVER COAL PRICING

Poland's power generators have so far held off the mining companies'
demands for higher coal prices. In January, they are paying on the
basis of the much disputed "import equivalent" price of $32/t, written
into a long-term agreement signed towards the end of 1994. However, the
issue is far from settled and fresh arguments over the matter are
certain.

Essentially, the problem is that the mining companies assumed that the
zloty would continue to fall against the dollar, and that the agreement
would deliver ever higher zloty prices. The figure of $32/t was chosen
since it was reckoned that a higher price would enable the power
generators to import coal more cheaply; it was also reckoned, at the
time, to leave some profit for the coal miners.

The problems started towards the end of the third quarter last year,
when the effects of a firmer zloty, which had started to climb against
the dollar in the middle of last year, started to work through to the
pricing formula. The miners started asking for an average increase of
13% in coal prices (with some asking for up to 50%).

The power generators, meanwhile, want to stick to the long-term
agreement, especially as the electricity price increase scheduled for
this year is well below expected inflation. Of a planned rise of 14%,
the power generating industry will get just 9% - the rest being an
increase in value added tax - and inflation being forecast at 17% for
this year.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "47"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

BELCHATOW CONSIDERS EXPANSION

The Belchatow power station and the Belchatow lignite mine are in
discussions with Polish industry minister Klemens Scierski and deputy
industry minister Herbert Gabrys about whether to build two  370 MW
generating blocksat the site, and whether to start an open cast lignite
mine at Szczerow.

The case for the two blocks is that from 2003 onwards, each year, two
out of the 12 generating blocks at Belchatow (with a capacity of 360 MW
each) are due to be closed down for refurbishing. This would coincide
with a time when Poland's energy demands are expected to be rising, so
the loss of the two blocks could hinder growth. Furthermore, Poland's
power requirements would continue to rise after 2010, so the additional
740 MW of capacity would not go amiss.

The new lignite mine - with estimated reserves of 700mt - would ensure
the viability of Belchatow until 2060. Without it, the site would
probably run out of lignite in 2016. The financing of the project will
depend on signing long-term power sale contracts with the grid company
Polskie Sieci Elektroenergetyczne SA (PSE) at appropriate prices. It is
here that the proposed project could run into difficulties since PSE is
examining several tens of applications for long-term power sales.

If the new project were to go ahead, the two new generating blocks
would be owned by a separate company in which the existing Elekrownia
Belchatow would be a shareholder, along with a strategic investor; they
would be expected to arrange the financing, and would need the power
sales contract to guarantee bank borrowings. The industry ministry is
said to have received offers from a number of Polish and foreign
companies willing to take a stake in the new project.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "48"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

BULGARIA FORMULATES INVESTMENTS

The Bulgarian Committee on Power Engineering (CPE) has drafted an
investment programme for the period ending 1998 and presented it to the
government for approval. The programme is based on the government
strategy for the energy sector until 2020, approved late last year (EEE
50/9).

The total investments for this period planned by the CPE are 30% lower
than the ones provided for in the strategy (Lev31.362bn for 1996,
Lev29.75bn for 1997 and Lev21.797bn for 1998).

The CPE investment programme includes rehabilitating old units of the
Martisa Iztok 2 power engineering complex and the launch of Unit 8, as
well as the two units of the Chaira pump-storage water power system.
Investments to begin completing the second nuclear power plant in
Belene are also provided for. According to provisional estimates, the
investments required total $1.3bn.

CPE acting chairman Konstantin Roussinov says that in the past five
years investment in the sector (Lev7.5bn) has been at the expense of
reserves set aside earlier. If funds for building new capacities are
not increased, he warns, there will be a shortage of capacity in 1999,
and as early as 1998 there will be a shortage of electricity.

The situation is complicated by the unrealistically low amortisation
norms which were calculated on the basis of asset evaluation in 1992.
The sector is in danger of being completely decapitalised, Roussinov
warns. If the amortisation norms are raised, this could bring up to 30%
of the investments needed for the CPE programme with the rest financed
by government credits or subsidies, the official believes.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "49"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

KRASNOYARSK SENDS POWER TO MONGOLIA VIA NEW LINK

Electricity is now being supplied to Mongolia's western districts from
Krasnoyarsk through a new transmission line via the shortest route
which crosses the territory of Tuva.

"The Mongolians built approximately 200km of a 110 kv power
transmission line, from the town of Ulangom to the border with Russia,
and we added another 50km to the line," said Yuri Ushenin, senior staff
member at the centre. "It took a little over a year to do the whole
job. However the start of energy exports should bring considerable
benefits for the people of Krasnoyarsk".

On the domestic market, 1.3 cents is charged per kWh, whereas Mongolia
pays the Russians for electricity at the world price of five cents. The
difference enables the Krasnoyarsk authorities to keep down the charges
for electricity for their customers". At present Mongolia consumes only
2 MW of energy, but demand is increasing and in some two or three
months it intends to increase imports by some 50%, Ushenin added.
* The Sibirenergo grid is about to commission a new high-voltage
transmission line, according to Samuel Zilberman, Sibirenergo deputy
director-general. A substation has already begun operating on the Itat-
Barnaul power transmission line, as a first step towards accomplishing
the major task of transmitting Siberia's surplus power to districts
experiencing shortages, he explained. This will mean the wider use in
future of electricity from a chain of hydro plants on the Angara and
the Yenisei rivers and from heat-and-power stations of the Kansk-
Achinsk fuel-and-power complex. Zilberman said that in 1995 more than 7
TWh was lost because Siberia's hydro plants are not yet able to
transmit power to the districts most in need.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "50"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

RADET PLANS PIPE OVERHAUL

Bucharest heating utility Radet plans to invest Lev50bn this year in
the modernisation of its distribution system. The project, financed
with Lev40bn from Radet revenues and Lev10bn from the local government
budget, involves the replacement of battered pipes and the bringing
into service of new reservoirs.

By June the company hopes to have completed a Lev2.5bn upgrade of a
thermal plant supplying heat to the Bucharest Press Building. The plant
will be equipped with new meters and a computer system, Radet executive
Gheorghe Dabela said. The company also hopes to complete construction
of a pipeline from the Progresul plant to the Rahova area where many
householders are currently without heating facilities.

Also on Radet's schedule for 1995 is the modernisation of 25 thermal
stations, the installation of residential meters, and the replacement
of 1,000 heat exchangers and 100km of pipeline. The new pipes will be
fully insulated to cut down on heat loss during distribution. A more
extensive overhaul of its entire system, with potential financing from
the World Bank and the European Investment Bank (EIB), is currently
under consideration at Radet. According to Dabela, the EIB has
discussed the possibility of a loan up to $40m for the project which
would begin in 1997.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "51"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

UKRAINE RAISES PRICES

Retail gas prices for domestic users rose 34% in Ukraine from the start
of the year which means customers will now be paying 60% of the actual
cost of the gas. The retail price of coal was also increased by an
average of 24% while electricity charges rose 29% to Ker6,400/kWh in
urban areas and Ker6,000/kWh in rural districts.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "52"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

RUSSIA AWAITS IMF AGREEMENT

Talks between Russia and the International Monetary Fund are continuing
and will end on 31 January, a finance ministry official said on 19
January. "The talks are going on as you would expect," Anton Tolstikov,
deputy head of the ministry's international financial organisations
department, told Reuters. The IMF delegation currently visiting Moscow
is reviewing Moscow's performance under the existing $6.25bn standby
programme, whose last tranche is due to be paid out shortly, and also
negotiating a new three-year loan, likely to be $9bn.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "53"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

AZERI 1995 OUTPUT DOWN

Azeri crude oil output fell to 9.16mt in 1995 from 9.56mt in 1994,
Interfax news agency quoted the state oil company SOCAR as saying on 5
January. Natural gas production was 6.64bncm, up from 6.37bncm in 1994.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "54"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

UKRAINIAN OUTPUT DOWN ON 1994

Ukraine's natural gas and crude oil output in 1995 dipped slightly on
1994 levels, a spokesman for the state committee on oil and gas said.
Preliminary figures put gas output at 17.44bncm last year, down from
18.3bncm in 1994. Combined crude and gas condensate output was 3.94mt
in 1995, down from 4.2mt the year before.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "55"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

FRONTIER OPTIMISTIC ON POLISH CONCESSION

Frontier Oil Exploration said it had identified moveable oil at two
previously tested structures on its concession in the onshore Baltic
region of Poland. A firm has estimated that the Gladysze-1 site has
probable and possible reserves exceeding the company's minimum target
of 25mbbl. Frontier Oil said it plans to acquire additional drillsite-
specific seismic data and drill appraisal wells this year to test one
or both the Gladysze structures.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "56"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

CONCESSIONS IN POLAND LINED UP

Texaco, trading in Poland as Wielkopolska Energia SA, and Medusa Oil
and Gas, trading as Medusa Poland Spzoo, were likely to obtain oil and
gas exploration concessions in Poland. Texaco's concession was expected
to cover central Poland, while Medusa's was expected to be in the
Carpathian mountains in the south of the country. Elsewhere, the
director of Polish Oil and Gas' Geonafta geology division, Marek
Hoffmann, estimated that Poland's gas reserves were of the order of
150bncm.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "57"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

SOCAR GETS PIPELINE CONTROL

The Azeri government has authorised the transfer of control over the
country's oil and gas pipelines to state oil company SOCAR, the Turan
news agency reported earlier this month. It said the decree includes
the Azeri section of the Baku-Grozny pipeline which the international
consortium developing offshore fields plans to use to transport early
output of up to 70,000bbl/d late this year. The pipelines were formerly
owned by the state.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "58"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

LUKOIL CONSOLIDATES MOST SHARES

About 90% of shares in NK Lukoil subsidiaries had been consolidated
into shares in the parent company by 1 January, public affairs
executive director Alexander Vasilenko said. Lukoil began the process
of exchanging shares of subsidiaries for parent company shares last
year. Lukoil is considering placing up to 15% of its shares, worth
about $600m, on the London Stock Exchange or the New York Stock
Exchange, according to a published report. The Independent on Sunday
reported that Lukoil officials said the company was in talks with both
exchanges and expects to make a decision within the next few months.
Any listing would take place around the end of the year.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "59"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

SLOVENIAN COMPANY STARTS SHARE SALE

Slovenian petrol company Istrabenz commenced the sale of shares valued
at ST2.5bn ($19.8m) on 5 January. The sale is scheduled to last until 4
March and is open to individual and corporate investors from Slovenia
and abroad. The sale is part of the company's privatisation process in
which 39% of shares will be sold to employees, 47.7% to domestic and
foreign investors, while 13.3% will be retained by the state. Istrabenz
currently holds around 23% of the petrol retail market and manages a
network of outlets in a joint venture with OMV and had net profits of
$11.1m in 1994.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "60"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

FIRST HYDRO-TEXACO STATION IN LITHUANIA

Hydro-Texaco, the 50:50 joint venture oil marketing and development
company owned by Norsk Hydro and Texaco Scandinavia, has opened its
first filling station in Lithuania, Hydro-Texaco officials said. The
new station, along with a self service shop and restaurant, was opened
4 January outside Vilnius. Start-up costs were put at $1.6m. Hydro-
Texaco expects to see a return on its investment in six to seven years.
Hydro-Texaco plans to develop a network of 20 filling stations in
Lithuania, a company official said. The Lithuanian oil operation will
be supplied by Norsk Hydro affiliated refineries in Sweden and Denmark.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "61"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

RUSSIA REDUCES BELARUS PRICES

Gazprom has reduced gas prices to $50 per 1,000 cubic metres from $53,
the president of Belarus state company Beltopgaz Eduard Tofkinets said
earlier this month. Gazprom cut the price, which is linked to gas
transit through Belarus to central Europe, due to an increase in the
volume of gas being transported through the country and also because of
a customs union between the two countries, he said. "Thanks to
Gazprom's price cut and Beltopgaz's savings in transporting gas, the
government has decided to reduce gas prices for domestic consumers by
8.5% this month," he said. Tofkinets said Belarus owed Gazprom $562m as
of 1 January for gas imports.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "62"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

RUSSIAN COAL PRODUCTION FOR 1995 TOTALS 250.1MT

Coal producing companies belonging to the state-owned Rosugol coal
concern produced a total of 250.1mt last year, a decrease on the
259.7mt produced in 1994. Of the 1995 total 104.9mt came from
underground pits and 145.1mt from open-cast mines. The Kuzbass in
southwest Siberia was the biggest coal-producing region with 93.5mt.
The Pechora field in the Arctic produced 22.2mt and the Kansk-Achinsk
field in Siberia 30.6mt. Losses of over R13bn have been registered by
the Chelyabinskugol coal company in the Urals with production cut by
half to 1mt due to stoppages, payments problems and low morale due to
wage arrears.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "63"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

MAJOR RUSSIAN SHALE PRODUCER FACES CLOSURE

The Leningradslanets joint stock company, one of northwest Russia's
biggest shale producers has been unable to extend its contract with the
Baltic regional power plant in Estonia - its main customer - and is
facing closure. The company supplies shale in return for electricity.
Bureaucratic delays have prevented the signing of a new agreement to
replace the one which expired at the end of 1995. The entire population
of Slantsy in the Leningrad region depends on the mine for its
livelihood.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "64"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

US SUPPORT FOR ARMENIAN COAL INDUSTRY

The US Agency for International Development (USAID) is to provide
technical assistance of $3m to develop Armenia's coal fields. The
agreement, signed with the environment ministry is for the
establishment of an advanced laboratory for coal analysis and a
computer centre to help to assess Armenia's coal-production potential.
Geophysical and drilling equipment is to be supplied by the US
Geological Survey which will also train Armenian specialists. USAID
previously granted $1m to help to develop a coalfield at Dzhadzhur
(Leninakan) with proven reserves of 200,000t.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "65"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

RUSSIAN PLANT OPERATORS WARN OF PROTEST ACTION

Russia's nuclear power plant workers have threatened to shut down the
facilities unless they receive wages unpaid for three months. Energy
consumers owe the sector about R2,500bn ($555m), according to
Rosenergoatom officials. Despite these problems, there was an increase
in production last year, according to Rosenergoatom. Total production
was over 99 TWh compared with 97.8 TWh in 1994. However this is still
only 85% of the production figure for 1990. Russia's plants also
suffered fewer incidents in 1995 with only four rated on the
International Nuclear Events scale compared with 13 in 1994.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "66"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

OBJECTIONS TO RUSSIA'S FAR EAST NUCLEAR PLANT

The governor of Russia's far east Maritime Territory, Yevgeny
Nazdratenko, has described a Russian-Canadian project to build a
nuclear plant in the area as hasty and ill-considered (EEE 50/29).
"Before passing judgement on such a project, our government should
carry out a referendum to learn whether our residents want this plant
or not," he says "The time has passed when economic projects could be
imposed upon regions without the consent of their population".
Nazdratenko says it would be better to allocate funds for the
completion of the Bureiskaya hydro plant in the Amur region



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "67"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

CERNAVODA EXPECTED TO START THIS MONTH

Romania's first nuclear reactor at Cernavoda, beset by delays in recent
months, is expected to become operational this month, the country's
finance minister said earlier this month. However, Florin Georgescu did
not elaborate on when the plant, being built by AECL and Ansaldo Spa,
would actually supply power to the grid. A senior Renel official said
recently that he expected it to be connected by mid 1996, some six
months behind schedule.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "68"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

CZECH DRAFT LAW ON NUCLEAR TAX

On 3 January the Czech cabinet approved a law on nuclear energy and ion
radiation that would tax nuclear power plants, industry minister
Vladimir Dlouhy said. According to the law, which has to be approved by
parliament, every nuclear energy producer would have to pay a special
fee to the finance ministry. The money is to be used to build a waste
storage facility. Dlouhy said he expects annual revenues of around
K600m and added he did not expect energy costs to rise by any more than
three or four percent because of the law which should become
operational at the start of next year.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "69"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

IGNALINA PLANT IN FINANCIAL TROUBLES

Unit 2 at Lithuania's Ignalina plant was closed down on 7 January
following an inspection which identified a leak in the cooling water.
The plant is also facing problems following the suspension of operation
by the Lithuanian Joint Stock Innovation Bank (LAIB). Staff salaries
are being paid late and payments from customers are also delayed, but
normal operation of the plant will not be affected, says plant director
Viktor Shevaldin. There had been fears that fuel supplies would be
affected as the plant used LAIB to transfer payment. However the
government has made funds available and the plant has enough fuel until
the end of January.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "70"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

POWER PRODUCTION DOWN AT ARMENIAN NUCLEAR PLANT

Armenia's nuclear power plant in Metsamor, which began operating again
in October after being mothballed for six years, is being forced to
work at low capacity because of the instability of the power
distribution system, according to plant director Suren Azatyan. He said
the plant's Unit 2 could increase its capacity from the present level
of 310 MW to 376 MW only if the power distribution system is stable and
reliable, but present fluctuations make it impossible.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "71"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

NO POWER CUTS FOR BULGARIA

Bulgaria's National Electricity Company vowed it would not allow any
power cuts and shortages this winter. According to NEC acting chairman,
Trifon Tsvetkov, the country has sufficient generating capacities in
coal, gas and nuclear fuels to prevent the cuts. At a press conference,
Tsvetkov told journalists that electricity consumption in 1995 was up
12% compared to 1994 levels. The NEC is expected to have finished the
1995 financial year with a loss of Lev2bn instead of the projected
Lev9bn. But this was achieved by saving some expenditure on repair
works on generating capacities which will have to be dealt with this
year.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "72"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

BULGARIA TO SET UP AN INSURANCE POOL

The Bulgarian Committee on Power Engineering (CPE) is planning to set up
a pool of insurance companies to cover the energy sector, according to
Roument Ovcharov, deputy head of the CPE. In particular, the pool will
cover civil liabilities in case of an accident with nuclear
installations. Setting up such an insurance institution was one of the
requirements of the Vienna Convention, Ovcharov said. CPE chairman,
Konstantin Roussinov, has informed the government of its intentions and
has contacted several institutions including the State Insurance
Institute, the specialised Energy insurance company and two private
insurers. The National Electricity Company holds a 50% stake in Energy.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "73"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

SERBIAN ELECTRICITY UP IN 1995

The Serbian electricity supply company, EPS, said it produced 33.6 TWh
of electricity last year, an increase of 6.6% over 1994 levels, Tanjug
news agency reported on 4 January quoting a statement by the company's
management board.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "74"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

SWISS AGREEMENT FOR UKRAINE

Ukraine and Switzerland have signed an inter-governmental agreement on
Swiss financial assistance for Ukrainian hydro plants. SFr40m was made
available under the agreement to help upgrade plants and implement
reforms.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "75"></A>Copyright
EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
January 22, 1996

SLOVAK DESULPHURISATION DELAY

The installation of desulphurisation equipment at the Novaky power
plant in Slovakia is running behind schedule with a new target date of
June 1997 instead of early this year. Delays have been caused because
of technical problems according to a company spokesman as well as
increased costs.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B34-10</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B030-80</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey92.html 205.156.212.5 19970114230327 text/html 96751
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:00:48 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:29 GMT
Content-length: 96564
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ey92.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet <BR>
January 24, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>AUTO-OIL STRAIN BEGINS TO SHOW</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1541 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>ALL EYES ON BOLOGNA FOR POWER PROGRESS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(532 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>EU LOOKS EAST TO SECURE OIL AND GAS SUPPLIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1317 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>ENERGY WHITE PAPER TAKES PRAGMATIC APPROACH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2133 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PUBLICATIONS REVIEW</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>VISIONS OF THE ENERGY FUTURE IN 2020</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(996 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>NEW R&D CALL LAUNCHED FOR RENEWABLES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(403 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>BRUSSELS UPDATES NOTIFICATION RULES FOR COMMUNITY ENERGY INVESTMENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(590 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>GAS TRANSIT BODY SET UP AFTER YEARS OF DELAY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(216 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>CHERNOBYL CLOSURE DEAL SIGNED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(380 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>COMMISSION APPROVES DUTCH ENERGY TAX LEGISLATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(175 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>RECHAR II BOOSTS COAL REGENERATION IN FRANCE/GERMANY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(220 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>ITALY PROMISES TO PUSH ON IEM AND ENERGY NETWORKS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(446 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>MINISTERS EXTEND EIA RULES TO NUCLEAR REPROCESSING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(231 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>MINISTERS BALANCE BUDGET ON R&D FUNDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(165 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>MEPS PUSH FOR NUCLEAR SAFETY GUARANTEES IN FREE TRADE DEAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(265 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>DEBATE ON JET R&D PROGRAMME PUT OFF UNTIL FEBRUARY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(267 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>EIB FUNDS TRANSMISSION PROJECTS IN GREECE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(213 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>BOOST FOR HYDRO-ELECTRIC AND WIND POWER IN SPAIN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(115 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>EIB LOANS IMPROVE AIR QUALITY IN THE UK AND CZECH REPUBLIC</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(196 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>EU FOSTERS ENERGY LINKS WITH PAKISTAN AND CHINA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(209 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>EUROGAS CALLS FOR WITHDRAWAL OF COMMISSION'S IRP PROPOSAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(230 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>NEW COAL BODY EURISCOAL WELCOMES ENERGY WHITE PAPER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(221 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>FRENCH DISTRIBUTORS PUSH TO SHOP AROUND FOR POWER SUPPLIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(378 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>EIA DIRECTIVE CALLED INTO FRAY OVER UK NUCLEAR WASTE PLANS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(253 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>LARGE USERS THREATEN EC ACTION OVER PROPOSED GAS LEVY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(337 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>ENERGY LOBBYISTS BREATHE EASY OVER REGULATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(115 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>UK INDUSTRY BACKS NATURAL GAS VEHICLES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(114 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>EDF/EDISON FINALISE ISE TAKEOVER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(98 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>EU SIGNS AGREEMENTS WITH THREE BLACK SEA COUNTRIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(106 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>COMMISSION VETS BP/SONATRACH DEAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(67 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>FIRST R&D FUNDS RELEASED FOR CLIMATE STUDIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(99 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>EU SCIENTISTS APPEAL FOR MORE ENERGY RESEARCH FUNDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(121 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>GREECE TENDERS SIX OIL CONCESSIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(134 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#34"><LI>SAUDI ARABIA URGES EU TO SCRAP ENERGY TAXES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(120 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#35"><LI>NO EIA NEEDED FOR LUDMIN WASTE STORE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(81 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#36"><LI>GO-AHEAD FOR ARGENTINE NUCLEAR DEAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(52 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#37"><LI>EU/MOROCCO PLAN ENERGY COOPERATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(80 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PUBLICATIONS REVIEW</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#38"><LI>BRUSSELS TACKLES GREEN TRANSPORT COSTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(110 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#39"><LI>ELEKTROWATT/LANDIS TAKEOVER SCRUTINISED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(50 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

AUTO-OIL STRAIN BEGINS TO SHOW

Relations between the oil and car industries and the Commission are
becoming increasingly strained as Brussels prepares its auto-oil
legislation.

The three parties, who collaborated together in the two-year auto-oil
programme to discover the most cost-effective means of improving air
quality, are due to meet tomorrow to discuss how the programme's
findings should be translated into legislation.

While accepting the need to control emissions of particulates and ozone
precursors from road transport, as well as urban NOx, the two
industries are concerned that the principle of cost-effectiveness is
being threatened by growing political pressure to act on air quality.
They believe that the measures being considered by Brussels to cut
vehicle emissions after the year 2000 are too ambitious and could
result in unacceptable costs for both industries.

Commission officials counter by saying that the results of the auto-oil
programme are only one of a series of factors that must take into
account when the actual legislation is drafted.

The auto-oil programme was set up in 1993 to investigate what needed to
be done to reduce levels of urban carbon monoxide (CO), NOx, benzene,
particulates and the regional problem of tropospheric ozone from road
traffic by the year 2010. The oil and car industries collaborated
together for the first time to study the impact of vehicle technologies
and fuel quality on reducing all emissions, while the Commission
examined the air quality of seven representative European cities - The
Hague, Cologne, London, Lyon, Madrid, Milan and Athens.

When the results were examined, it became clear that NOx, and latterly
particulates and ozone precursors, would cause the main problems,
whereas existing legislation could keep CO and benzene below acceptable
levels by 2010 (ECE 81/2).

In its initial calculations, the Commission worked out that the NOx
problem in four of the cities, The Hague, Cologne, London and Lyon,
could be solved by technical changes to heavy goods vehicles (HGV) and
light commercial vehicles (LCV) - cost-effective as they were low in
number but high emitters - along with improved inspection and
maintenance procedures. No changes were needed to fuel quality, and
local non-technical measures, such as road pricing and cheaper public
transport, were also not necessary.

While this strategy, known as the `Lyon' package, imposed costs on the
vehicle industry but left the oil industry relatively unscathed,
vehicle manufacturers were relieved that it excluded measures on
passenger cars. Overall, implementing the Lyon package would cost
industry Ecu 1.647bn a year over fifteen years.

But the problem with this package, for the Commission, is that it did
not solve the urban NOx problem in Madrid, Milan and particularly
Athens, where emissions needed to be cut by 55% from 1990 levels by
2010. According to Commission calculations, even if the maximum number
of local non-technical measures were added to the Lyon package, the
problem of NOx would still not be solved in the three cities. As each
city was chosen as representative in terms of geographical location and
vehicle fleet, this would mean that a substantial number of Europe's
cities would fail to curb NOx emissions by the required amount.

Indeed, such was the problem in Athens that even the maximum technical
changes to vehicles and fuels - the `best available technology'
solution - which would cost industry Ecu 9.6bn a year over 15 years,
plus the maximum amount of non-technical measures, would still not
solve the city's NOx problem. This is mainly due to the age of the
vehicle fleet, and the fact that by 2010 a large number of cars will
still not have catalytic converters.

Therefore, the Commission is arguing that tighter NOx standards need to
be imposed at European level to ensure that, when the full range of
local non-technical measures are added, Milan and Madrid at least are
able to meet future air quality targets (in Athens, some parts of the
city centre may have to be closed to traffic entirely in order to hit
the mark).

In the Commission's view, the need for these tighter standards is
reinforced by the need also to control emissions of particulates and
ozone precursors, such as overall NOx and volatile organic compounds
(VOCs).

While curbing particulates and ozone precursors has been an aim of the
programme from the beginning, analysing the results of both pollutants
was complicated by a lack of data and the absence of a clearly-
identified international reduction target.

Recent evidence, however, has increasingly underlined the threat of
particulates - particularly PM10s, tiny particles of dust less than 10
microns in diameter emitted by diesel exhausts - and tried to quantify
their danger to human health. In the UK, recent research by the Expert
Panel on Air Quality Standards (EPAQS) recommended a standard of 50
micrograms per cubic metre as a 24-hour average for PM10s, and this is
presently being examined by a Brussels committee to see if it is
acceptable as a European standard.

At present, the maximum daily mean value for PM10s in many European
cities is 100-150 micrograms/m3, meaning that in some cases reductions
of 50-66% would be needed to meet this new target. This could not be
met by just the Lyon package.

For ozone, existing legislation will cut levels significantly by 2010,
but the impact of additional measures will be small, as over the next
15 years the contribution of road traffic to NOx and VOCs will
decrease, compared to that from stationary sources. This may put
pressure on the Commission to set more stringent standards for power
station emissions during its ongoing review of the Large Combustion
Plant (LCP).

Nevertheless, in order to get the maximum hourly ozone levels down to
below 180 micrograms/m3 - the target set in directive 92/72/EEC on
ozone pollution - the Commission believes that all sources of NOx and
VOCs need to be cut by 70-80% on 1990 levels.

Consequently, more stringent measures than the Lyon package are being
considered at a European-wide level, which look set to bump up the
total cost of the package from Ecu1.6bn to nearer Ecu4-6bn a year over
the same period.

Three-quarters of the cost of the final package is still likely to fall
on the vehicle industry. The package will contain all the elements of
the Lyon package, but is also likely to necessitate technical changes
to passenger cars, not just HGVs and LCVs. Depending on the severity of
the measures, this could increase the manufacturing price per gasoline
vehicle by between Ecu42.7-Ecu340. In addition, member states may be
encouraged to introduce fiscal incentives to encourage further
improvements in vehicle technology from 2005.

But the oil industry will not escape unscathed. It will have to improve
fuel quality, particularly diesel to reduce particulates, but also, and
more expensively, gasoline. On present calculations, however, the oil
industry is likely to get away with the least stringent fuel
improvement package, which would cost it Ecu9.4bn for gasoline, and
Ecu5.2bn for diesel - a total of Ecu14.6bn over 15 years. Some costs
will also fall on national administrations for improved inspection and
maintenance procedures.

But car and oil industries are not prepared to accept this without a
fight. Both argue that the Lyon package would meet NOx emissions in 90%
of European cities - the Commission says 75% - and represents the
maximum technical changes that should be imposed at a European level,
with the gaps closed by local measures.

"There is no reason to impose Europe-wide more [stringent standards]
than what is needed by France, even for Italy and Spain", says Carlo
Cucchi of the European Automobile Manufacturers Association (ACEA).

To do this would violate the cost-effectiveness principle of the auto-
oil programme. "The Commission's ambition is to reach the best possible
level of air quality. It should not be to make industry spend as much
money as possible in order to fulfil political ambitions", said ACEA in
a statement last month. NOx reduction measures would reduce
particulates by 50%, while for ozone the solution should take into
account stationary as well as mobile sources, says ACEA.

Even though figures suggest that the most stringent measures would add
only 3-5% to the present purchase price of vehicles (excluding tax),
car manufacturers worry that consumers will refuse these higher prices,
and say that absorbing them would wipe out profit margins.

The oil industry is similarly concerned. While believing it is not
necessary to go further than the Lyon package to control NOx, oil
industry association Europia says it is prepared to discuss further
measures for particulates and ozone. But they must be cost-effective;
the oil industry "will not accept an invalid and politically-driven
solution", says Europia's Michel Flohic.

Inevitable divisions within the Commission are also complicating
matters. Environment directorate DGXI is pushing for high European-wide
standards plus later fiscal incentives to tackle air quality, while
industry directorate DGIII is concerned that political pressure from
the European Parliament and the Council could fold such a two-step
approach into one, imposing unacceptably high standards on industry. In
turn, energy directorate DGXVII, concerned about the impact on the
already-beleaguered oil refining industry, is asking for more cost-
effective research on the fuel quality proposals.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

ALL EYES ON BOLOGNA FOR POWER PROGRESS

The Italian presidency is waiting to test the water at the informal
energy council meeting at Bologna early next month before deciding what
should be done to push forward on the vexed issue of electricity
liberalisation.

Meeting today with Energy Commissioner Christos Papoutsis, Italy's
industry minister Alberto Clo said that it was not realistic at the
present time to push for a special meeting of energy ministers to solve
the liberalisation issue ahead of the scheduled Energy Council on 7
May, said a Commission official. Clo has recently held meetings with
both the French and German governments.

The option of a special ministerial meeting was pushed by Papoutsis at
the end of last year when the 20 December Energy Council made no
progress on the issue, due largely to domestic political problems in
France (ECE 84/1). It was supported by a majority of member states, but
France and Greece had reservations.

That no progress was made at the December Council came little surprise.
Political problems in France left the government with no room to
manoeuvre on distributor access - the key sticking point in the
negotiations. France is refusing to allow distributors to shop around
for their power under the new rules, while liberalisers, such as
Germany and the UK are insisting on distributor access to ensure fair
competition.

Some observers even feared that the situation had worsened, as France,
backed by Greece, took the opportunity to issue a unilateral
declaration that it considered energy to be a public service, angering
German officials who then reiterated the need for greater opening of
energy markets and more competition.

Only Presidency conclusions were issued from the meeting, but these at
least were upbeat, saying that negotiations had reached a final stage
and that adopting a common position should be possible at the next
Council meeting.

The issue will now be discussed informally over lunch in Bologna, and
Rome will then decide how to take matters forward. The Italians face an
awkward juggling act, however, in coming up with a compromise that all
parties can accept.

Papoutsis, along with the liberalisers, would find it hard to endorse
any weakening of the Spanish compromise, which would be roundly opposed
by other Commission members, notably Competition Commissioner Karel Van
Miert.

And while French Industry minister Franck Borotra recently told the
press that a directive is needed as soon as possible, he warned "there
is no way that we will step back from our position which is based on
the single buyer ... the monopoly of transport and distribution belongs
to the state".

* Meanwhile ministers did come to a common position on 20 December, as
predicted, on efficiency standards for fridges and freezers. Ministers
proposed that three years after the adoption of the directive, such
appliances must have improved their efficiency by15%. A year later,
more stringent standards would then come into effect. This result is
tougher than the Commission's proposal, but falls short of the more
stringent measures pushed for by Strasbourg (ECE 84/2). According to
Papoutsis, the 15% improvement in energy efficiency will result in
savings equivalent to the total electricity generation of Greece by
2020.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

EU LOOKS EAST TO SECURE OIL AND GAS SUPPLIES

The increasing importance of the Black Sea region as a key transit area
for energy supplies flowing westwards into Europe was recognised by the
EU last month with the official inauguration of the Black Sea Regional
Energy Centre (BSREC) in Bulgaria.

Opened by Energy Commissioner Christos Papoutsis and Bulgarian Prime
Minister Zhan Videnov on 18 December in Sofia, the Centre aims to
coordinate the energy sector activities of the 11 member countries*
surrounding the Black Sea and to act as a focal point for EU, foreign
and local energy investment to the region.

"The establishment of the Centre has been the first region-wide
initiative of the European Commission in the Black Sea region. I
believe it is an important step for future cooperation in the energy
sector between the countries of the European Union and those of the
Black Sea region," Papoutsis said at the inauguration.

The increasing value of the Black Sea region for the EU into the next
century was further strengthened with the announcement by Papoutsis of
two fast-track measures to "pave the way for real progress on energy
issues in the region".

One is the creation of a Balkans Energy Interconnections Task Force
which will use the Centre to study oil and electricity interconnections
in the Balkans, and the "pivotal role" they play in the energy
interconnections between Asia and Europe. Funding for the Task Force is
expected to total Ecu0.5m, the bulk of which will come from a new
allocation of Synergy funds.

As Papoutsis put it, the Black Sea region is "the most important area
regarding the transport and trading of oil, natural gas and
electricity", and one which the EU hopes will be transformed into "the
energy highway between east and west".

Papoutsis also announced that a Ministerial meeting will be held in
spring-1997, at which five energy-related issues will be discussed and
"translated into policy statements".

These comprise: the need for adopting the interim or final results of
the Balkans Energy Interconnections Task Force; the increasing
importance of the Black Sea and the Balkan region for oil and gas
transit from the Caspian Sea to the EU; the economic problems of the
Black Sea region, particularly those relating to energy allocation and
pricing; the potential for a systematic implementation of the European
Energy Charter and Treaty; and the need to maintain and deepen
political and economic goodwill between the EU and the Black Sea
countries.

The role of land-locked Azerbaijan and Black Sea transit countries to
the west looks set to become particularly important to the EU, as
Western oil companies vie to exploit the extensive energy reserves in
the Azeri part of the Caspian Sea for west European markets.

The need for energy-sector cooperation was agreed by the 11 members of
the Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC) in June 1992. A declaration
of intent formally establishing the Centre was signed in September
1994, following an energy conference on the Black Sea region held by
energy directorate DGXVII at Chalkidiki in Greece in May 1994.

All 11 members of BSEC signed up to the Centre with the European
Commission acting as a twelfth member. It was agreed that Bulgaria
would host the Centre for a preliminary period of three years and that,
as a compromise, Romania would assume chairmanship of the biannual
steering committee - the chair will subsequently be allocated in
alphabetical order. The Centre's initial work programme for 1995 was
adopted at the first steering committee meeting in Sofia on 24 February
1995 (ECE 75/11).

EU cooperation

The Centre has five main aims in its role as a focal point for energy-
centre activities to develop cooperation between the Black Sea region
countries and the EU:

* to promote energy policy applications and market reform with
reference to the European Energy Charter;

* to promote investment in the energy sector of the Black Sea region
and promote funding opportunities and joint ventures;

* to provide the energy sector of the Black Sea region with easy access
to EU institutions and vice-versa;

* to become the home of Black Sea region initiatives by social partners
who want to link up with their European counterparts;

* to provide coordination services on request for the EU's Synergy,
Phare and Tacis programmes.

The EU is backing the Centre by providing financial assistance of
Ecu2.5m towards start-up and operating costs for a preliminary 2-3
years via three funding programmes: Ecu1m from Synergy, Ecu1m from
Phare and Ecu0.5m from Tacis.

All three programmes - together with the energy demonstration programme
Thermie - are using the Centre as a base from which to coordinate
funding and attract multinational investment from financing
institutions such as the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD), the European Investment Bank (EIB), foreign and
local banks and private enterprise. The European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) is also being tapped for
technical assistance.

To date, only part of the Centre's 1995 work programme is up and
running (see table). Three of the four planned 2-day workshops were
held towards the end of 1995 (ECE 81/11), while work is in progress for
the remaining projects. According to a spokesman, proposals for the
1996 work programme have been submitted to Phare and Tacis for
negotiation and are in the process of being approved.

Energy Charter Treaty

In addition to promoting energy policy applications and market reform,
the EU hopes the Centre will facilitate "producer/consumer dialogue" in
line with the objectives of the European Energy Charter Treaty.

So far, all BSREC countries have signed the Treaty and its associated
provisions, which provide a framework for energy trade, cooperation,
investment and joint ventures in the Black Sea region, where no
legislative support exists. The 11 members were urged by Papoutsis in
December to ratify the Treaty as soon as possible.

"Concerns over security of supply, environmental protection and
increased trade in a competitive framework are shared by all countries.
The implementation of the European Energy Charter Treaty can create the
conditions for improved energy trade and cooperation in the region," a
Commission spokesman said in Sofia.

Regional stability

Aside from energy, the hope is that the Centre will also be a valuable
means of strengthening stability and promoting peace and prosperity in
a region characterised by political turbulence.

"We deeply believe that energy, apart from the specific benefits, can
also act as an important catalyst for political and economic
cooperation and stability," Papoutsis said in December.

For Bulgaria especially, the Centre marks a firm step towards future
accession to the European Union, in which energy constitutes a
strategic factor.

"We have declared our readiness to work for the future of united Europe
step in this direction," Bulgarian prime minister Zhan Videnov declared
at the inauguration.

* The 12 members of BSREC are: the European Commission, Albania,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Georgia, Greece, Moldova, Romania,
Russia, Turkey and Ukraine.

Project title                           EC programme

1. Energy action plan for the
Black Sea countries                     Synergy
2. Energy efficient technologies
for the hotel sector                    Thermie
3. Study on the electrical interconnection
of the Caucasus countries and Turkey    Tacis
4. Workshop: Recent market reforms
and prospects*                          Synergy
5. Workshop: Financing energy efficiency
projects*                               Synergy
6. Workshop: Energy pricing policies
and their impact*                       Synergy
7. Workshop: Energy sector surveys      Synergy
8. The European Energy Charter Treaty
and energy sector development*          Synergy
9. Major project: Energy and the
environment in the west coast of the
Black Sea                               Phare
10. Seminar: Implementing the Energy
Charter principles on transit and
market reform                           Phare
11. Seminar: Market reforms in the gas
and electricity sectors, forming
overall energy policy                   Phare
12. Legal and institutional framework
promoting inter-state energy trade
and hydrocarbon transport networks      Tacis

* completed during 1995.

Source: BSREC



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

ENERGY WHITE PAPER TAKES PRAGMATIC APPROACH

The increasing integration of the Community calls for a set of common
energy aims, defined at Community level, to ensure that member states
do not pursue conflicting energy policies, and that national energy
policies tally with the wider, overall objectives of Union economic
policy.

This is the main conclusion of the Commission's white paper on energy
policy, approved by Brussels in December. Brussels argues that common
energy aims are increasingly important due to the Community's growing
dependence on energy imports, and because the energy sector is subject
to crises which necessitate the need for flexible and consistent
collective action.

As a first move towards defining common energy aims, the Commission
advocates a three step process - setting up a programme to monitor
energy trends, thereby ensuring that all energy policy decisions are
made on the basis of shared analysis; establishing how such cooperation
would work in practice; and setting up an Energy Consultative
Committee, consisting of key players in the energy sector, in order to
debate the various ideas.

But the white paper is pragmatic as to how this common policy is
implemented. Aware that member states are unlikely to endorse a new
range of energy powers in the Treaty, the Commission sets out a five-
year energy work programme which can be implemented under existing
treaty instruments, highlighting those areas where policies at EC level
can promote the key aims of security of supply, competitiveness and
environmental protection. The programme, to be updated every two years,
consists of a mixture of already-proposed and new legislation.

Delays energy chapter debate

The Commission is careful to stress that actions at Community level
should only be taken "if they bring added value". The paper makes it
clear, however, that while the Commission has a large number of
instruments in the energy sector, there are considerable gaps that
could hamper energy policy development.

But it leaves the controversial issue of whether energy needs its own
chapter in the Treaty - and thereby stronger legal powers - to a later
report, to be issued before the start of the InterGovernmental
Conference in March.

The energy work programme is based on four main policy areas - market
integration, managing external dependency, promoting sustainable
development, and supporting energy research and technology.

Energy liberalisation

The most important element in market integration is the long-awaited
liberalisation of the electricity and gas markets, which the Commission
believes will benefit energy consumers by lowering prices. Where public
service obligations allow an opt-out from competition "it will be of
prime importance to ensure their full transparency", and the paper
suggests that "general criteria" may need to be established to judge
such cases.

Liberalised electricity and gas markets will also need to be closely
monitored to ensure that the market is working properly, that different
national systems offer comparable market access, independent generators
get a fair deal and national electricity and gas regulators cooperate
with each other. To ensure this, the Commission proposes using existing
legislation which requires member states to notify Brussels of
investments, imports and exports, in order to set up a data base
networked between administrations.

Much to the delight of the oil industry, who originally suggested it
via oil industry association Europia, the Commission will also develop
energy impact assessments, to ensure that policy decisions in other
sectors, such as environment, social and fiscal fields, are not
damaging to energy sector investments. The Commission will also draft
guidelines to support energy network projects at a pan-European level
which have a Community interest.

Brussels also plans, via two Commission decisions this year, to ensure
that overall energy policy aims are fully taken into account when the
Community sanctions energy sector loans from the European Investment
Bank, and the Cohesion fund.

Still on investments, there is a ray of hope for the oil refining
industry, whose viability has recently been affected by overcapacity.
The Commission is worried that if the refinery market starts to
contract - which is already happening with the recently-announced
cutbacks from BP - the Community could be short of oil products in a
crisis situation. The paper comments "the Community needs to keep this
situation under review and, wherever possible, ensure that the
regulatory regime it imposes on this sector, does not further
jeopardise its competitive position." With this in mind, DGXVII has
been critical of fuel quality measures proposed under the auto-oil
legislation (see page one).

Elsewhere, more work also needs to be done on compiling standards for
energy products to ensure that they meet quality and safety
requirements. This is particularly the case for energy efficiency,
where various national measures, not copied by other member states,
have become barriers to trade. This year the Commission will propose
that energy efficiency becomes an essential requirement in new and
existing directives on energy consuming equipment. An energy working
group under standardisation bodies CEN and CENELEC will also be set up
to look at the scope for further standards to promote energy
efficiency, renewables and energy transportation.

Managing external dependency

Measures in this area are grouped under three headings - crisis
measures, diversification and developing international relations.

While there is presently no need for new oil crisis rules, the
Commission believes that the existing legislation on oil stocks and
their management, which dates from the late 1960s and 1970s, needs to
be updated in the light of the new Union members and the various new
treaties. At present there are no gas crisis measures, but the
Commission made it clear in its recent communication on gas security
(ECE 82/1) that something needs to be put in place. The white paper,
however, confines itself to merely continuing to study the issue.
Communications on both sectors, and possible proposals for oil, are
planned for next year.

This year the Commission plans to improve the rules governing the
supply of nuclear materials into Europe. Efforts will be made in soon-
to-be-negotiated nuclear trade agreements with Russia and other CIS
countries to guard against an influx of nuclear materials at low
prices. There are also plans to strengthen chapter six of the Euratom
treaty which obliges all member states to notify nuclear supply deals
to the Euratom Supply Agency.

Under diversification, the Commission treads carefully, aware that any
attempts to define the fuel mix would be fiercely resisted by member
states. The paper restricts itself to commenting that diversification
will be improved when the internal energy market comes into effect, and
proposes the repeal of a 1970s directive restricting the use of fuel
oil for electricity generation, saying this would give generators more
flexibility.

The Commission is upbeat about the future of coal, saying that in the
next decade an important share of domestic coal in the Community will
be competitive, and stressing the importance of developing new clean
coal technology. A new proposal on developing such technology is due
this year, along with one on maintaining the relevant parts of the ECSC
treaty when it expires in 2002.

Nuclear should remain

On nuclear, the Commission acknowledges the problem of public
acceptance, but stresses that nuclear should remain part of the fuel
choice. At some point, the Commission will submit a proposal to promote
the signing of the IAEA international convention on the safe management
of radioactive wastes, and is planning an action plan to tackle the
whole issue of nuclear waste, including research. Next year there may
also be a proposal to harmonise the conditions under which radioactive
substances are transported as well as a communication on nuclear
standardisation. The paper also reiterates support for nuclear fusion
and reprocessing, and promises that the long-awaited indicative nuclear
programme (known as the PINC by its French acronym) will be released
this year.

A whole raft of measures are planned to beef up energy's role in
international relations, in the light of the Community's growing
dependence on energy imports. Aside from pushing the ratification of
the Energy Charter Treaty, and the signing of Charter Treaty number
two, the Commission plans to issue a communication and proposals this
year to strengthen the Community's role in the International Energy
Agency (IEA), allowing EC members to develop common positions on energy
issues when particular Community interests are at stake.

There will also be proposals starting next year to ensure that energy
issues get funding in the various external financial instruments for
cooperation and assistance that the Community signs with other
countries. This will be followed in 1998 by a proposal on security of
investments, to be studied with the financial institutions, member
states and industry. In the meantime, the Commission plans to push
ahead with new nuclear agreements on trade and R&D.

Further strengthening energy cooperation with other countries, the
Commission plans to create a Euro-Mediterranean Forum to identify
priorities for investment in the region, and will next year produce a
strategy for energy cooperation with Asia, and the ALURE programme for
energy cooperation with Latin America. The paper also stresses that
every effort must be made to relaunch negotiations for a Free Trade
Agreement with the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC),
which foundered mainly on the GCC opposition to the proposed carbon-
energy tax.

Upgrading the energy sector will also play an important part in
preparing the eastern European countries for joining the Community, and
money could be available from the Save and ALTENER programmes for this.

Sustainable development

Here the paper talks about the contribution of fiscal measures, energy
efficiency and renewables.

The Commission stresses the importance of internalising external costs,
as highlighted in the white paper on Growth, Competitiveness and
Employment. While many such costs have already been reduced via
emission limits, voluntary agreements and civil liability the paper
comments that "where necessary, further consideration should be given
to the introduction of economic instruments", to ensure that the
polluter pays. This, however, should always be balanced by a cost-
benefit analysis.

But while internalising external costs is the Commission's "preferred
option", attempts to actually impose fiscal instruments, such as the
proposed carbon-energy tax, have run into all sorts of technical,
practical and political problems.

Consequently, the paper notes that "other instruments need to be
considered". These include voluntary agreements with industry, a policy
option which has become increasingly attractive to the Commission over
the past year and which will be the subject of a forthcoming
communication; voluntary industrial audits; and an increasing role for
standardisation bodies. To be acceptable at European level, voluntary
agreements "must be fair, give an economic advantage to participating
firms, reliable, representative of the entire sector involved,
compatible with competition results and it must be possible to monitor
their results".

On energy efficiency, the Commission intends to push ahead with
existing measures, such as the proposal on integrated resource planning
and the Save 2 programme, but will also introduce new proposals. This
year, Brussels plans to push for international agreements to harmonise
the energy consumption of various technologies, using the internal
market argument that it will prevent distortions of competition. In
addition, it will examine whether existing rules that allow member
states to apply for exemptions in excise duties for developing
environmentally-friendly products (directive 92/81/EEC) are sufficient.
Next year, there will be a communication setting out a strategy for
promoting co-generation. In 1998, the Commission plans to review the
whole issue of taxation policy and energy efficiency.

Renewables, notes the paper, will constitute the main long-term
sustainable energy source. In addition to plans for a follow up to the
Altener programme, there will be communications on both renewables
policy and the role they can play in regions and urban areas.

Three of the measures in the five year plan involve the results of the
auto-oil programme - the communication on the programme itself, and the
planned directives on fuel quality and vehicle emissions. A further
two, the framework directive on air quality and the proposed emission
limits for liquid fuels, are linked to this initiative.

Energy technology and research

The Commission intends to publish proposals this year for the fifth R&D
programme, to replace the current fourth R&D programme when it finishes
in 1998. There are also plans to set up new task forces to strengthen
links between energy and other technologies which could be useful. As
the old OPETs (Organisations for the Promotion of Energy Technology),
which disseminated information no longer exist due to the stalemate
over Thermie 2 funds, the Commission will this year propose a new, much
smaller energy dissemination network, via energy agencies and
universities, with funds from the main fourth framework programme.
There are also plans next year for a communication outlining a global
R&TD strategy for the Community.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

VISIONS OF THE ENERGY FUTURE IN 2020

After extensive research into the possible shape of the energy sector
in 2020, officials in energy directorate DGXVII have concluded that an
energy policy is needed "to ensure that energy investments and choices
made today remain coherent and rational into the future".

European Energy to 2020 is the wide-ranging economic research on which
the conclusions of the white paper are based. Over a two year period,
DGXVII's energy policy officials modeled four possible energy futures
to 2020, taking the view that a scenario-based approach was the best
way to tackle the energy sector at a time of change and uncertainty,
when it was unclear what impact factors like environmental protection,
global markets and geopolitics would have on the future energy scene.

The study looks at four scenarios: conventional wisdom, a business-as-
usual scenario projecting the continuation of current trends;
battlefield, in which the world reverts to isolationism and power
blocks, with increased risk of political disruption to energy supplies;
hypermarket, where market forces, liberalism and free trade
predominate; and forum, an environmental scenario where global
integration allows collective public action to deal with environmental
threats. The consequences for competitiveness, security of supply and
environmental protection, the three key aims of energy policy, varied
widely according to each scenario. But various key findings emerged.

Even though three out of the four scenarios (all but conventional
wisdom) assumed that global warming is proven by 2005, in all but forum
rising energy consumption will result in increased CO2 emissions by
2020, despite the growth of natural gas. Only under the forum scenario
will CO2 emissions be below 1990 levels in 2020. While under
battlefield they will have only risen by 4%, under conventional wisdom
and hypermarket the rise is 15% and 18% respectively. The paper
concludes "one clear result is that radical measures will be needed if
Europe's target of CO2 stabilisation is to be achieved".

While the availability of energy resources is not a problem, future
policy will have to tackle the fact that, in all scenarios, declining
indigenous energy production leaves Europe increasingly dependent on
imports by 2020, especially for gas. The degree of dependence varies,
however, from 55% in forum (only slightly up from today's 50%) to 70%
under the hypermarket free trade scenario.

All scenarios indicate that energy demand growth will remain modest,
with both conventional wisdom and forum showing average annual growth
rates of 1.6% - slightly less than the growth seen over the last 20
years. Under battlefield, demand growth drops to 1.3% after another oil
price shock stifles economic growth, while hypermarket envisages
slightly higher growth at 1.8%.

Any demand growth that does occur is mainly due to the transport
sector, which is also the single largest contributor to CO2 emissions
to 2020. Depending on the scenario, transport accounts for between 42%-
55% of incremental final energy demand, and between 38% and
(effectively) 100% of future CO2 emissions. The report concludes that
"the policy significance of transport remains substantial and needs to
be addressed with urgency".

Turning to the future fuel mix, the news is good for renewables, and
bad for nuclear power. Renewables grow fast under all scenarios - even
under conventional wisdom their contribution grows threefold -
exceeding nuclear's contribution by 2020. But for nuclear power, only
forum, with its radical emphasis on environmental protection, offers
any prospects for long-term growth. Under the other three scenarios,
unless current attitudes change, "nuclear growth will fade and decline
in the long-term".

The future belongs to gas and electricity. Gas is the fastest-growing
fuel under all scenarios, with demand at least doubling, mainly for
power generation (see table). In final energy demand, the overriding
trend is a growing penetration of network energies such as electricity
and distributed heat. Oil consumption grows very slowly under all
scenarios, largely fuelled by the transport sector, while coal use
declines largely due to its environmental impact under conventional
wisdom and forum (where demand falls by 75% by 2020) and due to the
growth of gas in hypermarket.

At the end of the study, each scenario was analysed to see how far it
met the three key energy policy aims. Overall, the policy-heavy forum
scenario was the winner, resulting in "a very attractive energy
future". Rather to the surprise of DGXVII officials, the results
indicated that high economic growth is compatible with wide-ranging CO2
reduction policies, without compromising security of supply. The study
comments that "the forum scenario illustrates the compatibility of
doubling GDP between 1990 and 2020 while lowering CO2 emissions by 11%
and maintaining the lowest import dependency". While energy prices will
be much higher under the forum scenario, the actual cost to industry,
and therefore the impact on competitiveness, will be considerably
lightened by increased energy efficiency. By contrast, relying solely
on market forces in hypermarket would boost economic wealth to the same
level, but CO2 emissions would be 17% above 1990 levels, while import
dependency would be the highest of any of the scenarios. Overall,
solely relying on market forces may be attractive economically in the
short/medium term, but "the model results show hypermarket as being
unsustainable as a long term energy future".

Battlefield highlighted a "turbulent" future, dominated by concern over
security of supply. While moderate economic growth plus the
continuation of nuclear meant that battlefield fared well in terms of
total energy demand and CO2 emissions, the study comments that the
scenario "is not a progressive one", and would not stimulate the
development of new technologies. Business-as-usual is also not
advisable, as it cannot be guaranteed that the trend towards energy-
intensity gains and greater efficiency in power generation will
continue. While energy costs drop, both import dependency and CO2
emissions rise substantially, making the conventional wisdom scenario
unsustainable.

Scenario          % of total         Gas
                  production         consumption
                                     (mtoe)

Conventional         40                218
Battlefield          35                176
Forum                31                157
Hypermarket          51                290
1992                6.4                 31

Source: European Energy to 2020, European Commission.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

NEW R&D CALL LAUNCHED FOR RENEWABLES

Research Commissioner Edith Cresson announced on 16 January that up to
Ecu30m is to be released for renewable energy research.

The move follows severe criticism of the first call for energy research
tenders under the Fourth Framework Programme, when renewables only
attracted a small part of the funding (ECE 81/14).

It was claimed at the time that projects deemed worthy of support by
expert assessment panels had been unaccountably downgraded by
Commission officials. The 16 January announcement was an attempt to
make amends by disclosing that money will also be available to help
prospective applicants improve the quality of their proposals - and
even suggesting that Commission officials were on standby to help.

The main funding covered by the announcement is being made available
under the JOULE programme, the specific non-nuclear energy programme
that now forms part of the overall Fourth Framework R&TD Programme.

Cresson's announcement was timed to coincide with publication in the EC
Official Journal of a call for research proposals in three selected
areas: photovoltaic solar energy, wind power (in particular the design
of generators) and biomass energy (in particular combined heat and
power production with systems based on biomass gasification).

The Commission statement said "this initiative will make it possible to
consolidate the position of renewable energy sources under the JOULE
programme, the aim being to earmark for these energy sources at least
58.6% of the total amount of funds available.

"Given the inadequate quality of projects submitted, especially in the
above areas, renewable energy sources accounted for only 45% of the
projects selected by the Commission last July. The budget of Ecu25-30m
for the call for proposals launched today will make it possible to
bridge the gap".

The statement added that the Commission had also drawn up a "reserve
list" to fund additional renewable energy projects in 1996 - "depending
on the funds available" - and would launch a series of "practical
initiatives" such as seminars, conferences and information schemes.

These would be designed to "facilitate the preparation of proposals",
which were often submitted by smaller enterprises, and to improve the
quality of those proposals.

Researchers were invited to submit preliminary versions of their
proposals of their projects as soon as possible (ahead of a final
deadline of 15 May) - "so that the Commission can give them the best
possible advice concerning the preparation of the project files".



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

BRUSSELS UPDATES NOTIFICATION RULES FOR COMMUNITY ENERGY INVESTMENTS

The Commission has revised the rules obliging member states to notify
Brussels of their energy project investment decisions, giving national
governments more time to supply the information.

The revised version of Council regulation 1056/72, which obliges
national governments to notify the Commission annually of investments
likely to have a Community impact in the oil, natural gas and
electricity sectors, came into force on 24 December last year, the day
after it appeared in the Official Journal. The regulation covers oil
refineries and power plants over a certain size, along with
transfrontier or submarine electricity and gas lines (see table).

The main change to the regulation is that member states have a few more
months to communicate the information to Brussels, with the deadline
extended from 15 February to 15 April. The deadline for industry's
reports to national governments has been shifted from 15 January to 15
March. This deadline does not apply, however, if governments get the
information from another source - another change.

While the Commission proposed to repeal a whole raft of other energy
legislation dating from the 1970s last summer, on the grounds that it
was outdated, it argued that this notification procedure should remain
as it was the only official source of information on energy
infrastructure developments across the fifteen (ECE 80/5). Such
information was essential in order to carry out policy reviews, argued
Brussels.

Under the law, national governments are obliged to notify Brussels of
investments in the electricity sector within five years of their start,
and within three years in the case of oil and gas projects.

PETROLEUM

Refining

- distillation plants with a capacity of not less than 1mt/yr;

- extension of distilling capacity beyond 1mt/yr;

- reforming/cracking plants with a minimum capacity of 500t/day;

- desulphurisation plants for residual fuel oil/gas oil/feedstock/other
petroleum products.

Chemical plants which do not produce fuel oil and/or motor fuels, or
which produce them only as by-products, are excluded.

Transport

- transfrontier oil pipelines as well as projects of common interest
identified under the guidelines established by application of Article
129c of the Treaty.

Pipelines for military purposes and those supplying plants outside the
scope of refining are excluded.

NATURAL GAS

Transport

- transfrontier gas pipelines as well as projects of common interest
identified under the guidelines established by application of Article
129c of the Treaty;

- terminals for the importation of liquefied natural gas.
Gas pipelines and terminals for military purposes and those supplying
chemical plants which do not produce energy products, or which produce
them only as by-products, are excluded.

Distribution

- underground storage installations with a capacity of not less than
150,000,000m3.

Installations for military purposes and those supplying chemical plants
which do not produce energy products, or which produce them only as by-
products, are excluded.

ELECTRICITY

Production

- thermal power stations (generators with a unit capacity of 200 MW or
more);

- hydro-electric power stations (power stations having a capacity of 50
MW or more).

Transport

- overhead transmission lines, if they have been designed for a voltage
of 345 kV or more;

- underground and sub-marine transmission cables, if they have been
designed for a voltage of 100 kV or more and constitute essential links
in national or international interconnecting networks;

- projects of common interest identified under guidelines established
by application of Article 129c of the Treaty.

Source: Official Journal.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

GAS TRANSIT BODY SET UP AFTER YEARS OF DELAY

Almost five years after the gas transit directive became law, the
Commission has finally set up the expert committee foreseen in the
legislation to advise gas companies on the transit rules, and to act as
the conciliation body for any disputes.

In a decision which came into effect on 23 December last year, seven
days after its publication in the Official Journal (OJ), the Commission
established the 20-member unpaid committee. The list of members will be
published in the OJ but it will consist of 15 representatives of the
high pressure natural gas transmission grids (one from each member
state), three independent experts, one person from Eurogas and one from
the Commission.

The role of the committee, which will meet at least once a year, plus
whenever conciliation is needed, will be to examine the technical,
financial and legal conditions of transit within and outside the
Community, and to help the Commission draft an annual report on the
workings of the transit directive.

For conciliation, in the event of a dispute between two parties, the
committee will be cut to six members - the Commission, two of the three
experts and three grid representatives. The committee will then give
its verdict, which will be non-binding, within three months of the
dispute being notified.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

CHERNOBYL CLOSURE DEAL SIGNED

Ukraine has finally signed an agreement to close Chernobyl after seven
years of protracted negotiations with the G-7 countries.

The total deal, worth $2.307bn in grants and loans, is no higher than
the offer made by the G-7 in Kiev in November, which Ukraine rejected
as inadequate while continuing to demand a minimum $4bn (ECE 83/6).

The final text of the memorandum of understanding (MoU), signed in
Ottawa on 20 December, was agreed in Vienna at the end of November
after being stalled over two issues: the closure date and the extent of
Western financial support. Sources say Ukraine only agreed to sign
after threats were made to withhold western credits for economic
restructuring.

The MoU comprises $498m in grants, with $43m for power sector
restructuring, $102m for an energy investment programme, $349m for
nuclear safety and $4m for a social impact plan. The $1.809bn in loans
will go to the energy investment programme and includes Ecu400m from
Euratom, agreed at Corfu in 1994, for completing reactor 2 at
Khmelnitsky and reactor 4 at Rovno, as well as rehabilitating thermal
and hydroelectric plants, pumped storage projects and energy
efficiency. In principle, the MoU says, revenue-generating projects
will be considered for loans and non-revenue-generating projects for
grants.

The nuclear safety component is thought to comprise grants from the
1995 and 1996 Tacis programme agreed at Corfu, and $200m from the EBRD-
administered Nuclear Safety Account agreed at Naples in 1994. These may
be used to pave the way for decommissioning, including the construction
of new waste treatment facilities.

According to G-7 sources, the final wording of the MoU was
"deliberately vague" to allow for different interpretations. After
Ukraine objected to the closure deadline being 2000, the phrase was
omitted from the title in the final version, though it remains in the
text which says decommissioning will be undertaken within the "shortest
practically achievable time".

Ukrainian officials say closure is unlikely to be achieved by 2000.
"Removal of the facility and ensuring its ecological safety will take
over a decade. Chernobyl will need tremendous sums for shutdown
operations, running into billions of dollars over many years. This is
why Ukraine sees the memorandum only as the beginning," Ukrainian
environment and nuclear safety minister Yuri Kostenko said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

COMMISSION APPROVES DUTCH ENERGY TAX LEGISLATION

The Commission has given the green light to Dutch legislation which
allows an energy tax to be levied on small-scale energy users.

Under the legislation, a tax will be levied on consumption of the first
50,000 kWh of electricity and the first 170,000m3 of natural gas, or
the equivalent consumption of gas oil, medium-heavy oil (paraffin) and
liquified petroleum gas (LPG). Revenue generated by the tax will be
redirected to taxpayers through reduced capital and labour tax.

The new tax applies to small-scale users only, such as private
households and small businesses, and aims to reduce CO2 emissions and
encourage energy saving practices. Large-scale electricity users, and
those who exceed 170,000m3 of gas consumption, are exempt in order to
offset losses in competitiveness at international level and because
other measures exist to reduce energy consumption by heavy-users.

Last year the Commission approved Dutch plans to exempt certain
activities from environmental tax legislation, such as groundwater and
waste contributions, on the basis that the state aid did not affect
inter-EU trade (ECE 78/12).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

RECHAR II BOOSTS COAL REGENERATION IN FRANCE/GERMANY

The Commission has approved over Ecu13m in aid for on-going projects in
three former coal mining regions in France under the Rechar II
regeneration programme, following a proposal from Monika Wulf-Mathies,
Commissioner for regional development and cohesion.

The former coal-mining region of Lorraine is to get Ecu10.9m from
Rechar II, of which the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) is
contributing Ecu10m and the European Social Fund (ESF) Ecu0.85m,
representing 44% of the total cost of the programme. The funds are
provided until end-1997, with Ecu4.9m going to projects which encourage
employment and Ecu5.9m to new businesses which reuse industrial waste
land and restructure urban areas.

A second project, running under the Ecu2.7m Languedoc-Roussillon
programme in the Ales coalfield, will get Ecu1.018m from Rechar II
towards infrastructure and vocational training projects, while a third
allocation of Rechar II funds worth Ecu1.146m, goes towards an Ecu4.4m
project in the Albi-Carmaux coalfield in the Midi-Pyrenees. Funding
will help promote new businesses, improve the environment, and develop
human resources. Both funding allocations are provided until end-1997
and include contributions from the ERDF and ESF.

* Former coal-mining communities in Germany will also get Ecu6.2m under
the Rechar II programme. The aid will help the Saarbrucken
conglomeration and the Saarlouis and Neunkirchen districts improve
environmental rehabilitation, stimulate employment and develop
industrial sites.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

ITALY PROMISES TO PUSH ON IEM AND ENERGY NETWORKS

Energy issues did not feature prominently in the presentation to the
European Parliament of Italy's priorities for its six month EU
presidency.

But Italian foreign minister, Susanna Agnelli, told MEPs that: "The
pursuit of a coherent strategy for growth, competitiveness and
employment must involve implementation of the major infrastructure
projects and the completion of the liberalisation processes in the
telecommunications and energy sectors".

She also stressed that Rome would concentrate on improving Europe's
trans-frontier energy links. "Our priority is to see through the
legislative procedure at present undergoing conciliation with the
European Parliament regarding guidelines for the trans-European tran
sport and energy networks.

"We realise that in these areas every effort will have to be made to
mobilise an increased volume of private investment and to explore the
possibility of greater resources being made available in the Community
context, too."

In a later reference to energy, Agnelli also mentioned the Community's
new Mediterranean partnership programme, launched at last year's
Barcelona conference. She said that energy resources would be the
subject of one of a series of meetings to be held by the two sides on
alignment of their economies.

A document compiled by the ministry for foreign affairs in Rome on the
priorities of the Italian presidency and circulated ahead of the
Agnelli speech, said the Dini government would "strive to obtain the
final approval of the guidelines for trans-European networks."

The presidency would also "foster balanced discussion in the Council
and constructive dialogue with the European Parliament on any available
margin for increasing appropriations under the current financial
perspectives ... or, possibly, on the need for the financial
perspectives to be revised."

There would also be discussion on supplementing the budget of the
Fourth Framework R&TD Programme - "a further decisive factor in the
Community's action to make Europe's economic system more competitive,"
although the document went on to say that the Commission proposals to
focus the extra resources on "a very limited number of strategic
objectives, with particular reference on the information society, will
have the Presidency's wholehearted support".

The document continued: "Market liberalisation is a prerequisite for
lasting growth: it will be the Presidency's paramount concern to see
that a legislative framework is defined that will ensure the
liberalisation of key sectors such as telecommunications and energy,
while respecting the need to guarantee universal service at affordable
prices."

However, neither Agnelli's speech nor the Rome document made any
reference to energy taxes, other than an oblique reference in the
document to the need to "refine new instruments and objectives for
sustainable development" through interaction with other EC policies
"whether economic, fiscal, industrial or cooperation."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

MINISTERS EXTEND EIA RULES TO NUCLEAR REPROCESSING

At their meeting on 18 December last year, environment ministers
approved a common position on the revision of the environmental impact
assessment directive. Germany alone voted against.

Ministers agreed to extend the list of projects which require a
mandatory impact assessment (those in annex I) to include nuclear
reprocessing plants and nuclear waste storage sites, as proposed by the
Commission.

But ministers also agreed to support a number of additions to the annex
proposed by the European Parliament. These include extending the need
for such an assessment to nuclear fuel fabrication and enrichment
plants, and the dismantling of nuclear power stations.

In the oil and gas sector, ministers also agreed to widen annex I to
cover extraction of petroleum (over 500t a day) and natural gas (over
500,000m3/day); pipelines for the transport of gas, oil or chemicals
with a diameter over 800mm and a length of more than 40km; and
installations for the storage of petrol or chemical products with a
capacity over 200,000t.

In the power sector, annex I was widened to include all power lines
over 225 kV and longer than 15km.

The council also agreed a number of additions to annex II, for which
impact assessments are not mandatory, but depend on the discretion of
the member state.

The common position will now go back to the European Parliament for
second reading.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

MINISTERS BALANCE BUDGET ON R&D FUNDS

The Council has agreed to an increase in funds for the Fourth Framework
R&D programme to take account of Austria, Sweden and Finland's
accession to the EU.

According to a Commission spokesman, however, the increase does not
represent a new injection of funds but merely incorporates into the EC
budget the money already paid to the research programme by the three
countries since joining the European Economic Area.

In a common position formally approved on 30 November, ministers agreed
to register an increase in research funds for the programme of 6.5% -
up Ecu800m on the original budget of Ecu12.3bn. This involves adding
6.87% to research projects and a maximum rise of 4% for staff and
management costs. The result is an increase of Ecu718m for the EC non-
nuclear Framework Programme, and a further Ecu82m for the Euratom
nuclear research Programme.

While the Euratom increase is effective immediately, the EC programme
has to get second reading approval from the European Parliament.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

MEPS PUSH FOR NUCLEAR SAFETY GUARANTEES IN FREE TRADE DEAL

The European Parliament's foreign affairs committee has suggested that
the EU should exploit the framework of a new trade regime between the
Community and Slovakia to press for safety guarantees on the
controversial Mochovce nuclear power plant.

The idea was aired in a Strasbourg plenary debate on 15 January when
the assembly discussed proposals for agreements with the Czech and
Slovak republics aimed at ensuring that their trade competition rules
are aligned with those of the EC.

Foreign affairs committee spokeswoman, Dutch Green MEP Nel van Dijk
reminded colleagues of their vote on 16 March 1995 when they demanded
"that there must not be any doubt as to the safety of the plant co-
financed by the EC" and called for "strict compliance" with EC safety
standards.

Her committee wanted the future of the plant to be discussed within the
joint `association council' created to oversee movement toward EC-
Slovak free trade within ten years, under an agreement which came into
force in February 1995.

However, van Dijk said that despite her committee's "criticisms" of the
Bratislava government regarding Mochovce and the treatment of
minorities, her colleagues would go along with the assembly's
endorsement of the proposals.

Commissioner Hans van den Broek, who is responsible for EC trade
relations with central and eastern Europe, said he would raise
misgivings voiced by MEPs on a forthcoming visit to Bratislava.

But he offered no immediate prospects of talks on Mochovce in the
association council, saying that disputes between the two sides would
only go before the Council "as a last resort".



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

DEBATE ON JET R&D PROGRAMME PUT OFF UNTIL FEBRUARY

European Parliament discussion of proposals to extend the Joint
European Torus (JET) thermo-nuclear energy research project at Culham
to the end of 1999 has been postponed.

Some MEPs objected to suggestions that the proposals should be endorsed
on the nod, without debate. Time will have to be found at a future
session, probably the 12-16 February plenary.

Several of the other amendments to the project's statutes are technical
and result from the accession of Sweden and Finland to the EC.
Moreover, the Parliament has little influence over a project which
operates under the umbrella of a special Joint Undertaking.

However, some MEPs are likely to use a debate to voice criticism of
Community support for nuclear fusion research, including the suggested
Ecu226m for JET in the years 1997-1999.

The issue of "discriminatory" salaries paid to UKAEA staff working at
Culham alongside better paid Community employees is also likely to get
a further airing.

In discussions on the 1994 Community budget, Strasbourg sought to
freeze almost Ecu60m of Community funds for JET in an attempt to
pressure the Joint Undertaking to amend its employment rules.

Although a subsequent ruling from the European Court of Justice upheld
the legality of the employment arrangements, the Parliament voted to
release the funding on the basis of a 'note of understanding' the some
rules would be changed.

Budgets committee rapporteur, Irish MEP John McCartin will say in his
report to plenary that the Commission has to date failed to provide a
report on enactment of the changes, suggesting that the requirements
have not been fulfilled.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

EIB FUNDS TRANSMISSION PROJECTS IN GREECE

The EIB is providing Ecu63.8m in loans to two generation and
transmission projects in Greece, in order to reduce the country's
dependence on imported energy supplies.

The first project comprises Ecu62.2m in long-term loans being provided
to the Greece Public Power Corporation (PPC), to extend and reinforce
transmission and distribution networks and improve the reliability of
electricity supply. Under the project, 21 interconnections will be made
on the mainland system and nine submarine interconnections will be made
with the Aegean islands. The work is part of a five-year development
programme by PPC to which the EIB has already committed Ecu62.2m in
1993.

The second project involves construction of a privately-owned 2.5 MW
hydro-electric power station at Tsivlos in northern Peloponnese. Some
Ecu1.07m in grant finance is being provided to the project by the EIB
under the financial mechanism of the European Economic Area (EEA).
Electricity generated by the station will feed into PPC's national grid
and replace the region's dependence on thermal energy.

The station is the first in Greece to be owned and operated by a
private company and will serve as a pilot project for 50 other
potential investments throughout the country. The project is receiving
grant support through the Thermie programme for its use of
biodegradable lubricants.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

BOOST FOR HYDRO-ELECTRIC AND WIND POWER IN SPAIN

The EIB is backing renewable energy in Spain by providing Ecu26.7m in
loans towards eight projects in the north-east of the country.

Funding will support construction of seven small hydro-electric power
stations and one wind park in the Comunidad Floral of Navarra, as part
of a general EU policy to develop domestic renewable resources.

Under the deal, Energia Hidroelectrica de Navarra will get the bulk of
the loan for five hydro plants along the Ebro River and two along the
Aragon and Arga tributaries, generating an estimated 24.3 MW in
additional capacity. The wind farm is an extension of an ongoing pilot
project near Pamplona, and will add 17 MW of installed capacity.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

EIB LOANS IMPROVE AIR QUALITY IN THE UK AND CZECH REPUBLIC

Following years of deliberation, the EIB has finally approved a Ecu360m
loan towards anti-pollution equipment at the Drax power station in the
UK, the largest coal-fired plant in western Europe.

EIB assistance was originally requested by the station's UK owners,
National Power, to install six flue-gas desulphurisation units and
replace existing burners with low NOx burners at the Yorkshire plant.

But since the plant is already two-thirds completed, and the 40 jobs
which the loan was intended to create have already been allocated,
National Power is now deliberating whether to take up the loan.

Once up and running later this year, the 3,750 MW capacity station is
expected to reduce its SO2 emissions by 225,000t/yr and NOx emissions
by 55,000t/yr enabling the UK to exceed its national target for
reducing both emissions, says National Power.

* An Ecu200m EIB loan to Czech power utility CEZ will enable the
country's largest lignite-fired power stations to be upgraded in line
with international emission standards. Funding will install flue gas
desulphurisation equipment at the plant, reducing SO2 emissions by 90%
and improving air quality in the `Black Triangle' region and in
neighbouring Germany and Poland.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

EU FOSTERS ENERGY LINKS WITH PAKISTAN AND CHINA

Power generation projects in Pakistan and offshore exploration projects
in China are getting a total of Ecu79m in EIB loans, under a three-year
energy programme linking the EU with 30 Asian and Latin American
countries.

Under the first deal, Ecu24m will upgrade and connect Pakistan's Ghazi-
Barotha hydro-power plant on the Indus River with the national
transmission grid, generating 6,600 GWh/yr of much-needed low-cost
electricity for the region. Co-financed by the World Bank, the Asian
Development Bank, OECF of Japan, Kreditanstalt fur Wideraufbau and the
Islamic Development Bank, the EIB loan is the second for electricity
development projects in Pakistan.

The second EIB loan to China, involves Ecu55m for offshore oil and gas
exploration at the Ping Hu field, including pipeline construction
linking the field with a satellite city of Shanghai. EIB funding for
the project, the first for China, is part of a larger loan worth
Ecu770m being co-financed by the French Government, the Asian
Development Bank and the Exim Bank of Japan.

The EIB has set aside Ecu750m during 1994-1996 for energy projects in
Asia and Latin America, of which Ecu36m has been committed to
electricity projects in Pakistan, Ecu55m in India, Ecu46m to natural
gas transport projects in Indonesia and Ecu58m in Thailand.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

EUROGAS CALLS FOR WITHDRAWAL OF COMMISSION'S IRP PROPOSAL

Eurogas, the European association of the natural gas industry, has
called for the Commission to withdraw its proposal on integrated
resource planning (IRP), approved by Brussels in September last year
(ECE 81/1).

Eurogas argues that the proposed legislation, which would oblige
electricity and gas distributors to draw up plans evaluating demand-
side as well as supply-side measures, is "unnecessary, potentially
harmful and discriminatory".

Eurogas argues that there is no role for EC regulation in this field as
the natural gas industry already promotes a wide-range of energy
efficiency services, including industrial energy audits and advice to
consumers on how to cut back on energy use.

Moreover the proposal as it stands is discriminatory, says Eurogas, as
it hits the gas industry and not competing fuels, which often
contribute more per unit of energy produced to greenhouse gas
emissions, the ultimate target of the legislation.

The legislation could also harm the gas sector by introducing
bureaucracy to the marketplace. Eurogas attacks the whole premise of
the proposal, saying it is based on old studies from the US which only
refer to electricity, and which cannot be extrapolated to gas.

Instead of the proposed legislation, the association says that a more
sensible approach would be to launch a serious study of the energy
market in Europe, possibly leading to EU moves to strengthen existing
energy efficiency policies.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

NEW COAL BODY EURISCOAL WELCOMES ENERGY WHITE PAPER

Euriscoal, the new Brussels-based association set up to promote coal
use in Europe, has welcomed what it sees as the strong support given to
coal as a future energy source by the Commission's energy white paper.

In a statement, Luc Bohyn, Euriscoal's director, drew particular notice
to the paper's statement that "coal can be expected to maintain its
share of global energy supply due to its inherent price advantage".

Bohyn said that coal was ideally placed to fulfil the three main
objectives of European energy policy, as it was competitive, clean and
compared to other fossil fuels, offered by far the best security of
supply.

Coal's main problem, he said, was convincing the public that it could
now be burned cleanly. He stressed that CO2 emissions from coal burning
in the European Union were hardly more than 0.2 % of the overall world-
wide emissions.

As such emissions were a global problem, Europe should concentrate on
exporting technology and know-how to countries such as India and China
in order to improve their fuel efficiency, rather than imposing a CO2
tax in Europe.

Euriscoal (the European Importers and Suppliers of Coal) was set up
earlier this year by companies from the UK, Spain, France and Belgium
in order to promote future coal use, particularly for electricity
generation.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

FRENCH DISTRIBUTORS PUSH TO SHOP AROUND FOR POWER SUPPLIES

France's independent power distributors - which number around 180 and
account for about 5% of the total power used in the country - have
started lobbying to become "eligible consumers" under any deregulation
of the electricity supply market prompted by European legislation.

Speaking on their behalf, ANROC, which represents about 100 of the
independents, stressed the virtues of public service, endorsed the
argument about long-term investments, and agreed that these were
incompatible with third party access.

Nevertheless, ANROC warned that the definitions of "independent
producers" and "eligible consumers" adopted by the French authorities
so far could undermine the existence of these independent bodies, and
could have long-term implications for all local authorities.

The association emphasised that the law foresaw a key role for local
authorities in the distribution of electricity in their areas,
irrespective of whether they used their own utility for the purpose or
whether they used the services of Electricite de France (EdF). These
competences were an essential part of the local authorities' powers for
planning and maintaining economic development of their districts.

The independent producers were concerned that the government MP Jacques
Vernier believed that "non-nationalised distributors must in no case be
considered eligible consumers, since this would allow them to negotiate
their own electricity, which would risk serious price differences
between communities, depending on whether they had their own utility".

The trade unions are also largely hostile to the independents'
position. If the independent distributors become eligible consumers,
and their businesses prosper, other communities will want to do the
same. If they get into difficulties, EdF will be asked to cover their
losses, argued a joint position paper prepared by the CGT, FO, CFDT,
and CFTC trade unions. In the long-term, equal prices throughout the
country would become impossible, and the grid would be threatened with
break-up, the union argued. The independents countered that an
equalisation fund could resolve the problem.

Many of the independents were set up at the beginning of the century,
well before EdF was created in 1946. In total, they cover 2,800
communes (local authorities) and serve some 3.4m people.

ANROC is one of the associations that brings them together, as does its
European counterpart Confederation Europeenne des Distributeurs
d'Energie publics Communaux (CEDEC).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

EIA DIRECTIVE CALLED INTO FRAY OVER UK NUCLEAR WASTE PLANS

The Irish government is urging the Commission to investigate plans by
UK Nirex to examine the geological suitability of Cumbrian rock for
storing Sellafield nuclear waste.

State-owned Nirex wants to build an underground Rock Characterisation
Facility (RCF) at Sellafield, with a view to constructing a long-term
nuclear waste repository, but Ireland says the plans present a "totally
unacceptable intrusion into the health, environmental and economic well-
being of the Irish people" because of the site's proximity to the Irish
coast.

Ireland's energy minister Emmet Stagg, recently gave evidence to this
effect at a public enquiry held on the issue in Cumbria. Ireland has
sustained a long-running campaign against the Sellafield plant for a
number of years.

In a recent letter to environment directorate DGXI, Dublin calls on the
Commission to examine Nirex's environmental impact statement which
Ireland believes contravenes the European environmental impact
assessment directive on three counts - it considers the RCF only rather
than the whole waste repository programme; it fails to provide the
direct and indirect effects of the planned RCF and the larger
programme; and it fails to give adequate information about alternative
locations or options for the project during the site selection
programme.

The Irish government has said it is prepared to take the case to the EU
and international courts if the UK public inquiry, due to end in
February, does not endorse Ireland's point of view. Such a decision
could be challenged under Euratom Treaty rules on marine waste
disposal, Dublin believes.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

LARGE USERS THREATEN EC ACTION OVER PROPOSED GAS LEVY

Large energy users in the UK have warned Energy Minister Tim Eggar,
that they will challenge under EC competition rules any attempt to
impose a levy on gas customers in order to compensate British Gas for
its take-or-pay contracts.

The Energy Intensive Users Group (EIUG) has written to Eggar saying
that such a levy, as a mechanism to support British Gas via taxation,
would constitute state aid and so would have to be cleared by the
European Commission. "Were such a provision to appear in the licenses,
EIUG members would clearly have to consider taking action under the
Article 92 EEC," says EIUG chairman Ian Blakey.

He pointed out that the fossil fuel levy, a similar mechanism levied on
behalf of the former Nuclear Electric, had first to be cleared by
Brussels. The EIUG has copied the letter to the Commission.

The idea of the levy arose in press reports earlier this month, and
EIUG's suspicions have been aroused by the publication of draft
shippers licenses with a blank page.

British Gas has long been arguing for some help to compensate for
expensive take-or-pay contracts it negotiated with North Sea producers
when it was a state-owned monopoly in charge of the UK's security of
supply. British Gas argues that it should not have to shoulder the
burden of the take-or-pay contracts alone, now that the government has
changed the rules of the game and introduced competition.

But large users say that for years they have suffered from monopoly
pricing by British Gas, "making substantial contributions to the
company's impressive financial record over the years since
privatisation".

Moreover they argue that a levy would ease pressure on British Gas to
renegotiate its supply contracts with North Sea gas producers, a move
which is "essential to the future of market-based gas supply".
Consumers would benefit from lower prices if British Gas managed to get
a better deal from producers, the large users believe. According to an
EIUG spokeswoman, Eggar has yet to reply.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

ENERGY LOBBYISTS BREATHE EASY OVER REGULATION

Attempts to regulate the lobbying of MEPs suffered a setback this month
when proposals drafted on behalf of the rules committee by Labour MEP
Glyn Ford were referred back to committee following a voting session in
Strasbourg. The report called on Parliament to keep a register of
lobbyists for public inspection, applying without exemption to all
those who use the Parliament buildings. In exchange for completing a
form, lobbyists would receive a pass, renewable annually. Each lobbyist
would also have to disclose gifts offered to members, assistants or
officials worth more than Ecu1,000/yr per person and `assistants' would
have declare that they "neither represent nor defend any interests
other than those connected with their duties".



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

UK INDUSTRY BACKS NATURAL GAS VEHICLES

The UK Natural Gas Vehicle Association (NGVA) is backing the UK
government's decision to reduce road fuel duty on natural gas by 15%.
The move follows the recent UK budget which imposed an 8.2-20.1%
increase in duty on leaded, unleaded, super unleaded and diesel in a
bid to cut CO2 emissions, but a cut in duty on compressed natural gas
and liquid petroleum gas to encourage it as a road fuel. The
Association's executive director Fred Parker said that NGVA members -
who include vehicle and engine manufacturers, system suppliers and gas
suppliers - are poised to increase the use of natural gas vehicles in
company fleets and to develop a gas refuelling infrastructure.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

EDF/EDISON FINALISE ISE TAKEOVER

Electricite de France (EdF) and Italy's Edison have became official
joint owners of a 75% stake in Ilva Servizi Energie (ISE), the
electricity generating arm of Italian steel-making group Ilva. Final
confirmation of the deal was dependent on certain conditions being
removed which has now been done. The Commission approved the takeover
under EU merger regulations last year after being satisfied that the
resulting combined market share for electricity supply would not exceed
5% (ECE 78/20, 77/9). ISE has a total power generating capacity of 600
MW, with a 500 MW gas-fired thermal station under construction at
Tarante.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

EU SIGNS AGREEMENTS WITH THREE BLACK SEA COUNTRIES

Greater mining cooperation will be part of three separate partnership
agreements with Azerbaijan, Armenia and Georgia signed by the EU. Each
agreement establishes a framework for developing political and economic
relations with the EU and sets out 25 areas for mutual cooperation of
which mining is one. It also facilitates trade through the most
favoured nation treatment and provides for technical assistance through
the Tacis programme. To date each country has received Ecu300m from the
EU in technical assistance and humanitarian aid. The new agreements
follow on from similar partnership agreements with Russia, Ukraine,
Moldova and Kyrgyzstan, endorsed by the European Parliament last month
(ECE 84/15).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

COMMISSION VETS BP/SONATRACH DEAL

A joint venture company set up by British Petroleum (In Salah) Ltd and
Algerian state oil and gas company Sonatrach is being investigated by
the Commission. The venture plans to research, explore and market
Algerian natural gas. Since the two companies are involved in all
aspects of oil and gas production - from exploration to refining,
transportation and marketing - the deal could infringe EU competition
regulations.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

FIRST R&D FUNDS RELEASED FOR CLIMATE STUDIES

The Commission has approved the first funding tranche worth Ecu217m to
the environment and climate aspect of the 1994-1998 Fourth Framework
R&D programme. Awarded in response to a proposal from Research
Commissioner Edith Cresson, funding will go to 318 R&D projects. These
build on previous research programmes including research into
minimising damage caused by natural disasters such as ozone depletion,
global warming and contaminated land through an assessment of
environmental quality, environmental technology and sustainable
development. The environment and climate aspect of the Fourth Framework
Programme has a total budget of Ecu532m - 4.3% of the entire
Programme's budget.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

EU SCIENTISTS APPEAL FOR MORE ENERGY RESEARCH FUNDS

Scientists are calling on the EU to boost funding for oil and gas
research, which they say currently receives only 6% of research
funding, despite the two fuels contributing to over 60% of the EU's
total energy needs. The campaign is being coordinated through the
European Network for Research in Geo-Energy (ENeRG), formed in 1993 to
promote R&D and demonstration work in oil and gas technology. The body
says the oil and gas research budget was cut from Ecu310m to Ecu220m in
the most recent research programme drafted by the Commission. Other
leading European research groups involved in the campaign include the
Institut Francais du Petrole, the German Petroleum Institute, Norway's
Rogaland Research, and the UK's Petroleum Science and Technology
Institute.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

GREECE TENDERS SIX OIL CONCESSIONS

Greece has invited bids from foreign companies for six concessions for
onshore and offshore oil exploration in the west of the country where
seismic studies and test drilling have shown promising results. The
three onshore blocks are in the north-west Peloponnese, while the
offshore blocks are in the Ionian Sea off Katakolo, in the Patras Gulf
and off the island of Paxi. The concessions are offered under a new law
implementing the provisions of the hydrocarbons licensing agreement,
which opens up oil exploration to competitive tender within the EU.
Under the new arrangements, Greek state exploration company, DEP-EKY,
will take a 12% stake in each concession, with the remainder being made
available to foreign oil companies and private Greek investors. The
deadline for submitting proposals for test drilling is the end of May
1996.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

SAUDI ARABIA URGES EU TO SCRAP ENERGY TAXES

A Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) member has repeated the Council's call
for the EU to abolish plans for CO2/energy taxes on imported energy
products (ECE 82/22). Speaking at a meeting of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) this month, Saudi Arabia
said the taxes were an obstacle to a fair world trade regime and were
being introduced "under the cover of environmental pretexts". The GCC
says its members will suffer the most of all oil producers if the EU
imposes the CO2 tax, with total estimated losses exceeding $17.7bn by
2000. The EU imports a fifth of its crude oil from the GCC states which
comprise Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar
and Oman.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

NO EIA NEEDED FOR LUDMIN WASTE STORE

The interim storage facility being built at Ludmin near Greifswald in
Germany is a temporary store for nuclear waste, and therefore does not
need to be assessed under the environmental impact assessment
directive, the Commission said in a written parliamentary answer at the
January plenary session. The Commission said that it was satisfied that
Ludmin was correctly classified as a temporary site as Germany was
actively pursuing other plans for permanent nuclear waste storage sites
at Konrad and the Gorleban salt-domes.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "36"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

GO-AHEAD FOR ARGENTINE NUCLEAR DEAL

At the General Affairs Council on 4 December, the Council authorised
the Commission to negotiate a nuclear cooperation agreement with
Argentina on the peaceful use of nuclear power. The previous nuclear
cooperation agreement between Argentina and the EU expired on 5
November 1983 without ever having come into read effect (ECE 80/3).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "37"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

EU/MOROCCO PLAN ENERGY COOPERATION

Energy cooperation will play a part in the recently-finalised
association agreement between the EU and Morocco. Cooperation will
focus on renewables, energy saving, research, and efforts to modernise
energy networks, interconnecting them with the Community. The agreement
will gradually establish a free-trade area between the EU and Morocco
over a 12 year period, and will strengthen political dialogue. Along
with similar agreements recently signed with Tunisia and Israel, it is
part of the EU's drive to strengthen its Mediterranean policy.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "38"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

BRUSSELS TACKLES GREEN TRANSPORT COSTS

The Commission has released a report on policy options for
internalising the external costs of transport*. Saying that transport
policy is at a crossroads, and that the current policy is
unsustainable, the green paper looks at pricing rather than regulation
in the hope of encouraging new environmentally-friendly modes of
transport. At the moment, the report says that the polluter does not
pay when it comes to road transport, whose costs in terms of
congestion, accidents and air pollution cost the Community almost
Ecu250bn a year. Road taxation falls short of covering these costs, and
the report advocates a fairer pricing system.

* Towards fair and efficient pricing in transport.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "39"></A>Copyright
EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet
January 24, 1996

ELEKTROWATT/LANDIS TAKEOVER SCRUTINISED

The proposed takeover of German firm Landis & Gyr by Elektrowatt, part
of CS Holding, is being investigated by the Commission to see whether
it infringes merger regulations. Elektrowatt is involved in the
production, distribution and trade of electricity while Landis controls
utilities for companies active in the energy sector.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B34-11</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B030-112</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey82.html 205.156.212.5 19970114230403 text/html 28557
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:02:09 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:21 GMT
Content-length: 28370
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ey82.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
ELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>==========</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Jordan verdict overturned</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(302 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>UK plaintiffs' legal aid reinstated</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(205 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>======================</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>California PUC news release on cellular tower&nbsp;emissions</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(414 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>RF Briefs: California</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(393 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>RF Briefs: Florida</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(92 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>RF Briefs:  New Jersey</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(715 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>RF Briefs: Wisconsin</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(112 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>========</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>1995 DOE Contractor's Review: Final installment</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(237 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>1995 Contractor's Review:  Policy Studies </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(310 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>Critical review of power frequency-cancer link</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(281 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>=============</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>Car interference worries needless, say UK experts</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(247 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>New European EMC regulations take effect</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(244 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>Hong Kong government considering alternative&nbsp;routes for troubled power line</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(192 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Jordan verdict overturned


The decision in Jordan v.  Georgia Power and Oglethorpe Power,
rendered in the utilities' favor in May 1994 after a Douglas
County Court jury trial (See EMF Keeptrack V.6, no.11, June 1,
1994), has been overturned by the Georgia Appeals Court.  The new
ruling reopens the case, but it is uncertain in which court the
case will be retried.

In the 1994 decision, the 11 person jury found that power line
electric and magnetic fields were not the proven cause of Nancy
Jean Jordan's non-Hodgkins lymphoma.  Judge David T.  Emerson
issued a directed verdict on the property devaluation portion of
the case, writing that power lines had not devalued the
plaintiff's property.

The plaintiff's attorney, Robert Shields of Doffermyre, Shields,
Canfield & Knowles in Atlanta, Georgia, brought an appeal
challenging the judge for permitting defense witnesses to present
hearsay evidence.  The witnesses in question were two doctors,
who testified that the consensus of the scientific community is
that electric and magnetic fields do not cause cancer.  The
appeals court agreed with the plaintiff, saying that the doctors
did not identify the community of experts and did not say how the
consensus was reached.  Douglas County Superior Court judge David
Emerson "committed reversible error" in allowing the testimony,
said the appeals court.  He did not err in dismissing counts of
trespass, nuisance and property damage claims.

The court also ruled that jurors for the new trial must be
screened, and might not be allowed to participate in the case if
they belong to Oglethorpe Power's membership cooperative,
Greystone Power.  In order to disqualify jurors, the plaintiffs
must prove a financial benefit will result from membership.
Georgia Power attorney Robert Pennington said he planned to
appeal the decision to the Georgia Supreme Court.

Copyright 1996  Center for Energy Information



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

UK plaintiffs' legal aid reinstated


Three families in Britain who claim power lines caused their
children's leukemia have gained back the right to legal aid in
their cases against electric companies.  Ray Studholme, whose
13-year old Simon Studholme died of leukemia in 1992, told
reporters, "It's brilliant news.  Hopefully we well now be able
to bring this case to court."

The families, who live in Bolton, Birmingham and North Yorkshire,
were granted legal aid in 1993, but the aid was withdrawn this
summer after the National Grid and regional electric companies
appealed.  The High Court in London restored the aid December 9.
The case may take up to two years to come to trial.

Solicitor Martyn Day is representing the families.  Day is
well-known for taking on large companies over environmental
concerns.  After the recent decision, he told the press,
"Although I accept the legal right of the National Grid to try to
stop legal aid being granted, I think there is a moral issue here
and I believe it was quite wrong of them to try to prevent these
families taking these cases through to trial."

Each family is suing the electric companies for up to 100,000
pounds.

Copyright 1996  Center for Energy Information



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

California PUC news release on cellular tower
emissions


The December 1 issue of EMF Keeptrack reported that the
California Public Utilities Commission had announced a policy on
RF/EMF from cellular towers.  Printed below is the full text of
that announcement.

"California Public Utilities Commission News Release 505 Van Ness
Avenue San Francisco, CA 94102- 3298 Contact:  Dianne Dienstein
415-703-2423

November 8, 1995

CPUC REMAINS WATCHFUL REGARDING RF/EMF FROM
CELLULAR TOWERS

The California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) today ordered
cellular utilities to identify and address public concerns about
potential health problems from electromagnetic field (EMF) and
radio-frequency (RF) exposure in siting and building new cellular
towers.  It urged cellular companies to site facilities away from
schools and hospitals, and to restrict access to sites with
warning signs and barriers.

The Commission's jurisdiction is limited to cellular towers and
related facilities - it does not regulate cellular phones.  The
federal Food and Drug Administration regulates RF emissions from
consumer/industrial devices and is looking into RF emissions from
hand-held cellular phones.

Due to public concern and scientific uncertainty regarding the
potential health effects of EMF exposure, the Commission examined
what steps should be taken to mitigate the health effects, if
any, of RF and EMFs from the 1,000 cellular facilities in
California.  It found no scientific link between EMFs and adverse
health effects on humans from cellular facilities.

A steering committee composed of one representative each from the
CPUC Commission Advisory and Compliance Division, CPUC Division
of Ratepayer Advocates, state Department of Health Services,
Cellular Carriers Association of California, and Citizens
Concerned About Telecommunications EMF held an EMF informational
workshop on July 21, 1993 for interested individuals and
organizations.  The workshop was videotaped for those who could
not attend.

The workshop report, included with the Commission decision today,
identified levels of cellular utilities' EMF and RF radiation
impacts, issues for further consideration and interim safety
measures.

The Commission will not adopt a specific numeric standard for
RF/EMF exposure associated with cellular facilities because it is
premature to do so given no scientific evidence of a definite
link between cellular facility EMF exposure and adverse health
effects.

However, as more scientific research is completed, commission
action may become necessary.  The CPUC Commission Advisory and
Compliance Division will keep track of cellular EMF/RF research
findings and information, advise the Commission if action is
needed to address them, and convene periodic workshops to share
that information with all interested parties."

Copyright 1996  Center for Energy Information



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

RF Briefs: California


In Sherman Oaks, California, cellular service provider L.A.
Cellular and residents of the Granada Hills area are arguing over
the placement of a 62-foot antenna at the Patrick Henry Middle
School.  Los Angeles City Associate Zoning Administrator Horace
Tramel, Jr.  held a hearing concerning the tower and decided to
wait four weeks before issuing his ruling, giving the residents
and the company time to reach a compromise.  L.A.  Cellular has
offered to cover the antenna with a bark-like material to make it
less visible, but many residents are against any kind of antenna
at the school for health reasons.  The Los Angeles Unified School
District decided to lease the land to the company in August, in
exchange for $1200 per month, paid to the middle school.

In El Dorado County, the County Planning Commission vetoed a
special use permit for a cellular tower on a hill overlooking a
shopping center in Cameron Park.  Commissioner Brian Veit
explained, "We cannot make the finding that its use would not be
detrimental to the residents' health, safety and welfare or
injurious to the neighborhood."  Nextel Communications wanted to
build a three antenna station in a barn it would build on a
leased site in the residential area.  Antennas at the facility
would have been only 19-feet high.  Neighbors are worried about
the precedent such a facility would set, and real estate agents
told the commission that the plan for the facility had already
discouraged potential buyers.  The commission suggested that
Nextel apply to build a higher tower on a remote site, preferably
in a commercial area.

In Fair Oaks, controversy over cellular tower health effects
seemed to have died down.  A public meeting of the Planning
Advisory Council revealed no opposition to a Pacific Bell Mobile
Services plan to install a new 60-foot personal communication
system (PCS) tower.  PCS towers are smaller and must be placed
closer together than cellular phone towers.  The PCS system would
allow users with a "smart card" to insert the card into certain
devices, such as a phone, to transmit voice and wireless fax.
Operations should commence in the Fair Oaks area by January 1997.

Although public opposition was lacking, council members voiced
concerns about EMF and the visual impact of the planned
monopoles.  They postponed their recommendation on the matter
until a January 17 meeting.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

RF Briefs: Florida


In Palm Beach Gardens, Florida, the city council voted in October
to allow communication towers to be built in planned development
areas, to restrict tower height to 400 feet and to require a
distance from homes of three times the tower height.  Tests may
be required once a year.  Residents of Palm Beach Country Estates
had hoped the council would require a distance of ten times the
tower height and testing four times a year.  Palm Beach
Communications has applied for permission to build three 500-foot
towers near the development.  




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

RF Briefs:  New Jersey


In Pennsauken, New Jersey, cellular phone company Comcast
Metrophone withdrew a request for a zoning variance after about
60 citizens protested the plan to build a tower on the property
of the World Harvest Christian Center.  The announcement came at
the beginning of a public meeting September 28.  Comcast said it
would submit an application to build the tower in an area of the
township that is zoned industrial.  The World Harvest Christian
Center would have received $1200 a month for allowing the tower
to be built on its property.

In Clifton, the city council voted October 1 to reverse a zoning
board decision that would have allowed Bell Atlantic to build a
150-foot tower near Dianne Court and Allwood Road.  The proposed
site was one of two acceptable to Bell Atlantic.  The company's
first choice, a high-rise apartment building called Country Club
Towers, was previously rejected by the zoning board.  Tenants of
the apartment building were adamantly opposed the antenna because
of health concerns.

Bell Atlantic appealed the zoning board rejection but agreed to
drop the appeal in return for a favorable decision on the Allwood
Road site.  The city council overturned that decision on the
grounds that it was unfair to the Dianne Court/Allwood Road
residents, who are also concerned about health effects.  The
council also ruled that Bell Atlantic failed to show that it
could not find an alternate site.

An attorney representing Bell Atlantic said the company examined
all possible commercial sites and found only two it could use.
Although the two sites are commercially zoned, they are within
500 feet of homes.  Attorney Greg Czura explained, "This carrier
must serve this area by its FCC license.  We have to build
something here to provide adequate service."

In Ringwood, New Jersey, a public hearing on a joint NYNEX/Bell
Atlantic application had to be continued from September 28 to
October 23 because too many people wanted to speak out against
the project.  The two companies want to build three 60-foot
towers near the clubhouse of the Erskine Lakes Property Owners
Association.  The towers would resemble flagpoles, complete with
flags.  Residents mentioned both health concerns and visual
concerns.  Rejecting the "flagpole" design, one resident said, "I
don't want the hilltop behind my house looking like a used-car
lot."  Others said the flagpoles would spoil the view from nearby
hiking trails.  At least one resident offered support for the
project, saying that lost hikers could use cellular phones to
call for help.

Members of the Erskine Lakes Property Owners Association were
angry that negotiations for the tower siting were carried out
without their knowledge by the association's president.  NYNEX
and Bell Atlantic are seeking a zoning variance from use, height,
and rear setback regulations.

Also in Ringwood, a group of neighbors, led by artist Joel
Popadics, is lobbying for removal of a 100-foot cellular tower
built by AT&T last winter.  The group says there should have been
a public hearing before the tower was built at the Ambulance
Corps building.  It replaced an older tower and is wider and more
visible than the previous antenna.  Borough officials agreed
there should have been a hearing and have promised to hold one.
LINE RF Briefs:  New York .TEXT In Greenburgh, New York, town
officials took a proactive approach to cellular siting concerns,
meeting with residences and telecommunications company
representatives from NYNEX to draft a zoning ordinance.  The new
ordinance is based loosely on similar laws passed in Seattle,
Washington, and Portland, Oregon, and covers the whole range of
antennas, from satellite dishes and television and radio
transmitters to cellular phone towers.

The draft ordinance was completed in September and forwarded to
the planning board for review.  NYNEX, AT&T Wireless and
community members all provided input.  The ordinance
distinguishes between receiving antennas and transmitting
antennas and restricts transmitting antennas to nonresidential
zones.  They must be 500 feet from a residential property line
and also 750 feet from schools, day-care centers and playgrounds.

NYNEX was pleased with the outcome, according to a New York Times
article.  An attorney representing the company explained, "If a
company can go in someplace as a matter of right, it would
probably prefer to do that than try to fight local zoning laws."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

RF Briefs: Wisconsin


In the North Shore region of Milwaukee, Wisconsin, three towns
have been fighting cellular antenna plans.  Bayside, Whitefish
Bay and Fox Point have large numbers of residents concerned about
the potential health threat from towers.  According to cellular
phone companies, the North Shore has more cellular phones than
any other part of the Milwaukee area.  With the number expected
to double in a year, more antennas are badly needed.  The three
communities have all refused permits to Ameritech and Cellular
One since July 1995.  The cellular companies plan an educational
campaign and hope to enlist cellular phone users to help push for
the towers.

Copyright 1996  Center for Energy Information



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

1995 DOE Contractor's Review: Final installment


In the last two issues of EMF Keeptrack summarized proceedings of
the 1995 Annual Review of Research on the Biological Effects of
Electric and Magnetic Fields from the Generation, Delivery & Use
of Electricity, sponsored by the US Department of Energy and
several other organizations.  In this final installment of our
report on the conference, we highlight the papers presented on
communications research and policy.  LINE 1995 Contractor's
Review:  Communications Research .TEXT Shari McMahan of the
School of Social Ecology, Environmental Health Sciences,
University of California at Irvine, presented study results on
how the content of EMF risk information influences public
attitudes.  McMahan and her colleague S.  Cornwell designed a
study in which 115 subjects read a low threat message and 136
subjects read a high threat message.  Subjects responded to
questions concerning personal attitudes and opinions about EMFs.
These questions were posed to participants 2 weeks later.  One
finding was that subjects in both groups said they would be least
likely to trust the news media, electric companies and friends
for balanced information about EMF.  They were most likely to
trust the American Medical Association, doctors, the
Environmental Protection Agency, and the State of California
Department of Health Services.  While researchers did find
significant differences in attitudes between the high risk and
low risk message groups, they caution the study population was
composed of college students and may not represent the general
population.  





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

1995 Contractor's Review:  Policy Studies 


Martha McNeal of McNeal Consulting, West Palm Beach, Florida,
presented a talk on EMF policy options that local governments
could adopt.  She identified five basic policy options:  1) No
action, 2) Monitor research/provide information,
3)Setbacks/buffers, 4) Numerical limits, and 5)Prudent
avoidance/reduction.  Arguing that setbacks, buffers and
numerical limits can create economic burdens for property owners
and communities, McNeal recommended that communities adopt
flexible strategies which support prudent avoidance or reduction
and monitoring research.  She warned that setbacks, buffers and
numerical limits would erode the value of some existing
properties thereby eroding the community's tax base.  During a
question-and- answer period, Cindy Sage of Sage Associates
vehemently disagreed with McNeal's recommendations, saying they
were suited more to utilities than to local government.  She also
said that McNeal's conclusions about property equity were
inconsistent with the conclusions of the California EMF Consensus
Group.

H.  Keith Florig of Resources for the Future, Washington, DC,
discussed risk perception and the reasons policy makers either
regulate or do not regulate suspected environmental hazards.  To
study this, he looked at quantitative and qualitative features of
EMF risk compared to risk from other known or suspected hazards.
Looking at the epidemiological studies of children in very high
current configuration homes, he found that the risk of cancer
estimated from these studies would identify EMF as a worse killer
of children than automobile accidents or fire, and would suggest
that EMF should be regulated.  However, the magnitude of risk is
not the most important factor in the public's perception of EMF
risk, according to Florig.  Other more important factors appear
to be the distribution across different groups of risk, benefit
and control costs and trust in policy making institutions.  When
children are involved, or when people feel they are bearing an
unfair risk burden, EMF concerns become more acute.

Copyright 1996  Center for Energy Information



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Critical review of power frequency-cancer link


A review paper published in the Proceedings of the Society for
Experimental Biology and Medicine examines evidence of an
association between power-frequency electric and magnetic fields
and cancer.  John Moulder of the Radiation Oncology Department of
the Medical College of Wisconsin and Kenneth R.  Foster of the
Bioengineering Department of the University of Pennsylvania first
summarize what is known about the biophysics of power frequency
(50-60 Hz) fields, then examine the epidemiological and
laboratory studies.  They conclude evidence for power-frequency
fields being carcinogenic is extremely weak.

The authors contend that the scientific community, in general,
agrees there is no danger of cancer from power- frequency fields.
"There is, then, a broad consensus in the scientific community
that no causal association has been established between
residential and occupational exposure to power-frequency fields,
and the risk of cancer."  They argue the controversy in
scientific circles is limited to whether a link may be
established in the future and what kind of studies are most
important to do now.

The authors give suggestions for future studies and predictions
on the potential impact of a positive or negative finding.
Outcomes most likely to put the controversy to rest might be the
identification of a confounder in the childhood
leukemia-wirecoding studies, or an unsuspected alternative
carcinogen in the studies of electrical occupations.  Studies
most in need of replication, they claim, are the positive reports
of tumor promotion in chemically-induced breast cancer (D.S.
Beniashvili, Cancer Letters, V.61, p.75-79, 1991, and W.
Loscher, Cancer Letters, V.71, p.75-81, 1993) and the reports of
genotoxicity enhancement (M.  Rosenthal, Mutation Research,
V.210, p.329-335, 1989, and D.E.  Hintenlang,
Bioelectromagnetics, V.14, p.545-551, 1993).

Copyright 1996  Center for Energy Information



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Car interference worries needless, say UK experts


Today's cars are thoroughly tested for electromagnetic
interference problems, a British expert told the press in
October, after a media scare over potential mobile phone
interference with brakes.  Large manufacturers test cars in EMC
(electromagnetic compatibility) chambers, bombarding them with
radio waves from 10 kHz to 1 GHz to simulate exposure to anything
from defense installations to mobile phones.  Ian Simmons,
project director of the UK's Transport Research Laboratory (TRL)
claims, "I know of no case where any mobile phone has caused
interference of a nature to threaten a car's electronic systems."

Design changes have ruled out most interference with cars'
electronics, according to the TRL.  A few exceptions can occur,
however, such as when a car passes a highly active microwave
tower or high-powered transmitters and receivers used by police
and emergency personnel.

New European Community rules on electromagnetic compatibility (as
of January 1, 1996) apply to vehicles and require manufacturers
to use certain test methods and meet certain standards.  Industry
officials say the car makers have been following the new rules
for some time and that the European directives actually grew out
of standards set by car companies.  Aftermarket equipment might
not have to comply with the new rules until 2002.

As for mobile phones, Ian Simmons told reporters that portable
phones not designed for car use could induce high fields, but
because they would not be brought close to the car's electronic
equipment, they should not cause a problem.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

New European EMC regulations take effect


Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) is now the law for products
sold or installed in the member nations of the European Union.
Beginning January 1, 1996, manufacturers of electrical equipment
must meet a new set of standards to receive the "CE Mark" showing
conformance with all European safety requirements.  The new EMC
directives say that equipment must not cause undesirable
radiation, and it cannot be susceptible to the effects of
unwanted electromagnetic radiation.  The regulations are not
aimed at reducing health concerns, but at ensuring that various
devices will operate smoothly together.  Health concerns arise in
some situations, however.  Hospital equipment, wheelchairs,
automobile control systems and industrial equipment potentially
can be affected by electromagnetic interference.  Less life
threatening, but important, are the effects of interference on
computers and broadcasting.

For US manufacturers, this means that any product meant for
export to Europe must be certified electromagnetically
compatible.  The standards for telecommunications equipment are
said to be more clear than those for other electrical devices,
and some experts advise companies to contract for outside testing
by a "competent body" such as Underwriters' Laboratories.
According to the European Union rules, "competent bodies" are
selected by a national "notified body", currently the US
Occupational Safety and Health Administration.

Most manufacturers are prepared for the new regulations, which
have been widely publicized.  Another set of requirements will
come into effect on January 1, 1997, requiring the use of
"low-voltage components."

Copyright 1996  Center for Energy Information



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Hong Kong government considering alternative
routes for troubled power line


Legislators planned to discuss five alternative routes for a
controversial 400-kV transmission line in mid- December, but a
satisfactory compromise appears remote.  Utility company China
Light and Power (CLP) nearly has completed the power line along
the original route and says it must begin construction on the
final section over Yick Yuen village in order to supply needed
electricity on schedule.  Residents of the area are accusing the
utility and government officials of delaying their consideration
of alternative routes in order to finish the line, even though
the Legislative Council (LegCo) ordered in April 1995 that a new
route be chosen to avoid coming close to homes.

A government spokeswoman told the press that each of the five
alternatives submitted by citizens' groups was flawed.  Two pass
close to housing, one poses technical problems because it crosses
a road, one passes through a village and over a church, and one
goes through the Ho Chung valley, which is designated as a site
of special scientific interest.  Legislators have said the line
should be routed through a park area to avoid proximity to homes.

Copyright 1996  Center for Energy Information



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B34-12</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B030-167</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey65.html 205.156.212.5 19970114230505 text/html 126963
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:02:51 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:10 GMT
Content-length: 126775
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ey65.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet <BR>
January 8, 1996   <BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>WHAT UTILITIES PAID FOR FOSSIL FUEL DELIVERIES IN AUGUST -- FROM REPORTS TO&nbsp;FERC</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(34 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>ELECTRIC UTILITY COMMON STOCKS--1995 VS. 1994</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1014 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>ELECTRIC UTILITY STOCKS FINISH 1995 AND START 1996 WITH STRONG GAINS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(641 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>NIMO SEEKS FERC ENFORCEMENT ACTION AGAINST N.Y. PSC ON `QF' PAYMENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(280 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>YANKEE ROWE SETTLEMENT FEATURES COST SAVINGS BECAUSE OF BARNWELL REOPENING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(335 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>HOUSE-SENATE TELECOM COMPROMISE SEEN PROTECTING UTILITY CONSUMERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(892 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>EPRI ANALYSIS SAYS ELECTRICAL WORKERS HAVE 10-20% MORE RISK OF BRAIN&nbsp;CANCER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(506 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>TROUBLED OKLAHOMA CO-OP DENIES ALLEGATIONS IN CLASS-ACTION SUIT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(420 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>FERC ALJ RULING ON SYNFUELS PROJECT COULD HIT BASIN ELECTRIC CO-OP HARD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(313 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RESTRUCTURING</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>CANADA'S ALBERTA LAUNCHES SWEEPING RESTRUCTURING OF WHOLESALE MARKET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(514 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>ELCON ISSUES `ROAD MAP' TO COMPETITION WITH STRANDED-COST RECOVERY FORMULA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1375 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>FEDERAL BUDGET IMPASSE PROMPTS FERC TO POSTPONE DATE FOR COMMENTS ON EIS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(128 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>N.Y. PSC LAW JUDGE RECOMMENDS FORMING AN ISO FOR TRANSITION TO RETAIL&nbsp;ACCESS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(443 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>POWER MARKETS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>NYMEX PRESIDENT PREDICTS REGULATORY ACTION SOON, MARCH LAUNCH OF FUTURES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(350 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ELECTRIC VEHICLES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>UTILITIES SEE GM'S ELECTRIC VEHICLE PLAN INTRODUCING `EXCITING NEW ERA'</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(567 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FINANCE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>MOODY'S SEES HIGH PRICES, STRANDED ASSETS HURTING NORTHEAST ELECTRICS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(627 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>UTILITIES SEEK TO EXPAND `TWO-COUNTY RULE' ALLOWING TAX-EXEMPT FINANCING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(736 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>DIVERSIFICATION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>WESTERN RESOURCES ACQUIRES A LARGE ADT STAKE; HOPES FOR JOINT MARKETING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(265 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>HYDROPOWER</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>STATE OFFICIALS SEEK NEW SETTLEMENT PROVISIONS IN HYDRO RELICENSING PLAN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(563 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MERGERS & ACQUISITIONS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>PACIFICORP OPENS KENTUCKY OFFICE TO WRAP UP A DEAL WITH BIG RIVERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(706 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INDEPENDENT POWER</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>VIRGINIA POWER, DEVELOPER INK PACT KILLING 316-MW COAL-FIRED PROJECT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(265 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>TRANSMISSION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>FEDERAL JUDGE DENIES TEXAS CITY'S PETITION FOR TRANSMISSION ORDER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(925 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>AEP DISCOUNTS TRANSMISSION AND SEES REVENUES INCREASE FIVEFOLD: FALCONE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(151 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PLANNING</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>NORTHWEST UTILITIES DROP PLANS TO PURCHASE AS MUCH AS 1,000 MW</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(310 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>TVA IN DEAL WITH ENRON TO BUY POWER ON AN OPTION BASIS; ISSUES FINAL IRP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(442 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>COMPETITION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#26"><A HREF = "#26"><LI>FUELED BY PUBLIC OUTCRY, CITY OF TOLEDO TO RESUME STUDY ON FORMING&nbsp;MUNICIPAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(612 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>EL PASO ELECTRIC RETAINS 125-MW AIR BASE LOAD, ENDING LONG DISPUTE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(424 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>CLINTON VETOES DEFENSE BILL, KILLING STUDY OF SAVINGS FROM POWER-SHOPPING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(216 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RATES & REGULATION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>PSC CAPS TAMPA ELECTRIC ALLOWED EQUITY RETURN AT 12.5% FOR 1996</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(374 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><A HREF = "#30"><LI>S.C. CONSUMER AGENCY OPPOSING APPROVAL OF SCE&G DEPRECIATION RESERVE&nbsp;TRANSFER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(746 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INTERNATIONAL</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>SOCAL ED AFFILIATE CLOSES $1-BILLION PURCHASE OF 2,088-MW U.K. GENERATOR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(357 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>3,500-MW BRAZILIAN UTILITY SPLIT IN TWO IN PREPARATION FOR AUCTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(618 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>NSP UNIT, TRANSFIELD SIGN 180-MW POWER-SALES PACT IN AUSTRALIA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(177 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#34"><LI>CSW FORMS VENTURE WITH MEXICAN INDUSTRIAL FOR 100-MW PROJECT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(265 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MARKETING</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#35"><LI>ENRON SECURES RIGHTS TO BUY 5,400-MW OUTPUT FROM OGLETHORPE POWER SYSTEM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(497 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

WHAT UTILITIES PAID FOR FOSSIL FUEL DELIVERIES IN AUGUST -- FROM REPORTS TO
FERC

Illustration(s):
Table: WHAT UTILITIES PAID FOR FOSSIL FUEL DELIVERIES IN AUGUST -- FROM
REPORTS TO FERC (This table is not available electronically.Please see the
January 8, 1996, issue.)

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

ELECTRIC UTILITY COMMON STOCKS--1995 VS. 1994

              ELECTRIC UTILITY COMMON STOCKS--1995 VS. 1994

                        Close   (Div.)    Change    Close    (Div.)   
Change
                      12/30/94   Yield     93-94  12/29/95   Yield     
94-95
Dow Jones Industrials  3834.44            +2.140%  5117.12            
33.450%
Dow Jones Utilities     181.52           -20.837%   225.40           
+24.174%
Dow Jones Composite    1274.41            -7.720%  1693.21           
+32.862%
NYSE Utilities          198.41           -13.705%   252.90           
+27.463%
NYSE Composite          250.94            -3.142%   329.51           
+31.310%
S&P Utilities           150.12            +8.911%   150.12           
-13.014%
S&P 500                 459.27            -1.539%   615.93           
+34.111%

Dow Jones Industry Group Performance  Index
--overall               433.07            -2.062%   581.43           
+34.258%        --electric utils.       210.24           -17.993%   259.73 
          +23.540%        --natural gas utils.    137.49           -17.941%
  184.25            +34.010%        --telephone utils.      387.61         
  -9.776%   545.56            +40.750%        --water utils.         
454.76           -10.901%   554.90            +22.020%

Electric Utility Common Stocks
DQE##$29.625  (5.941%) -14.130%  $30.750  (4.162%)  +55.696%
Portland General       $19.250  (6.234%)  -6.098%  $29.125  (4.120%) 
+51.299%
Pinnacle West          $19.625  (4.586%) -12.290%  $28.750  (3.478%) 
+46.497%
CIPSCO*$27.000  (7.407%) -12.195%  $39.000  (5.213%)  +44.444%
Potomac Electric*      $18.375  (9.034%) -31.308%  $26.250  (6.324%) 
+42.857%
Interstate Power       $23.750  (8.758%) -21.162%  $33.125  (6.279%) 
+39.474%
Illinova*$21.844  (4.578%)  -1.271%  $30.000  (3.733%)  +37.339%
Unicom*$24.000  (6.667%) -14.667%  $32.750  (4.885%)  +36.458%
PS New Mexico          $12.922    (--)   +14.861%  $17.625    (--)   
+36.397%
NYSE&G$19.000  (7.368%) -38.211%  $25.875  (9.121%)  +36.184%
Houston Indus.*#       $35.625  (8.421%) -25.197%  $24.250  (6.186%) 
+36.140%
SCANA$42.125  (6.694%) -15.327%  $28.625  (5.031%)  +35.905%
Entergy*$21.875  (8.229%) -39.236%  $29.250  (6.154%)  +33.714%
Detroit Edison*        $26.125  (7.885%) -12.917%  $34.500  (5.971%) 
+32.057%
FPL Group*             $35.125  (4.783%) -10.224%  $46.375  (3.795%) 
+32.028%
Cilcorp$32.125  (7.658%) -14.333%  $42.375  (5.805%)  +31.907%
Allegheny PS*          $21.750  (7.540%) -17.924%  $28.625  (5.869%) 
+31.609%
PP&L Resources*        $19.000  (8.789%) -29.630%  $25.000  (6.680%) 
+31.579%
S. Indiana G&E         $26.500  (6.226%) -21.771%  $34.750  (4.863%) 
+31.132%
CMS Energy*            $22.875  (3.672%)  -8.955%  $29.875  (3.213%) 
+30.601%
CINergy*$23.500  (6.863%) -14.545%  $30.625  (5.616%)  +30.319%
Oklahoma G&E**         $33.125  (8.030%) -10.473%  $43.000  (6.186%) 
+29.811%
Carolina P&L*          $26.625  (6.610%) -11.618%  $34.500  (5.275%) 
+29.577%
General Pub. Util.*    $26.250  (6.857%) -14.980%  $34.000  (5.529%) 
+29.524%
Baltimore G&E*         $22.175  (6.870%) -12.808%  $28.500  (5.474%) 
+28.814%
NIPSCO Indus.*         $29.750  (5.244%)  -9.506%  $38.250  (4.392%) 
+28.571%
UNITIL$16.250  (7.631%) -16.667%  $20.875  (6.132%)  +28.461%
Texas Utilities*       $32.000  (9.625%) -26.012%  $41.000  (4.878%) 
+28.125%
Idaho Power            $23.500  (7.915%) -22.634%  $30.000  (6.200%) 
+27.660%
Wash. Water Pow.       $13.750  (9.018%) -26.667%  $17.500  (7.086%) 
+27.273%
WPS Resources          $26.750  (6.804%) -20.446%  $34.000  (5.471%) 
+27.103%
Ipalco Enterprises*    $30.000  (7.067%) -15.493%  $38.125  (5.666%) 
+27.083%
Ohio Edison*           $18.500  (8.108%) -18.681%  $23.500  (6.383%) 
+27.027%
United Illuminating    $29.500  (9.356%) -26.708%  $37.375  (7.545%) 
+26.695%
TECO Energy*           $20.250  (4.988%) -10.497%  $25.625  (4.136%) 
+26.543%
TNP Enterprises        $14.875  (5.378%)  -9.848%  $18.750  (4.693%) 
+26.050%
Delmarva Power         $18.141  (8.489%) -23.214%  $22.750  (6.769%) 
+25.409%
Sierra Pacific Res.    $18.750  (5.973%)  -8.537%  $23.375  (4.791%) 
+24.667%
St. Joseph L&P         $28.500  (6.316%)  -1.724%  $35.500  (5.183%) 
+24.561%
Duke Power*            $38.125  (5.141%) -10.029%  $47.375  (4.306%) 
+24.262%
MidAmer. (vs. IIG&E)   $19.875  (8.704%) -19.289%  $16.750  (7.164%) 
+23.887%
Southwestern PS        $26.500  (8.302%) -13.115%  $32.750  (6.717%) 
+23.585%
San Diego G&E*         $19.250  (7.896%) -22.613%  $23.750  (6.568%) 
+23.377%
New Eng. El. Sys.      $32.125  (7.159%) -17.891%  $39.625  (5.956%) 
+23.346%
Con Edison*            $25.750  (7.767%) -19.844%  $31.750  (6.425%) 
+23.301%
C&SW*$22.625  (7.514%) -25.207%  $27.875  (6.170%)  +23.204%
American EP*           $32.875  (7.300%) -11.448%  $40.500  (5.926%) 
+23.194%
Southern Co.*          $20.000  (5.900%)  -9.348%  $24.625  (4.954%) 
+23.125%
Commonwealth ES        $36.375  (8.247%) -21.351%  $44.750  (6.704%) 
+23.024%
PECO Energy*           $24.500  (6.612%) -19.008%  $30.125  (5.776%) 
+22.959%
Boston Edison          $24.000  (7.583%) -19.328%  $29.500  (6.372%) 
+22.917%
MidAmer. (vs. MWR)     $13.750  (8.436%) -23.611%  $16.750  (7.164%) 
+21.818%
DPL Inc.*              $20.500  (5.756%)  -0.606%  $24.750  (5.010%) 
+20.732%
SCEcorp*$14.625  (6.838%) -26.875%  $17.625  (5.674%)  +20.513%
PS Colorado*           $29.375  (6.808%)  -8.560%  $35.375  (5.767%) 
+20.425%
Hawaiian Elec. Ind.    $32.375  (7.290%)  -9.756%  $38.750  (6.193%) 
+19.691%
Upper Penin. En.       $15.500  (7.742%) -19.480%  $18.500  (6.757%) 
+19.355%
Wisconsin Energy*      $25.875  (5.449%)  -5.909%  $30.625  (4.800%) 
+18.357%
Union Electric*        $35.375  (6.897%)  -9.873%  $41.750  (5.988%) 
+18.021%
Bangor Hydro-Elec.     $9.750  (13.538%) -46.207%  $11.500  (6.261%) 
+17.949%
Florida Progress*      $30.000  (6.733%) -10.781%  $35.375  (5.710%) 
+17.917%
Fla. Public Utils.     $16.125  (7.194%) -14.000%  $18.875  (6.146%) 
+17.054%
West. Resources*       $28.625  (6.917%) -17.921%  $33.375  (6.052%) 
+16.594%
PacifiCorp*$18.125  (5.959%)  -5.844%  $21.125  (5.112%)  +16.552%
Cent. Hudson G&E       $26.500  (7.849%) -12.757%  $30.875  (6.802%) 
+16.509%
Pacific G&E*           $24.375  (8.041%) -30.605%  $28.375  (6.907%) 
+16.410%
Central La. Elec.      $23.1875 (6.296%)  -6.313%  $26.875  (5.581%) 
+15.903%
Black Hills            $21.375  (6.175%)  -6.044%  $24.750  (5.414%) 
+15.789%
Public Service EG*     $26.500  (8.151%) -17.187%  $30.625  (7.053%) 
+15.566%
Puget Sound P&L*       $20.125  (9.143%) -19.095%  $23.250  (7.914%) 
+15.528%
Dominion Res.*         $36.000  (7.167%) -20.661%  $41.250  (6.254%) 
+14.583%
LG&E Energy            $36.875  (5.830%)  -8.951%  $42.250  (5.254%) 
+14.576%
Minnesota P&L          $25.250  (8.000%) -22.901%  $28.375  (7.189%) 
+12.376%
Kansas City P&L*       $23.375  (6.503%)  +1.630%  $26.250  (5.943%) 
+12.299%
Northeast Utilities*   $21.625  (8.139%)  -8.947%  $24.250  (7.258%) 
+12.139%
WPL Holdings           $27.375  (7.014%) -16.730%  $30.625  (6.335%) 
+11.872%
Empire Dist. Elec.     $16.000  (8.000%) -22.892%  $17.875  (7.161%) 
+11.719%
N. States Power*       $44.000  (6.000%)  +2.029%  $49.125  (5.496%) 
+11.648%
KU Energy              $27.000  (6.074%)  -6.896%  $30.000  (5.600%) 
+11.111%
UtiliCorp United       $26.500  (6.491%) -16.535%  $29.375  (5.855%) 
+10.849%
O&R Utilities          $32.500  (7.877%) -20.000%  $35.750  (7.217%) 
+10.000%
Otter Tail Power       $32.500  (5.292%)  -3.704%  $35.750  (4.923%) 
+10.000%
MDU Resources##        $27.125  (5.899%) -13.889%  $19.875  (5.484%)  
+9.908%
Atlantic Energy        $17.625  (8.738%) -18.965%  $19.250  (8.000%)  
+9.220%
Nevada Power           $20.375  (7.853%) -15.544%  $22.250  (7.191%)  
+9.202%
Rochester G&E          $20.875  (8.623%) -20.476%  $22.625  (7.956%)  
+8.383%
Tucson EP              $3.000     (--)   -17.241%  $3.250     (--)    
+8.333%
Madison G&E            $32.500  (5.785%)  -3.704%  $35.000  (5.429%)  
+7.692%
Eastern Util. Asso.    $22.000  (7.000%) -21.429%  $23.625  (6.772%)  
+7.386%
LILCO$15.375 (11.577%) -36.923%  $16.375 (10.870%)   +6.504%
Cent. Maine Pow.       $13.5625 (6.636%)  -9.583%  $14.375  (6.261%)  
+5.991%
IES Industries         $25.250  (8.317%) -19.200%  $26.500  (7.924%)  
+4.950%
Northwestern PS        $26.750  (6.355%)  -6.956%  $28.000  (6.288%)  
+4.673%
Maine PS               $20.750  (8.867%) -19.807%  $21.375  (8.608%)  
+3.012%
Citizens Utils. `A'    $12.500    (--)    -2.710%  $12.750    (--)    
+2.000%
UGI$20.375  (6.773%)  -9.444%  $20.750  (6.747%)   +1.840%
Citizens Utils. `B'    $12.625    (--)   -26.300%  $12.750    (--)    
+0.990%
Centerior Energy*      $8.875   (9.014%) -33.019%  $8.875   (9.014%)       
0%
Green Mt. Power        $27.875  (7.605%) -10.081%  $27.750  (7.640%)  
-0.448%
Central Vt. PS         $13.500  (5.926%) -35.714%  $13.375  (5.981%)  
-0.926%
Montana Power          $23.000  (6.956%) -10.680%  $22.625  (7.072%)  
-1.630%
ESELCO$24.000  (4.167%)  +6.667%  $23.000  (4.522%)   -4.167%
Niagara Mohawk*        $14.250  (7.860%) -29.630%  $9.500  (11.789%) 
-33.333%
El Paso Electric       $0.8125     (--)  -69.767%  $0.34375   (--)   
-57.692%

STOCK SPLITS IN 1994:
# two for one
## three for two
* Indicates stock in Dow Jones Industry Group Performance Index for
electric utilities

All stocks traded on New York Stock Exchange except:
 American Stock Exchange: Florida Public Utilities, Maine Public Service,
and UNITIL NASDAQ: ESELCO,  Madison Gas & Electric, Otter Tail Power, and
Upper Peninsula Energy
 El Paso Electric is not listed. The price quoted is from the company.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

ELECTRIC UTILITY STOCKS FINISH 1995 AND START 1996 WITH STRONG GAINS

   Almost all electric utility stocks gained sharply in price--though not
as much as stocks overall--in 1995, erasing the losses of 1994 (EUW, 9 Jan
'95, 6).
   The gains continued in the first two trading sessions of this year, with
32 of the electric stocks on the New York Stock Exchange hitting new
52-week highs. Utility bonds also were near the 52-week highs reached at
the end of 1995.
   The Dow Jones Industry Group Performance Index for electric utilities
closed Dec. 29, 1995 at 259.73, up 23.54% from Dec. 30, 1994, and up 3.36
points from Dec. 31, 1993.
   On Jan. 3, 1996, the electric IGPI closed at 262.48, up 24.23% from Jan.
3, 1995, and its highest close since 267.53, on Nov. 1, 1993. The all-time
high remains 280.25, on Sept. 13, 1993.
   The Dow Jones Utilities, New York Stock Exchange Utilities, and Standard
& Poor's Utilities also set new 52-week highs on Jan. 3, 1996. The 228.27
close for the DJUA was up 24.72% from Jan. 3, 1995, and was its highest
close since 229.30, on Dec. 31, 1993.
   Ninety-six of the 103 publicly-traded electrics ended 1995 with price
gains, the most since 99 in 1991. Only six ended the year down, the fewest
since six in 1986. One was unchanged. In 1994, only four gained in price
and 99 lost.
   The Dow Jones Index of 10 utility bonds closed Dec. 29, 1995 at 102.06,
up 1,286 basis points or 14.42% from Dec. 30, 1994. The yield on these
bonds fell from 8.59% to 6.99%.
   On Jan. 3, 1996, the utility bond average also closed at 102.06, up
14.43% from Jan. 3, 1995. Their yield was 6.98%, down from 8.59% on Jan. 3,
1995.
   The 52-week high for utility bonds was 102.30, reached Dec. 28, 1995.
Also that day, the yield reached a 52-week low of 6.97%.
   On Jan. 3, 1996, the average yield on U.S. Treasury securities maturing
in one to 10 years hit a new 52-week low of 5.31%, down 248 basis points or
31.84% from Jan. 3, 1995.
   The yield on those maturing in 10 years or more also hit a new 52-week
low, at 6.17%, down 196 basis points or 24.11% from Jan. 3, 1995.
   Following are the electric stocks which hit new 52-week highs on Jan. 3
and 4. The number of new highs reached this year--if more than one--is in
parentheses, followed by the date and price of the latest new high,
followed by that day's closing price, if different:
   American Electric Power (two) on Jan. 3 ($41.375/$41.25); Baltimore Gas
& Electric on Jan. 2 ($29); Boston Edison (two) on Jan. 3 ($29.75); CIPSCO
on Jan. 3 ($39.375); CMS Energy (two) on Jan. 3 ($30.50/$31.25); CMS Energy
Class G on Jan. 3 ($19/$18.50);
   Also, Central Vermont Public Service on Jan. 3 ($14.50/$14.375); CINergy
on Jan. 3 ($31.25/$31.125); Con Edison on Jan. 2 ($32.50); DQE (two) on
Jan. 3 ($31.25/$31.125); DTE Energy (two) on Jan. 3 ($35.25/$35.125);
Dominion Resources (two) on Jan. 3 ($42.375);
   Also, Entergy on Jan. 2 ($29.50/$29.25); Florida Progress on Jan. 3
($35.875); General Public Utilities on Jan. 3 ($34.25/$34.125); Houston
Industries (two) on Jan. 3 ($24.875/$24.625); Illinova on Jan. 3 ($30.25);
Ipalco on Jan. 3 ($38.875/$38.75); NIPSCO Industries on Jan. 3
($38.75/$38.50);
   Also, New England Electric System on Jan. 3 ($40.25); Northern States
Power on Jan. 3 ($50.125); Ohio Edison (two) on Jan. 3 ($24.375/$24); PECO
Energy on Jan. 3 ($30.75); PacifiCorp on Jan. 3 ($21.875); Pinnacle West
Capital on Jan. 3 ($29.25);
   Also, Potomac Electric Power (two) on Jan. 3 ($26.625); Public Service
of Colorado on Jan. 3 ($36/$35.75); Public Service Enterprise Group on Jan.
3 ($31.125); TECO Energy on Jan. 3 ($26/$25.875); Texas Utilities on Jan. 3
($42/$41.875);
   Also, Union Electric on Jan. 3 ($42.25/$42); and Western Resources (two)
on Jan. 3 ($34.625/$34.50).

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

NIMO SEEKS FERC ENFORCEMENT ACTION AGAINST N.Y. PSC ON `QF' PAYMENTS

   Niagara Mohawk Power wants the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to
bring an enforcement action against the New York Public Service Commission
to bar it from implementing a 1991 state law requiring utilities to make
tax reimbursement payments to qualifying facilities.
   NiMo told FERC the law has required it to pay a total of almost
$18-million since 1991.
   The state legislature directs the PSC to order utilities to reimburse
QFs for natural gas import tax payments that the state requires QFs to pay
on fuel used to generate power that is sold to the utilities.
   According to NiMo, the state law is preempted by the Public Utility
Regulatory Policies Act and FERC's PURPA rules. ``The PSC cannot both obey
the New York statute and heed its obligations under Sec. 210 of PURPA,''
NiMo said (Docket No. EL96-26).
   The legislature imposed a monthly ``privilege tax'' on certain gas
importers amounting to 4.25% of the price paid for gas imported into the
state for use or consumption there. For cogenerating QFs, the amount of gas
taxed is that used in producing power for sale to utilities; the law
exempts gas used to produce power or steam for steam hosts.
   Utilities may pass the payments through in fuel-cost adjustments.
   NiMo itself paid about $7.2-million in 1994 and $4.8-million in 1995
through Sept. 30. The company projected it will pay between $7.2-million in
1996 and $13.5-million in the year 2006.
   FERC's 1995 rulings in cases involving Connecticut Power & Light and
Southern California Edison ``leave no room for doubt that this New York
statute is preempted'' because it requires utilities to pay avoided cost
rates to QFs, NiMo said.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

YANKEE ROWE SETTLEMENT FEATURES COST SAVINGS BECAUSE OF BARNWELL REOPENING

   Yankee Atomic Electric has filed with the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission an offer of settlement among parties in its decommissioning rate
case (Docket No. ER95-835).
   The decommissioning collection schedule is premised on an assumed
decommissioning cost of $306.4-million in 1995 dollars and trust fund
earnings assumptions specified in the package. The cost is lower than
proposed early last year because of unexpected availability of the
Barnwell, S.C., waste disposal site.
   The company, which is owned by and supplies 10 New England utilities
with nuclear power from its 185-MW plant in Rowe, Mass., said adoption of
the settlement would not set a precedent for any other plant or for any
future proceeding on Yankee.
   Signing the settlement are the attorneys general of Massachusetts and
Rhode Island, the Rhode Island Division of Public Utilities & Carriers, and
the Town of Norwood, Mass.
   Yankee is now decommissioning the plant. Last March, it submitted a
wholesale rate case to FERC based on an updated decommissioning cost study
that incorporated the Nuclear Regulatory Commission's approval of the
decommissioning plan, the Dept. of Energy's plans for accepting Yankee's
spent fuel for disposal, and updated assumptions on disposal of the plant's
low-level waste.
   Yankee's March 31 filing was based on an estimated decommissioning cost
of $352.3-million and a determination that annual collections of
$58.2-million through June 2000 would be needed to fund that amount. The
estimate assumed that Yankee would not be able to start certain major
dismantlement activity until 2003, because a low-level waste disposal
facility was not available.
   On July 1, however, South Carolina reopened the Barnwell facility to
waste generators outside the Southeast Compact states. Yankee computed then
that Barnwell's availability would allow the company to start sooner and
cut the total cost to $303.2-million, with annual collections of
$45.3-million.
   The settlement details how the cost will be allocated. It also specifies
that if Barnwell becomes unavailable, Yankee will notify FERC and will
increase its monthly collection to reflect a $50-million annual charge.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

HOUSE-SENATE TELECOM COMPROMISE SEEN PROTECTING UTILITY CONSUMERS

   House and Senate conferees on telecommunications reform legislation have
agreed on language allowing registered utility holding companies to offer
telecom services; sources say the compromise language gives electricity
consumers more protection than legislation approved last year by the
Senate.
   The Senate last summer approved telecom reform legislation that would
have carved out an exemption for utility telecom affiliates from SEC
regulation under the Public Utility Holding Company Act (EUW, 19 June '95,
3). The only consumer protections in that bill were provisions allowing
state regulators to audit and examine the telecom operating company's books
and records.
   The conferees' compromise retains the provisions giving states audit
authority and access to telecom affiliate books and records, but it also
would require state approval of transfers of telecom assets out of an
operating company's rate base, according to sources familiar with the
language.
   The compromise also includes another change that industry sources said
are favorable to utilities and consumers alike: The establishment of a new
kind of entity, the exempt telecommunications company (ETC), which would be
exempt from PUHCA regulation as long as its sole purpose is to provide
telecom services.
   ``The idea follows the Energy Policy Act and the creation of the exempt
wholesale generator,'' an attorney familiar with the compromise said. ``The
ETC has to be a single-purpose subsidiary. If it is single purpose, then it
qualifies. Once it qualifies and it is an ETC, the asset transfer provision
kicks in, and the state must approve all asset transfers.''
   The compromise also would require that the Securities & Exchange
Commission be notified of any issuance of securities related to ETCs. If on
the basis of that report, the SEC wants more information, the ETC must
provide it.
   The legislation also prohibits the use of utility assets as collateral
for ETC investments, and includes a provision that gives states the
authority to approve contracts among operating companies, utility holding
companies and ETCs.
   ``This is a significant additional protection for consumers over and
above what the Senate bill contained,'' the attorney said.
   The compromise only narrowly addresses the so-called ``Ohio Power''
issue, which refers to a federal court ruling that the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission cannot review transactions between holding company
affiliates already approved by the SEC.
   ``The compromise establishes no SEC preemption under `Ohio Power' for
contracts between affiliates in the area of telecommunications,'' the
attorney said. Instead, it stresses that the Federal Communications
Commission and the states have jurisdiction.
   The language also gives exempt utility holding companies the ability to
offer telecom services ``without limitation,'' according to the attorney.
   Sources said the breakthrough came despite opposition by Rep. John
Dingell (D-Mich.), ranking minority member of the House Commerce Committee
and an ardent champion of PUHCA.
   One source said Dingell's opposition to giving PUHCA exemptions remains
strong, but that a determined effort by Sen. Trent Lott (R-Miss.) to give
registereds the ability to offer telecom carried the day.
   ``This compromise has more to do with how much Trent Lott wanted it than
with anything else,'' this source said.
   Despite this compromise, the telecom legislation is not likely to move
quickly, sources agreed. Significant issues involving the ownership of
multiple news media outlets, various broadcast issues and other problems
remain to be resolved before the legislation returns to the House and
Senate for approval.
   Meanwhile, utility industry officials are continuing their lobbying
efforts to persuade House conferees to reject a Senate proposal backed by
the cable television industry that utility officials say could hike their
share of the costs of using and maintaining their poles by 50%.
   The Senate proposal is the latest wrinkle in the three-year fight
between cable companies and utilities over how to divide the cost of
attachments to utility poles.
   While this issue may appear small compared with the multi-billion-dollar
market at stake in the telecom industry restructuring debate, utility
officials are taking it very seriously. They say utilities and their
customers would see millions of dollars in increased pole maintenance costs
if the Senate proposal becomes law.
   Cable companies currently pay for their pole attachments at a subsidized
rate set by regulators under legislation approved years ago by Congress
when cable was a fledgling industry.
   But now that cable is everywhere, and that industry is ready to slug it
out with telephone companies for telecom customers, utilities say it is
time for them to pay a market rate, or at least a fair share, for their
pole attachments.
   Under legislation approved by the House, telecom providers would share
the fully allocated costs of their attachments, including repair and
allocation costs. Cable companies that offer only television service would
continue to pay at the current incremental rates, but if they offer telecom
services they would have to pay fully allocated costs.
   The Senate-passed telecom reform bill includes a complicated formula for
allocating pole attachment costs that would raise cable costs slightly, and
raise utilities' costs by about 38%.
   Under a proposal offered as a compromise by Senate conferees last month,
cable companies actually would pay less than under the Senate-passed bill,
while utilities would see their costs increase by 50%, according to an
industry analysis.
   If a utility company had 500,000 poles used by cable and telcos it would
lose $5.75-million per year under the Senate provision, and $8-million
annually under the new Senate proposal.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

EPRI ANALYSIS SAYS ELECTRICAL WORKERS HAVE 10-20% MORE RISK OF BRAIN
CANCER

   A new Electric Power Research Institute analysis of previous studies of
possible health risks associated with electromagnetic fields concludes that
electrical workers are about 10% to 20% more likely to develop brain cancer
than other workers.
   But because no clear relationship can be found between the amount of
exposure to EMF and the level of risk, researchers cannot conclude that
EMFs cause brain cancer, the analysis said.
   EPRI researcher Leeka Kheifets and University of California scientists
Abdelmonem Afifi, Patricia Buffler and Zhong Zhang performed a
``meta-analysis'' of 29 studies of EMF and brain cancer conducted from 1983
to 1994 in 12 countries. A meta-analysis is an examination of multiple
studies to determine what common conclusions can be drawn.
   About a third of the studies were conducted in the U.S., another third
in Scandinavia, and the remainder in Canada, Australia, Great Britain,
Germany and other countries. The earliest study was published in 1983,
while the largest number of studies, six, appeared in 1991.
   About half of the studies included follow-up before 1984 and were
published before 1990. Study designs used by the investigators included
proportional mortality, case-control analysis of death certificate data,
case control, and cohort studies.
   The EPRI study, published in the December issue of the Journal of
Occupational and Environmental Medicine, said most of the studies indicated
only a small elevation in risk, but noted ``considerable heterogeneity
among the results.''
   The U.S. and other studies showed relative risk increases of 40% or
higher compared to those with no occupational exposures to EMFs. The
Scandinavian studies, almost all of which were cohort studies based on
incident risk, showed the lowest relative risks for brain cancer. The
reasons for the lower relative risk reported in the Scandinavian studies
``are not exactly clear,'' the EPRI study said.
   To obtain the estimate of an increased risk of 10% to 20% for electrical
workers, the EPRI study adjusted each of the 29 studies' individual
findings according to a formula based on 15 criteria, including quality of
information, adequacy of design, possible biases and specificity of data.
   The research team said the body of evidence examined in the study allows
three possible interpretations: no association exists between occupational
exposure to EMF and the risk of cancer; a small effect exists, and
inconsistencies among studies reflects biases in the studies; the true EMF
exposure effect is large, but affects only a small number of individuals
who are somehow ``preconditioned.''
   ``We believe that this meta-analysis provides some evidence against the
hypothesis of no association between occupational exposure to EMF and the
risk of cancer, provides some evidence to support the hypothesis of a small
pervasive effect, and provides no clues that could help to identify a
circumstance or condition that would correspond to the third hypothesis,''
the researchers concluded.
   ``However, because of the lack of adequate exposure information and a
clear dose-response pattern, in is not possible to conclude that EMF is
causally associated with the observed excess of brain cancer in workers
employed in electrical occupations.''

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

TROUBLED OKLAHOMA CO-OP DENIES ALLEGATIONS IN CLASS-ACTION SUIT

   Verdigris Valley Electric Cooperative, its economic development
subsidiary and four current and former trustees have formally denied
allegations of gross negligence, breach of fiduciary duty and violation of
state and federal laws or regulations in connection with what has been
called the largest economic development loss ever sustained by a
distribution cooperative.
   The allegations were raised in a class-action lawsuit filed in October
by Cal McKinney, a member and harsh critic of the Collinsville, Okla.-based
co-op, which in October 1993 announced a $5.68-million write-off from an
economic development loan to Precision Tubulars, a metalworking firm which
went bankrupt without ever reaching full production (In the District Court
of Tulsa County, Case No. CJ-95-04552) (EUW, 23 Oct '95, 11).
   McKinney's suit was designed to make co-op members financially whole.
   In his answer on behalf of the co-op, Tulsa attorney Stephen Riley also
asserted that losses from the Precision deal were ``due to circumstances
beyond [defendants'] control.'' He also asserted that an Oklahoma law
requiring member approval before a co-op can encumber or otherwise dispose
of a ``substantial'' portion of its assets does not apply in this case.
   The co-op admits loaning Precision $6.79-million, but denies that this
constituted a substantial portion of its assets. VVEC's current annual
report lists total assets of $57-million.
   Riley also contends that McKinney lacks standing to represent other
co-op members, and contends that the suit is barred by the two-year statute
of limitations. He said McKinney knew or should have known of the losses to
VVEC members before it was officially announced at the October 1993 annual
meeting because of news accounts of Precision's problems starting in 1991.
   Riley said that former general manager Doyle Fulton and five current and
former trustees also named as defendants are not covered by the answer
because they have not yet been officially served with copies of the
lawsuit. An amended answer will be filed once they are served, he said.
   Riley's answer lists nine grounds on which he contends the suit should
be dismissed, but also indicated that the defendants acknowledge a need for
further discovery and investigation.
   No procedural schedule has been set for the case, but the discovery
process is expected to be extremely lengthy and complex. This litigation
marks the first time when all aspects of the Precision deal and VVEC's
involvement in it has been subject to court review. A Washington County
civil case involving much narrower issues generated one of the largest
court files in that county's history.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

FERC ALJ RULING ON SYNFUELS PROJECT COULD HIT BASIN ELECTRIC CO-OP HARD

   The Great Plains Synfuels Plant near Beulah, N.D., could be forced to
shut down and Basin Electric Power Cooperative could suffer negative
financial, rate, and capacity consequences as a result if a preliminary
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission ruling issued Dec. 29 is ultimately
affirmed.
   According to Basin Electric, settlement agreements stemming from the
long and troubled history of the Great Plains plant were struck in April
1994 with the Dakota Gasification Company (DGC), a non-regulated subsidiary
of the cooperative, and certain pipeline companies. The agreements
stipulate that synthetic gas from Great Plains is to be purchased by the
pipelines at defined prices above the market price over a seven-year
period.
   However, in FERC proceedings on the prudence of these accords, gas
consumer groups challenged these provisions and on Dec. 29 a FERC
administrative law judge ruled that the stipulated gas pricing and purchase
provisions were invalid. He recommended setting a new price equal to the
Gulf Coast index plus 5%.
   Dakota Gasification Co.'s current cost of producing synthetic gas is
$2.60/dekatherm. According to DGC vice president Kent Janssen, the new
price set by the ALJ ``comes nowhere near covering costs.''
   ``For the judge to suggest DGC can survive with that price is
ludicrous,'' Janssen declared.
   A shutdown of Great Plains would cost Basin Electric more than
$25-million annually in lost revenue, a utility spokesman said. In
addition, it could force the utility to raise the electric rates of its 126
member co-ops by an estimated 10% and would idle about 100 MW of the
900-MW, two-unit Antelope power station. ``We would not look at this as a
great bonanza,'' the spokesman said.
   Based on these concerns, DGC said it will vigorously challenge the ALJ's
ruling. All parties have 30 days from Dec. 29 to file exceptions with FERC.
Janssen said DGC plans to file within that period.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

CANADA'S ALBERTA LAUNCHES SWEEPING RESTRUCTURING OF WHOLESALE MARKET

   The province of Alberta, Canada, launched a sweeping restructuring of
the wholesale power industry on Jan. 1 that is the first to go into
operation in North America, with transmission separated from generation.
   So far, only wholesale transactions are involved, although a study will
be conducted soon on whether changes are needed that would usher in retail
wheeling as well.
   ``The lights are on, the new system is working properly,'' said Larry
Charach, senior director of electric policy for the Alberta Dept. of
Energy, which has overseen the restructuring. Some pool workers have been
working up to 40 hours straight to get the new system running.
   ``We expect in the long term, rates will be lower because we are
bringing in competitive forces,'' said Charach. ``Without the
restructuring, rates could have risen 20% within a few years.'' Pool rates
on Jan. 3 were about (U.S.) $7/MWh for on-peak power and about $4/MWh for
off-peak power.
   The new Power Pool of Alberta will be a clearing house for all power
sold within the province and for deals utilities strike with other
utilities, independent producers or power marketers from outside the
province in Canada or the United States.
   The pool functions as a spot market for all buying and selling of power
at hourly prices established by suppliers and purchasers bidding into the
pool.
   Incorporated into the pool were all existing generating units of the
province's three major utilities--TransAlta Utilities, Alberta Power and
Edmonton Power. The generation will be allocated to existing customers,
based on unamortized original or historic costs.
   The customers include generating utilities and distribution utilities
such as the cities of Calgary, Lethbridge and Red Deer. The three cities
have just awarded ZE PowerGroup of Richmond, British Columbia, a contract
to manage their power marketing and negotiate contracts with individual
suppliers, said Zak El-Ramly, ZE PowerGroup president. The cities can buy
separately or as a group, with a total of more than 1,100 MW of buying
power.
   Gerry Roberts, Calgary's manager of sales and services, said each city
is entitled to an allotment from the pool. Calgary previously bought all of
its power from TransAlta Utilities, which is based in Calgary.
   TransAlta, Edmonton Power, Alberta Power and the city of Calgary have
formed Grid Co. of Alberta Inc. (Gridco), which pools the operation of
their transmission into a single system. The utilities will retain
ownership of their wires. Transmission costs will be averaged so that the
rate will be the same province-wide.
   Open access would be provided on a non-discriminatory basis to all. This
includes independent power producers, which are expected to be the ones
building any new power plants needed in Alberta in the future.
   Since 1982, under the Alberta Electric Energy Marketing Act, utilities
within the province had averaged generation and transmission costs because
without the deal, rates of some utilities would have been dramatically
higher.
   But driving the need for change were complaints from TransAlta that it
was subsidizing ratepayers of other utilities. Industrial customers also
were claiming they were paying too much for power.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

ELCON ISSUES `ROAD MAP' TO COMPETITION WITH STRANDED-COST RECOVERY FORMULA

   The Electricity Consumers Resource Council last week issued a ``Road Map
for the Transition'' designed to respond to criticisms that its ``Blueprint
for Customer Choice'' lacked specifics--particularly in the area of
stranded investment.
   The Edison Electric Institute quickly denounced the so-called road map
as ``full of dead ends and some pretty deep potholes.'' EEI criticized the
proposal as a one-size-fits-all imposition of a federal structure on the
country's electric system that will benefit ELCON's members ``at the
expense of everyone else.''
   Nevertheless, with its road map to retail competition ELCON once again
has seized the initiative in the national debate over the future structure
of the electric industry. It offers what is seen as the first comprehensive
restructuring proposal--but probably not the last.
   When ELCON released its blueprint in September, it purposely glossed
over the stranded-cost issue. Shortly thereafter, Rep. Dan Schaefer
(R-Colo.) and William Massey of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
challenged the group to come forward with specific proposals addressing
stranded-cost recovery.
   ELCON's answer to those challenges is a complicated five-step process
featuring a formula for dividing up responsibility for unmitigable stranded
investment. The formula assigns a ``responsibility factor'' to utilities,
which would be determined by state regulators according to how efficiently
a utility responded to regulatory mandates and whether the company opposed
the mandates in the first place.
   A utility would be required to absorb at least 50% of its unmitigable
stranded costs, but in practice it probably would have to bear a greater
share. In a nutshell, the formula starts by assigning stranded costs
equally between ratepayers and shareholders, with the responsibility factor
deciding how much of the ratepayers' 50% share the utility would be
required to absorb in addition to its 50% share.
   But the formula only would be applied after state regulators conduct
what ELCON is billing as ``the last great rate case'' to determine what
sunk costs are not mitigable. In the alternative, the utility could opt to
sell its generation assets as a means of determining stranded costs.
   Stranded-cost recovery mechanisms would be subject to negotiation with
individual customers and classes of customers. Regulators would decide
recovery in the absence of a negotiated settlement. The utility would have
no more than five years to recover its stranded costs.
   ELCON executive director John Anderson called the road map's
stranded-cost provisions a ``statesmanlike'' effort to end the impasse
between ELCON and EEI over stranded-cost recovery. Historically, ELCON has
rejected any level of stranded-cost recovery in response to EEI's position
that utilities are entitled to 100% recovery. With its proposal on the
table, the issue of stranded-cost recovery is now open to negotiation,
Anderson suggested.
   But EEI president Thomas Kuhn called ELCON's proposal on stranded costs
a nonstarter. The formula, designed to ensure little if any stranded-cost
recovery, does not represent any change in ELCON's position, he said.
   ``I don't see that there's anything new in the ELCON proposal,'' Kuhn
said in an appearance before the Washington International Energy Group.
``We don't see a bargaining chip here at all.''
   Kuhn cited ``leading economists,'' FERC and most states as endorsing
EEI's position that utilities are entitled to 100% recovery. He predicted
that ELCON's complicated proposal will be rejected by the states.
   ELCON's road map proposes a three-year transition to retail competition
featuring a ``customer election period'' based on the telephone industry
experience. No later than the mid-point of the three-year transition
period, state regulators would feature a ``Day One'' designating the
beginning of the customer election period. As of that date, every customer
would have the right to choose an electric service provider. Customers
would be notified at least six months prior to ``Day One'' of their right
to switch from their utility provider.
   At the end of the transition, all generation assets will have been
removed from rate base. The generation company may continue to sell the
asset's power to its affiliated--or previously affiliated--distribution
company beyond the transition period under terms of a transition contract
approved by the state.
   Transition contracts also would provide for ancillary and backup
services to qualifying facilities under the Public Utility Regulatory
Policies Act. The utility PURPA Reform Group criticized this aspect of the
proposal as setting the stage for ``the last great PURPA land rush.'' The
group called it inconsistent to deny utilities stranded costs while
committing them indefinitely to the purchase of QF power.
   But ELCON's Anderson rejected utility complaints about uneconomic QF
contracts as ``a thing of the past.'' No utility is entering into high-cost
contracts with PURPA facilities today, he said. The importance of PURPA's
Section 210 is not its mandatory purchase provision, but the section's
requirements that utilities provide backup and ancillary services to QFs.
   As a check against market power, ELCON's road map calls for operational
unbundling of vertically integrated utilities using the Dept. of Justice's
methodology. While free market entry is an important check, it is not
sufficient in and of itself, the group said. Transmission assets would be
turned over to an independent system operator and controls would be placed
on interaffiliate pricing of transmission services and interaffiliate
distribution transactions.
   EEI's Kuhn dismissed ELCON's ``specious'' concerns about utility market
power and industry concentration. The electric utility industry is a great
deal less concentrated than the telephone industry or most ELCON members,
Kuhn asserted.
   ELCON further proposed that, during the first two years of the
transition, owners of FERC-regulated transmission facilities would be
required to file regional transmission group proposals. Siting of new
interstate transmission systems would become FERC's responsibility. ELCON
also proposed establishment of unregulated Private Delivery Systems, or
PDSs, such as a line linking two industrial facilities.
   If a new transmission line is built privately and without the exercise
of eminent domain, then the line would be unregulated. Owners of existing
transmission systems could petition FERC for a license to opt out from rate
regulation if the owner can show it does not exercise market power and the
line was not sited through the power of eminent domain. The unregulated
privately owned transmission facilities would provide competitive pressures
on monopoly transmission providers, ELCON suggested.
   Independent System operator franchises would be granted for finite
periods in order to allow others the opportunity to competitively bid for
the right to serve the franchise, ELCON proposed.
   Local distribution services would be unbundled with traditional
distribution functions split between the ``wires'' business and the
electric services merchant business under the proposal.
   ELCON also proposes establishment of joint federal-state boards to make
recommendations for state legislative actions to ensure universal service.
   The road map places much of the responsibility for the outcome of the
transition with state regulators, said ELCON's Anderson. The proposal is
intended to put to rest concerns of state regulators that ELCON advocates
``federalizing the system,'' he said: ``The states are going to have a
whole lot to do'' if the road map is implemented.
   ELCON's road map is ``pretty bold,'' but on first reading is not
specific enough to rebut complaints that the industry group seeks to
federalize electricity policy, said Charles Gray, assistant general counsel
for the National Assn. of Regulatory Utility Commissioners.
   EEI attacked the road map as ``shifting significant authority away from
the states to the federal government.'' EEI's Kuhn called for allowing
individual states to continue experimenting while FERC irons out its
rulemaking on wholesale open access.
   ``A lot more questions need to be answered,'' said NARUC's Gray. ``But
it's a discussion draft and you have to give them credit for that.''
   NARUC shipped the proposal out to its membership last week, Gray said,
citing a high degree of interest in it among state regulators. ``How you
sort out the transition is of high interest to NARUC,'' Gray said.
   The proposal also is the subject of strong interest on Capitol Hill.
ELCON's Anderson is a featured speaker at a conference in Colorado this
week, on an agenda that features Rep. Dan Schaefer (R-Colo.), chairman of
the House energy and power subcommittee, who is spearheading legislation to
promote retail competition and the end of utility monopoly regulation.
   Anderson downplayed the weight ELCON's proposal will carry with Schaefer
as he drafts his legislative proposal. ``I'm not naive enough to think we
are going to write the bill,'' Anderson said.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

FEDERAL BUDGET IMPASSE PROMPTS FERC TO POSTPONE DATE FOR COMMENTS ON EIS

   The showdown between Congress and the administration over the federal
budget has prompted the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to postpone
the Jan. 8 deadline for comments on its draft environmental impact
statement on the air pollution consequences of the open-access transmission
rulemaking.
   The postponement is in response to requests from officials at the
Environmental Protection Agency and other federal agencies shut down by the
budget impasse, preventing those agencies from preparing comments.
   FERC said it will publish a future notice establishing a new deadline.
It remains to be seen whether the delay in the EIS process will force a
similar delay by FERC in finalizing the open-access rulemaking, proposed
March 29, 1995. FERC had hoped to issue the final rule this spring.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

N.Y. PSC LAW JUDGE RECOMMENDS FORMING AN ISO FOR TRANSITION TO RETAIL
ACCESS

   New York should establish an independent system operator to formalize
wholesale competition and ensure a smooth transition to retail access, a
state administrative law judge has recommended.
   The judge's recommendation--issued as part of the state's Competitive
Opportunities proceeding--also calls for separating transmission and
distribution from generation and for recovering stranded costs with an
access charge imposed by a distribution company.
   The recommended decision was filed Dec. 22 by the state's Department of
Public Service administrative law judge Judith Lee and Ronald Liberty,
deputy director for the Energy and Water Division. It is subject to review
by the state's Public Service Commission, which will ultimately accept,
modify or reject it. The proceeding itself, which solicited proposals to
restructure the state's electric utility market, is aimed at lowering New
York's high electric rates.
   Key parts of the more than 200-page review:
   -- Strandable costs ``may be made unrecoverable by the transition from
regulation to a competitive market for electricity.'' These costs, the
decision states, could be recovered by a separate mechanism outside the
market, such as a non-bypassable access charge or wires charge imposed by a
distribution company;
   -- Transmission and distribution should be separate from generation, Lee
suggests, ``in order to limit the exercise of market power,'' and T&D
companies will need to serve all would-be buyers in the short term.
   Lee sees as ``critical'' the reliability of the bulk power system and
suggests that it should not be sacrificed in any way in order to achieve
the potential price reduction that may be associated with a system of
retail access. Therefore, ``effective competition at the wholesale level
should be established first, with an eye toward adding retail access as
rapidly as possible once a market is established and reliability is
ensured.''
   No timetable for the ``as rapidly as possible'' transition to retail
access has been established, a PSC spokesperson told Electric Utility
Week.
   Lee's recommendation was a ``tremendous disappointment'' to New York
industrials ``and to any advocate of full and open retail competition,''
said Barbara Brenner, counsel to Multiple Interveners, the industrial users
group. ``It delays, without schedule, retail competition and, in fact,
appears to delay even the implementation of wholesale competition for two
years.''
   Utilities, on the other hand, liked the proposal. Their trade group, the
Energy Assn. of New York State, applauded the law judge's recommendation as
``a thoughtful approach to what is clearly an incredibly complex series of
issues.''
   ``Wholesale competition to the extent that the Energy Association has
been talking about is far more significant than what might exist today in
New York--and in most other places,'' said Howard Shapiro, the
association's president.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

NYMEX PRESIDENT PREDICTS REGULATORY ACTION SOON, MARCH LAUNCH OF FUTURES

   Patrick Thompson, president of the New York Mercantile Exchange, last
week predicted the Commodity Futures Trading Commission will act on the
exchange's two proposed electricity futures contracts before the end of the
month, which could allow trading to begin by the end of March or early in
the second quarter of this year.
   NYMEX filed supplemental information on its proposed futures contracts
with the CFTC late last month. The material, responding to commission
inquiries concerning the deliverability of the commodity and potential
regulation of electricity futures by the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission, was filed under a claim of confidentiality and was not made
publicly available.
   The confidential filing cleared the way for CFTC staff to begin
preparing a memorandum for consideration by the commission. The four
sitting commissioners likely will begin considering whether to approve the
contracts later this month, according to a CFTC source.
   Assuming the supplemental filing from NYMEX answers all the questions
raised by the CFTC staff, the memorandum now being drafted could be sent to
the commission within two weeks, the CFTC source said.
   ``I'm really confident now that the CFTC has had all of its questions
answered--both technical and regulatory,'' NYMEX's Thompson said in a
telephone interview last week. ``I expect the approval process to conclude
very quickly.''
   NYMEX is expected to launch both contracts at the same time. The two
contracts are virtually identical, except for the physical delivery points
at the Palo Verde nuclear station switchyard and the California/Oregon
border intertie. The exchange plans to let the markets decide whether one
or both futures contracts will be sustained in the long term.
   With the road seemingly clear for launch of the western contracts, NYMEX
is beginning to focus on developing an eastern futures contract.
   NYMEX's advisory group is considering at least three systems for a
potential delivery point for a futures contract in the East, according to
sources. Those systems are the Pennsylvania-New Jersey-Maryland
Interconnection, the Tennessee Valley Authority and American Electric
Power. The Southern Company's system is also seen as a possible delivery
point, sources said.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

UTILITIES SEE GM'S ELECTRIC VEHICLE PLAN INTRODUCING `EXCITING NEW ERA'

   General Motors' announcement last week that it will market a new
electric passenger car and an electric pickup truck this fall ``shows that
electric vehicles are ready to play a significant role'' in reducing
pollution, the Edison Electric Institute declared. EEI has been pushing for
EV development for several years, largely against automakers' resistance.
   The announcement ``marks the beginning of an exciting new era in
transportation,'' according to EEI. Not only do utilities want EVs for
their emission-reduction power, which could ease pressure to get more
reductions from power plants, but they want them for their addition to
off-peak loads.
   GM's plan--to sell the vehicles in Los Angeles, San Diego, Phoenix, and
Tucson--was made public at the Los Angeles Auto Show. It came in the wake
of California Air Resources Board action easing its EV sales requirement in
the state. Some sources said the automaker's plan was a quid pro quo for
the CARB decision.
   ``We have worked with General Motors cooperatively over many years in
clean, energy-efficient transportation technology,'' said EEI vice
president Tom Morron, ``and we look forward to helping them introduce these
cars in any way we can. Even now, for example, more than 80 electric
utilities have pledged to purchase electric fleet vehicles and tonight,
many of those fleet managers are preparing to contact local dealers around
the country for information on the electric S-series pickup--a real truck,
from a real truck maker.''
   Besides selling a car, GM also said it will market an electric pickup
truck, a converted Chevrolet S-10, nationwide in 1997 for use in commercial
fleets. The company has not set production volumes for either vehicle, a
spokesman said, but will ``let the market decide'' how many to build.
   An advancement of GM's Impact prototype, the two-seat EV1 will feature a
price tag in the mid-$30,000 range. The EV1's lead acid batteries will
provide a 70- to 90-mile driving range, depending on weather and driving
habits, the spokesman said.
   The car will be marketed through Saturn dealerships in Los Angeles, San
Diego, Phoenix and Tucson.
   In a separate announcement, Southern California Edison said it opened
its first electric charging station Wednesday at a retail outlet--a
Wal-Mart store in the City of Industry--and plans to open more in
partnership with Wal-Mart. SoCal Ed paid for the charging ports while
Wal-Mart paid to have the electrical circuitry installed and it also will
pay the electricity costs.
   SoCal Ed hopes to install between 50 and 100 charging stations around
Los Angeles in the next year to test how they will be used. The utility and
the Los Angeles Dept. of Water and Power already have 75 charging stations
at utility headquarters and branches.
   According to GM's announcement, the EV1 is equipped with dual airbags,
anti-lock brakes, a CD player and cruise control. ``It is the world's most
aerodynamic production vehicle and it carries 23 new patents in a variety
of new technologies,'' the company said.
   Both vehicles will use the Delco Electronics Magne-Charge inductive
charging system, according to GM, which said it has already been tested and
received well by more than 500 people in GM's PrEView Drive EV test drive
program.
   One reason the company is introducing the vehicles in Southern
California and Arizona markets, an official said, is that ``they afford the
topographical and climatic conditions found to be most favorable to
electric vehicle operation.''

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

MOODY'S SEES HIGH PRICES, STRANDED ASSETS HURTING NORTHEAST ELECTRICS

   High prices and stranded-cost exposure make electric utilities in the
Northeast particularly vulnerable to competition, Moody's Investors Service
said in a report released at the end of December.
   ``High break-even prices and the stranded-cost exposure of the majority
of utilities in the Northeast competitive arena poorly position these
utilities to respond in a fully competitive environment.
   ``Combined with recent initiatives in the region to quicken the pace of
deregulation, Moody's expects downgrades to continue, especially in the
face of negative transition cost decisions and/or definitive moves to allow
open access,'' said analysts Julia Doetsch, Paul Fremont, Susan Abbot, and
Douglas Watson, in the report ``Northeast Break-Even Analysis.''
   Moody's defined the ``Northeast'' as the investor-owned systems within
two transmission interconnects of Con Edison, plus the Massachusetts
Municipal Wholesale Electric, New York Power Authority, Hydro Quebec, and
New Brunswick Power. It includes all of the New England and New York power
pools, plus Atlantic Electric, Delmarva Power, General Public Utilities,
Pennsylvania Power & Light, and Public Service Electric & Gas in the
Pennsylvania-New Jersey-Maryland Interconnection (PJM).
   High prices in the area reflect expensive, recently-completed nuclear
plants, and purchased-power pacts mandated by regulators, Moody's said,
adding that these costs are not likely to be fully recoverable in rates in
an ``open, price competitive market'' even though ``all principles
articulated to date [by state and federal regulators] include language
supportive of full recovery of prudent, verifiable costs arising from past
regulatory decisions.
   ``However comforting for the utilities this is meant to be, the sheer
magnitude of potential stranded investments in the region may dampen
regulatory enthusiasm--especially where rate increases would be required to
recover such transition costs. If the recovery of lost revenues associated
with authorizing rate discounting is any guide to underlying state bias for
cost sharing with regard to retail wheeling, then unbridled optimism for
full cost recovery remains generally unwarranted. Pennsylvania, offering
100% recovery for such revenue erosion, may be the exception,'' Moody's
continued.
   ``Many of these utilities--and in turn their equity holders--will be
forced to bear some of the financial pain associated with the transition.
This in turn diminishes the equity cushion available to debtholders,
resulting in negative rating pressure.''
   Moody's estimated total stranded-cost exposure in the region at
$43-billion, about 25% of the U.S. total and 45% more than the same
companies' total combined equity.
   The average Moody's senior secured debt rating for Northeastern
utilities is now ``Baa1,'' below the U.S. average of ``A3,'' though only
three--Niagara Mohawk Power, PP&L, and Northeast Utilities unit Public
Service of New Hampshire--were downgraded in 1995.
   Moody's presented ``break even'' prices--defined as ``the price it must
charge for each unit of capacity to cover fixed charges after applying all
profits or margins from energy sales''--in three ways: for installed
generation, for installed generation plus purchased power, and for those
two plus deferred assets.
   With all three included, Long Island Lighting ranks first at $317/kW,
with $7,661,000,000 in stranded costs, mostly for the ``regulatory asset''
representing future cost recovery of the abandoned Shoreham nuclear plant.
Even based only on its own generation, Lilco's break-even price is $105/kW,
first in the group.
   Ranking first in stranded costs as a percentage of equity is Central
Maine Power, at 456%. Though CMP's break-even price based on its own
generation is only $29/kW, adding purchased power boosts that to $196/kW,
and deferred assets raises it to $231/kW.
   In the best shape are NYPA, with a break-even price of $6/kW including
all costs, and Hydro Quebec, at a negative $18/kW. They have no stranded
costs, Moody's noted.
   Among the investor-owned companies, the lowest break-even price
including all costs is Central Hudson Gas & Electric, at $49/kW. It also
has the lowest stranded costs as a percentage of equity, at 10%.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

UTILITIES SEEK TO EXPAND `TWO-COUNTY RULE' ALLOWING TAX-EXEMPT FINANCING

   In an interesting chapter in the ongoing brawl between investor-owned
and municipal utilities, a group of IOUs that now are able to issue
tax-exempt bonds--just as municipals do--are trying to persuade Congress to
let them expand their service territories without having to call in their
bonds immediately, as the law now requires.
   The budget reconciliation bill approved by Congress, but vetoed by
President Clinton, would make changes in the so-called ``two-county'' rule,
an obscure wrinkle in the tax code that allows a handful of investor-owned
electric and gas utilities to issue tax-exempt bonds if they meet certain
qualifications.
   As the law now stands, utilities that qualify as ``local furnishers'' of
service in an area consisting either of two contiguous counties or one
county and one city may issue tax-exempt bonds the way municipals do. Only
15 gas and electric IOUs currently qualify.
   One of these, Delmarva Power & Light, wants to expand its gas
distribution beyond the two-county limit, but does not want to call in its
bonds immediately, as the law now requires, and seek higher cost capital
elsewhere. So, Sen. William Roth (R-Del.), chairman of the Finance
Committee, inserted an amendment to the tax code that would give two-county
utilities that want to expand six months to call in their bonds.
   But Roth, who wants the federal budget balanced, added another line that
will prohibit any other IOU from becoming a two-county utility.
   Committee staff estimated that provision would save the government
$22-million annually.
   The Roth language was included in the budget bill that cleared Congress
and was vetoed by Clinton. When San Diego Gas & Electric, Consolidated
Edison, Duquesne Light, and the other utilities that enjoy two-county
status for a portion of their systems heard about Roth's language, they
began lobbying for a provision of their own.
   While the situation remains fluid, sources on Capitol Hill and officials
from investor-owned and municipal utility groups confirmed that SDG&E and
Con Ed are pushing for a new amendment that would allow them to expand
their territories and not have to call the bonds in until the full term of
the bonds expires.
   Municipals are outraged by the idea. ``We oppose this on the grounds
that it is bad public policy,'' one municipal industry lobbyist told
Electric Utility Week. ``Private entities should not benefit from public
funds. We get these bonds because we are public entities with special
obligations to the public that IOUs don't face.''
   The lobbyist said it is ``frustrating'' when IOU officials argue before
congressional panels with oversight on energy issues that municipals'
ability to issue tax-exempt bonds is anticompetitive. Some of the same
officials, the lobbyist said, want to expand the two-county rule to give a
handful of IOUs ``a better deal than they have now.''
   The SDG&E/Con Ed lobbying effort has raised eyebrows among other
industry competitors. Tony Smith, tax director and assistant comptroller
for Southern California Edison, said his company thinks the original
amendment to give companies that want to expand an extra six months to call
in their bonds ``would not be unreasonable.''
   He added, however, that SoCal Ed wants a level playing field for all
competitors. ``In general terms, while subsidies have made sense in the
past, we don't think they make sense as we go forward into greater
competition,'' Smith said.
   ``One business entity should not be receiving subsidies to the exclusion
of others. It makes sense that all business entities be treated the same
and taxed under the same rules. That opinion would apply to municipals as
well as to investor-owned companies.''
   SDG&E, which did not return telephone inquiries about its lobbying
effort, had $786-million in outstanding tax-exempt bonds at the end of
1994, according to Morgan Stanley. Con Ed had $1.635-billion in outstanding
bonds in the same year.
   Ron Clements, the Edison Electric Institute's director of governmental
affairs specializing in tax and financial issues, said the national IOU
association has no position on the provision or efforts to amend it.
   ``From a conceptual viewpoint, tax-exempt debt from a two-county
perspective has a very limited purpose,'' Clements said. ``Power has to be
produced and distributed within that two-county area. It's a limited fix
aimed at a limited number of companies.''
   Clements and others interviewed agreed that the efforts of the other
utilities to expand the Delmarva provision are likely to be dropped by
Senate staff because they are too controversial.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

WESTERN RESOURCES ACQUIRES A LARGE ADT STAKE; HOPES FOR JOINT MARKETING

   Western Resources has announced an agreement to acquire 15.4-million
shares, or 11.7%, of ADT Limited stock held by Laidlaw Inc., plus an option
to acquire 15.4-million additional shares.
   The transaction, valued at $215-million, is expected to close early this
year, subject to necessary approvals, and further expands Western's
investment in the security field (EUW, 23 Oct '95, 4). ADT is the nation's
largest provider of monitored security services, and the transaction will
make Western one of ADT's largest shareholders.
   John Hayes, Jr., Western chairman, president and CEO, said the company
plans to propose to ADT the possibilities of jointly marketing Western
Resources' Westar brand energy products and services through ADT's more
than 200 sales offices in North America, the United Kingdom and Europe.
Westar offers back-up power systems, appliance repair options and a
comprehensive array of environmental and energy management programs.
   Hayes described the ADT stock acquisition as part of Western's growth
strategy, under which the company invests in businesses with attractive
natural revenue growth, which complement existing energy business lines and
which over time could provide a chance for Western to work with others to
provide a branded identity for marketing additional products and services.
   In December, Western acquired Mobilfone Security, and in November it
acquired the commercial and residential security service business of
Communications & Signaling Inc., but both those firms have operations
limited to Western's home state of Kansas.
   ADT operates in 44 states with more than one million security service
customers. It reported operating revenues of $1.5-billion for the 12 months
ending Sept. 30, 1995.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

STATE OFFICIALS SEEK NEW SETTLEMENT PROVISIONS IN HYDRO RELICENSING PLAN

   A national organization of state environmental officials said it
supports key elements of a proposal by the National Hydropower Assn. to
revamp the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission's hydro relicensing
procedures, but said the NHA plan needs ``more explicit accommodations for
settlement provisions.''
   The Environmental Council of the States (ECOS), a group of environmental
officials from 50 of the U.S. states and territories, praised most features
of the NHA proposal, which was filed with FERC last summer (EUW, 17 July
'95, 13). The commission in October launched a rulemaking on the issue
(Docket No. RM-16), specifically asking for comment on NHA's proposal (EUW,
6 Nov '95, 2) and whether a formal negotiated rulemaking would be a good
approach.
   NHA recently told FERC a negotiated rulemaking would give the best
chance for timely reform of the commission's relicensing procedures.
   ECOS said it likes the NHA proposal's emphasis on reducing the overall
time for reviewing FERC license applications, eliminating redundant
reports, and involving all stakeholders at the earliest time possible in
the environmental review process.
   FERC should, however, include provisions to assist state efforts to
settle disputes among stakeholders, ECOS advised, ``beyond the
encouragement given in the NHA proposal.'' The group said many of its
concerns likely could be resolved by administrative reforms and would not
necessarily require more rulemaking.
   ``Specifically, there should be provisions to ensure that formal
regulatory positions from involved agencies are not solicited by FERC on
draft [National Environmental Policy Act] documents during ongoing
settlement negotiations,'' ECOS said. ``The outcome of negotiations can
greatly accelerate NEPA reviews. Conversely, the quest for reasonable
settlement terms could also be undermined by the continued pursuit of
formal regulatory positions that might constrain the flexibility of
participants in modifying their positions to work toward agreements.''
   FERC could include ``an escape clause'' that would allow the commission
to defer regulatory steps during ongoing settlement negotiations, ECOS
said. It agreed with NHA that the commission's ex parte rules on FERC
communications with participants in the licensing process need to be
reformed.
   ``Staff interpretations of ex parte constraints can be extreme and
result in a stifling of communications and early resolution of issues
between FERC and other agencies and participants,'' ECOS said.
   ``Other agencies of government, including our own, are sensitive to ex
parte concerns and yet are able to find ways to do business without
incurring these problems. Any reform proposal for hydropower licensing must
deal with this issue.''
   ECOS questioned the NHA proposal provision that strongly encourages FERC
to enter into a memorandum of understanding with other agencies to
coordinate input on relicensing proceedings, saying that NHA makes no clear
statement on why such an MOU is necessary.
   Alternatively, ECOS suggested that regulations could mandate ``the
consolidation of federal agency input into hydropower relicensing in a
coordinated time frame.'' In addition, ECOS said the proposal would benefit
from ``specific provisions that facilitate comprehensive river basin
planning by providing financial and/or technical support.''
   ``Such planning is critical to providing a clear and reasonable context
to any cumulative impact assessment in river basins,'' ECOS continued. ``It
is essential to provide a vision of what agencies and the public want in a
river basin and not just the more traditional regulatory view of what they
don't want. This should be extremely valuable to power producers seeking to
secure their future in a given basin.''

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

PACIFICORP OPENS KENTUCKY OFFICE TO WRAP UP A DEAL WITH BIG RIVERS

   PacifiCorp opened an office in downtown Henderson, Ky., at the start of
the new year in hopes of wrapping up negotiations to lease and manage Big
Rivers Electric's coal plants over the next 25 years.
   The two companies expect to sign a ``letter of intent'' before the end
of January, an action that would trigger a series of state and federal
regulatory rulings over the next 12 to 18 months.
   If a deal can be reached with PacifiCorp, Big Rivers would remain
structurally intact and avoid a feared default in 1997. The co-op would
``maintain a commitment'' to the region, said Big Rivers board president
Sandra Wood. ``There would remain a strong, viable utility presence in
western Kentucky--a utility that can provide attractive rates to our
customers and act as an aggressive recruiter of industry and jobs in the
region.''
   While Big Rivers made it official in late December that PacifiCorp was
its choice for a business partner that could help the troubled co-op put to
rest more than a decade of financial problems, several unsuccessful suitors
apparently are still waiting in the wings.
   One well-placed source told Electric Utility Week that U.S. Generating,
an independent power producer, and two investor-owned utilities, CINergy
and Louisville Gas & Electric, ``think they're still in the game.'' If the
Big Rivers/PacifiCorp talks break down, these companies are ready to step
into the breach.
   So, too, is East Kentucky Power Cooperative, the other generation and
transmission cooperative in Kentucky. An East Kentucky spokesman said the
Winchester-based co-op, which is four times the size of 85,000-customer Big
Rivers, intends to keep its proposal on the table until a Big
Rivers/PacifiCorp deal becomes final.
   The selection of PacifiCorp culminated a lengthy search by Big Rivers
for a palatable solution to its $1.2-billion debt, much of which is owed to
the Rural Utilities Service. The RUS' predecessor, the Rural
Electrification Administration, loaned most of the money needed to
construct the 440-MW D.B. Wilson coal plant near Matanzas, Ky., in the
early 1980s.
   Wilson, the main source of Big Rivers' financial woes, gave the co-op a
huge surplus of power after the co-op gambled and lost on its bet that a
multibillion-dollar synthetic fuels industry would sprout in its western
Kentucky service territory, thereby generating the need for more
electricity.
   Now, PacifiCorp is asked to be Big Rivers' savior. Under the winning
proposal submitted by the Portland, Ore., investor-owned utility, an as-yet
unnamed subsidiary of PacifiCorp would operate the three coal plants owned
by Big Rivers--480-MW Green, 455-MW Coleman and Wilson--in addition to the
315-MW Station Two plant owned by the city of Henderson but operated by Big
Rivers under a long-term contract.
   The subsidiary also would manage the plants' fuel supply and market
surplus power to other utilities in the eastern U.S.
   Handling coal purchases for Big Rivers would remove a stigma that has
surrounded the co-op since federal investigators uncovered a
bribery/kickback scheme several years ago. Three individuals have been
convicted so far on charges of bribing former Big Rivers general manager
William Thorpe, who was forced to resign in July 1992. Thorpe, who has
denied any wrongdoing, is expected to stand trial on a variety of criminal
charges next summer.
   Under the PacifiCorp arrangement, PacifiCorp would make long-term lease
and operating payments to Big Rivers, the amounts of which have not been
disclosed. The co-op would use that money to repay its debt.
   PacifiCorp would sell electricity to Big Rivers, which then would resell
it to its four distribution co-ops: Green River Electric Corp., Henderson
Union Electric Cooperative, Meade County Rural Electric Membership Corp.
and Jackson Purchase Rural Electric Membership Corp.
   Big Rivers and PacifiCorp officials say the result would be lower
electric rates for customers, although they would not estimate how much.
   Alcan Aluminum and Southwire Co., Big Rivers' two largest customers,
have been pressuring the co-op, both verbally and through numerous
lawsuits, for lower electric rates for years. In early January, they were
attempting to arrange a meeting with Big Rivers and PacifiCorp to make sure
their concerns are heard.
   ``We're looking for a business solution...we didn't do all this
litigation for nothing,'' said Allen Eyre, administrative manager at
Alcan's Sebree, Ky., smelter.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

VIRGINIA POWER, DEVELOPER INK PACT KILLING 316-MW COAL-FIRED PROJECT

   Virginia Power has reached an agreement with Smith Cogeneration Inc. of
Oklahoma City calling for the developer to cancel a 316-MW, coal-fired
cogeneration plant at a Goodyear Tire & Rubber factory in Danville, Va.
   Terms of the agreement are confidential, said Gary Edwards, Virginia
Power's manager of capacity acquisition. Smith officials declined comment.
   Edwards confirmed the utility and the developer recently asked
Virginia's State Corporation Commission to drop their long-running dispute
over whether Virginia Power should be required to purchase power from
Smith.
   When it first proposed the $780-million project in the late 1980s, Smith
chose not to participate in Virginia Power's competitive solicitations for
non-utility generation (NUG) capacity. In 1991, the developer convinced the
SCC to appoint an arbitrator to help settle Smith's dispute with the
utility, which had refused to sign such a large contract outside the
solicitation process.
   A year ago, an SCC hearing examiner recommended the commission order
Virginia Power to settle the dispute, and suggested that an equitable
settlement might involve delaying the commercial start-up of the plant to
2000--four years later than Smith proposed.
   Meanwhile, Virginia Power continues to discuss with the owners of
operating NUGs on its system the possibility of somehow reducing the
utility's power-purchase costs and, in return, providing some financial
benefits to the owners.
   Among other things, said Edwards, some NUGs have expressed possible
interest in working with Virginia Power on ``creatively refinancing'' their
plants, or in turning over their fuel-supply obligations to the utility's
fossil and hydro generation business unit. No final agreements have been
reached to date.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

FEDERAL JUDGE DENIES TEXAS CITY'S PETITION FOR TRANSMISSION ORDER

   A federal judge in Houston has denied a preliminary injunction sought by
College Station, Texas, in a transmission dispute with the neighboring city
of Bryan and the Texas Municipal Power Agency, a power pool that includes
Bryan and several other Texas cities.
   The dispute now shifts to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission,
where College Station has filed for a transmission order under Sec. 211 of
the Federal Power Act.
   College Station resorted to U.S. District Court for the Southern
District of Texas, Houston Division, after attempting to negotiate a
wheeling agreement with Bryan and the TMPA power pool it needed to enter
into a power-purchase agreement with Dallas-based TU Electric.
   College Station's existing power-purchase agreement with Bryan and TMPA
expired Jan. 1. Bryan and College Station are already in litigation over
service territory disputes.
   Since Bryan and the power pool had been unsuccessful bidders in response
to the request for proposals that College Station awarded to TU Electric in
September, the city charged Bryan and the power pool with wrongful
interference and sought relief from the court under federal antitrust law.
   But U.S. District Court Judge Nancy Atlas denied the ``extraordinary
relief'' sought by College Station, finding that Bryan and the TMPA were
simply ``hard bargaining'' in their own best interests.
   Atlas questioned ``the legal viability of the claimed irreparable harm
and whether the public interest is served by a federal court granting
injunctive relief in what is essentially an aborted contract negotiation
between public entities engaging in state-authorized commercial
activities.''
   Lawyers for College Station conceded they may have lost the battle in
Atlas's courtroom, but asserted they won the war as the judge during a
hearing last month extracted concessions from Bryan and the power pool
ensuring that TU Electric's power would arrive with the new year.
   The judge persuaded the defendants to sign a remote control area load
agreement with TU Electric, allowing the utility to incorporate College
Station into its load remotely through telemetering equipment. Prior to the
hearing, the city manager of Bryan, who chairs the power pool, had declined
to sign the agreement, according to attorneys for College Station.
   The judge also extracted promises that Bryan and the power pool would
not interfere with College Station's receipt of the power while the rates
and terms of a wheeling agreement were in dispute. In a footnote to her
order, Atlas appeared to suggest she would hold Bryan and the power pool in
contempt if they did not live up to their word.
   Atlas rejected College Station's antitrust claims, finding that the
state action doctrine provided Bryan and the power pool with immunity from
claims under the Sherman Act.
   While College Station complained that Bryan and the TMPA proposed
transmission rates intended to make the power-sales agreement with TU
Electric uneconomic, the judge accepted the defendants' arguments that
existing law provides the grounds for embedded-cost rates and ``pancaking''
of rates across the TMPA system.
   ``The court cannot find a basis to conclude that defendants have acted
beyond their rights as owners of transmission facilities,'' Atlas ruled.
   The judge also rejected the tortious, or wrongful, interference
complaint, citing a lack of evidence that the defendants were blocking
College Station's receipt of the TU Electric power. ``Aggressive
negotiation, without more, does not amount to tortious interference with
contract,'' Atlas said.
   ``The court expressly declines to find that any party has acted in bad
faith,'' the court ruled. ``Both sides in these negotiations have been
jockeying for position and seeking leverage that will enable them to attain
a transmission agreement that best served their constituents' interests.
This is understandable under the circumstances and does not warrant court
intervention.''
   With the judge's decision, the focus of the transmission dispute now
shifts to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, where College Station
is seeking a wheeling order under Section 211 of the Federal Power Act.
   In the filing at FERC, College Station said Bryan and the municipal
power pool ``are exploiting their dominant position in the transmission
services market to deny College Station access to essential facilities to
purchase cheaper power from TU Electric.''
   Before the RFP was awarded to TU Electric, the rate for transmission
services offered by Bryan and the power pool amounted to about $17/kW/year,
according to College Station's filing at FERC. After the power-sales
agreement was awarded to TU Electric, the rates for transmission service
offered by Bryan and the power pool ultimately added up to $45.35/kW/year,
the city complained.
   The four cities have a tariff on file with the Texas Public Utility
Commission providing for a rate of $10.64/kW/year, College Station told
FERC.
   ``Having lost out in the marketplace to a more efficient competitor,
Bryan [and the municipal power pool] are intentionally interfering with
College Station's purchase of the transmission services necessary...at fair
and reasonable rates and on reasonable terms and conditions,'' the city
complained at FERC.
   The transmission agreement offered by Bryan and the power pool not only
called for rates making the TU Electric agreement more costly than Bryan's
proposal for services, but contained a clause forestalling College Station
from seeking relief at FERC or the Texas PUC, the city said in its FERC
filing.
   In the course of last month's hearing before Judge Atlas, the defendants
agreed to drop that demand, the order noted.
   The Texas PUC may decide to intervene at FERC and could ask the federal
regulators to defer the matter to Texas for resolution, according to one
source involved in the dispute. The deadline for interventions at FERC is
Jan. 22.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

AEP DISCOUNTS TRANSMISSION AND SEES REVENUES INCREASE FIVEFOLD: FALCONE

   A more open transmission system and discounted transmission rates have
produced a fivefold increase in revenues for American Electric Power,
according to Charles Falcone, senior vice president for system power
markets.
   Already for 1996, AEP has booked five to six times more point-to-point
service than AEP provided during 1995, Falcone told Electric Utility Week.
He said the discounting policy has boosted AEP's revenues from third-party
transmission fees to $20-million for 1996.
   The results have ``turned my eye to a different approach,'' Falcone
said: ``There'll be a lot more third-party transactions across the AEP
system this year.''
   Another strategy AEP will employ this year involves contracts for
``conversion service,'' Falcone said. The utility will broker deals
allowing wholesale power purchasers the option to ship coal to AEP and
receive electricity in return. This approach will attract customers when
AEP's prevailing price is not competitive, he said.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

NORTHWEST UTILITIES DROP PLANS TO PURCHASE AS MUCH AS 1,000 MW

   Energy consultants Power Resource Managers of Bellevue, Wash., said the
four utilities it represents have postponed plans to purchase up to 1,000
MW because of plummeting power prices and surplus West Coast generation
(EUW, 20 Feb '95, 13).
   The utilities PRM represented--the public utility districts of Benton,
Franklin and Grays Harbor counties in Washington and the Oregon-based
Clatskanie People's Utility District--wanted to diversify their supplies
away from the Bonneville Power Administration.
   But this fall, after BPA dropped its proposed rates to utility customers
8.2% to 2.49 cents/kWh, PRM asked the bidders to re-examine their numbers.
PRM now has placed the bidding on hold.
   Spot market power has been available for as low as 3 mills/kWh this
fall. ``I have not seen power prices this low since the 1970s,'' said
Gerald Garman, PRM president. He estimates the downward spiral on power
prices will continue for another 18 months. ``If you factor in inflation,
this would place power prices at well under 1 mill/kWh in 1970 terms, the
cheapest in Northwest history.''
   The Aluminum Co. of America (Alcoa) of Wenatchee, Wash., and the Pacific
Northwest Generating Cooperative, based in Portland, Ore., had been PRM
members but dropped out to pursue their own power-purchase options.
   PRM had shortlisted three independent plants and three utility system
sales totaling 1,295 MW earlier this year.
   Shortlisted utilities were PacifiCorp with a 20-year, 200-MW, baseload
system sale and a 20-year, 100-MW intermediate load system sale, and the
Bonneville Power Administration and Washington Water Power, each proposing
10-year, 100-MW system sales.
   Shortlisted independents were U.S. Generating Co., with a site for a
350-MW plant in either Arlington or Bucoda, Wash.; Summit Energy Group with
a 250-MW plant to be located in Goldendale, Wash.; and the Washington
Public Power Supply System of Richland, Wash., which proposed a 245-MW
gas-fired plant at Satsop, Wash.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

TVA IN DEAL WITH ENRON TO BUY POWER ON AN OPTION BASIS; ISSUES FINAL IRP

   The Tennessee Valley Authority has signed a contract with Enron Capital
and Trade Resources to purchase power on an option basis during the period
1998-2002.
   Neither TVA nor Enron would provide further details about the contract,
citing confidentiality requirements.
   The options contract is the first TVA has concluded based on bids from
an August 1994 request for proposals for up to 4,000 MW of load, and TVA
officials said they expect to sign other options contracts in early 1996.
   The contract was announced at the same time TVA issued a final version
of its integrated resource plan that said the federally owned utility
planned to use options contracts to purchase up to 3,000 MW of peaking and
baseload power between 1998 and 2002.
   Under the TVA option system, TVA will pay an up-front option price and
then decide by a predetermined strike date whether to buy the power. It
will pay the actual cost of the energy on delivery.
   TVA had said in early 1995 that it had received 138 option bids covering
9,800 MW of peaking and 12,200 MW of baseload power, but it gave little
further information.
   Also in the final version of its IRP, TVA said it was proceeding with
planning for a 400-MW coal gasification demonstration plant at its
Bellefonte nuclear site in northern Alabama. The project would use Dept. of
Energy clean coal research funding transferred from a stalled project in
Springfield, Ill. and use generation equipment already installed for the
never-completed nuclear plant.
   TVA is carrying out an 18-month study of long-term uses for the
Bellefonte site and based on that would be ready to begin construction of
the demonstration plant in late 1997, with an on-line target of 2000.
   If the initial plant is successful, it would become the core of a larger
plant that would produce 484 MW and co-produce methanol.
   In response to comments on its IRP from environmental and conservation
groups, the utility also said it intended to beef up its energy
conservation efforts to produce 650 MW of new savings by 2002 and 2,200 MW
by 2010. This represents an increased savings of 750 MW over previous
plans.
   TVA also said it would accelerate pilot renewables projects, including a
wind turbine and landfill-methane fuel cells. It also will begin a
commercial program in 1997 to co-fire wood waste from the region at its
large coal-fired power plants.
   TVA will review final comments on the IRP during January, and the TVA
board is expected to approve the final plan in mid-February, ending a
planning process that was ordered by Congress in the 1992 Energy Policy
Act.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

FUELED BY PUBLIC OUTCRY, CITY OF TOLEDO TO RESUME STUDY ON FORMING
MUNICIPAL

   More than a year after a lack of funding forced its suspension, a study
about whether to create a municipal electric system in Toledo is set to
resume, fueled by a public outcry.
   By late this month or early February, SVBK Consulting Group of Denver,
Colo., will attempt to pick up where it left off when the Toledo City
Council decided not to appropriate additional money to finish the second
phase of the study. The first part, completed in May 1992, concluded that a
muni in certain sections of Toledo could effectively compete with Toledo
Edison, the city's longtime electricity supplier (EUW, 1 June '92, 6).
   Toledo residents, already saddled with Toledo Ed electric rates that are
among the highest in the Midwest, were encouraged further by the utility's
pending request for a $35.2-million, or 4.17%, rate hike. They gathered
60,000 signatures on petitions supporting the resumption of the
municipalization study and presented them to the city council.
   That prompted the council to allocate $250,000 to complete the study,
hopefully by next fall.
   ``The citizens were particularly unhappy that the council stopped the
study in the middle, and they went door to door and got signatures,'' Kerry
Bruce, attorney for the Toledo Dept. of Public Utilities, told Electric
Utility Week. ``With that kind of interest, [the city council] simply
acceded to the requests of the citizens and funded the second half of the
study.''
   A Toledo Ed spokeswoman insisted her company ``doesn't have any
problems'' with resuming the study. But she did express some skepticism
about the fairness of the inquiry.
   If the study is fair, it will point out several risks inherent in
forming a municipal utility, she said. However, ``it's been our past
experience that the team of consultants Toledo is working with is not
fair...if this holds true, this group will say that municipalization is
feasible.''
   A ``fair, thorough, objective study will show what we already know--now
is not a good time to get into the electric utility business,'' she added.
``There are so many changes going on...deregulation is coming and people
are looking at retail wheeling. If that is the case, a new fledgling
municipal system would be competing for customers not only with the
existing investor-owned utility, but independent power producers and other
utilities as well.''
   Bruce said he was not surprised that Toledo Ed apparently feels
threatened by the study. The Centerior Energy subsidiary, he noted, ``has
some of the highest rates in the region.'' Those rates would go even higher
if the state Public Utilities Commission approves the proposed rate
increase later this year.
   The 1992 study found that a suggested buyout of Toledo Ed's system
within the city would be too expensive, costing about $473-million. But
construction of a parallel transmission and distribution system in parts of
Toledo, similar to the Cleveland Public Power system, could be economically
feasible.
   Bruce agreed that ``things are too volatile'' in the utility industry to
justify spending ``$100-million to build a competing, full-blown utility''
to do battle with Toledo Ed. He wants the consultant to shift the focus of
the renewed study away from its earlier emphasis.
   Instead, Bruce wants SVBK to ``look for ways the city can aggregate its
load and provide a conduit for retail wheeling to customers. I think it's
worth exploring to see if there's anything we can do short of constructing
a complete, full-blown system.''
   The Toledo Ed spokeswoman acknowledged her company needs to make some
improvements, including being ``more open and a more reliable supplier of
electricity.'' But if Toledo decides to form a muni, ``we would be a strong
competitor and fight for every customer.''

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

EL PASO ELECTRIC RETAINS 125-MW AIR BASE LOAD, ENDING LONG DISPUTE

   El Paso Electric has signed a new power-sales contract with Holloman Air
Force Base in New Mexico, ending a lengthy legal dispute over the base's
right to purchase power from alternative sources.
   Under the agreement, announced Dec. 29, the base will buy approximately
125 MW of load from EPE at current rates and in return EPE will agree to
freeze rates for 10 years.
   Holloman has been a long-term customer of EPE but in 1993, after EPE
filed for bankruptcy, the Air Force announced it would not renew its
contract with EPE when it expired in February 1994. Instead, in June 1993
Holloman issued a request for proposals for alternative supplies for the
base.
   However, in January 1994 EPE sued the Air Force, claiming that it did
not have the right to buy outside supplies under federal procurement rules
and also that EPE was the only utility authorized under New Mexico law to
provide retail service to the base.
   Because of the suit, the Air Force never went through with awarding a
new contract and EPE has continued to supply the base on an ad hoc basis.
Under the terms of the new agreement, the Air Force RFP has been canceled
and the EPE suit has been withdrawn.
   Also as part of the deal, at the end of the 10-year period Holloman will
be under no obligation to take service from EPE and can terminate the
contract without payment of damages.
   EPE is also trying to resolve a similar problem with the U.S. Army's
White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico which had issued a request for
proposals for about 75 MW in late 1994 to replace EPE supplies.
   In that case, EPE filed a protest with the Army which then decided to
suspend the RFP and review the legal issues. EPE has said that if the Army
decides to go ahead with the RFP it will file a new suit to block the
purchases.
   The actions come at a time when Congress is looking at legislation that
could free military bases to buy their own power, undercutting EPE's legal
claims (see story this issue).
   The Holloman deal with EPE parallels a rate freeze plan agreed to
between EPE and the city of El Paso last August which broke an impasse and
opened the way for EPE to end its bankruptcy case.
   EPE now hopes to win confirmation of its reorganization plan by the U.S.
Bankruptcy Court in Austin on Jan. 9 and emerge from bankruptcy shortly
afterwards.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

CLINTON VETOES DEFENSE BILL, KILLING STUDY OF SAVINGS FROM POWER-SHOPPING

   Industrials, marketers, independent power producers and a few utilities
that want Congress to let Dept. of Defense facilities shop for electricity
lost a major round when President Clinton vetoed the bill containing a
mandate for DOD to study the shopping issue and report by March 1 (EUW, 25
Dec '95, 2).
   The House version of the DOD bill had lifted a congressional ban on
defense facilities shopping for power, but in a compromise with the Senate,
the final version of the bill (H.R. 1530) called only for the study, which
was to be done in consultation with the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission.
   Advocates said they were pleased with the study requirement because it
gave them a chance to use the study to support legislation later this year.
Now they will have to try another route. One industry source said he hopes
DOD will go ahead and perform a study even without the mandate.
   The study was also to examine the stranded-investment liability for
utilities if DOD bypassed them for less expensive power, and to identify
statutory and regulatory impediments to such shopping.
   Clinton vetoed the measure because of major controversies unrelated to
the power provisions. Congress could revise the measure and try to send it
back to the White House.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

PSC CAPS TAMPA ELECTRIC ALLOWED EQUITY RETURN AT 12.5% FOR 1996

   The Florida Public Service Commission voted Jan. 3 to cap the 1996 rate
of return on equity for Tampa Electric at 12.5%, and to allow the PSC to
determine how any overearnings would be distributed.
   The move comes in the wake of TECO earning $45-million more than its
allowed equity return in 1995 and will forestall a rate case that would
have been filed in 1996 to pay for a new generating unit.
   In an earlier stipulation with staff (Docket No. 950379-EI), TECO's 1995
earnings were capped at 12.75%. The $45-million of 1995 overearnings will
be deferred until 1997, after TECO's new $550-million, 260-MW integrated
coal gasification combined cycle plant in Polk County goes on line in late
1996. TECO's actual ROE for 1995 was expected to be about 16%.
   The deal between the PSC staff and TECO effectively replaced
negotiations the utility was conducting with the Office of the Public
Counsel, which represents ratepayers at the Florida Public Service
Commission, according to OPC attorney Roger Howe.
   The PSC's action, which was the result of last-minute negotiations
between staff and TECO on 1996 earnings, could mean any excess revenues
could be used for the plant, a refund, to offset regulatory assets, or for
depreciation in 1997 or later. The PSC will likely make a decision on
disposition of 1996 excesses sometime in early 1997, according to Tim
Devlin of the PSC's Auditing and Finance Division.
   Under the arrangement for 1996, TECO will have an ROE range of 11.5% to
13.5%. However, all of the earnings over 11.5% will be split, which
effectively caps earnings at 12.5%. TECO estimated it will earn about
13.27% in 1996.
   The Polk unit will go into ratebase in late 1996 and based on TECO's
earnings projections, which are considered conservative, it will still earn
in excess of its allowed ROE. The 1995 excess carried forward was also
expected to cover the additional cost of the new unit through 1997, and
possibly beyond.
   Howe said that because interest rates were expected to further decline
during the next few years, it was likely the PSC would reduce TECO's
allowed ROE for 1997, which could mean additional excess earnings in that
year, despite the new unit.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

S.C. CONSUMER AGENCY OPPOSING APPROVAL OF SCE&G DEPRECIATION RESERVE
TRANSFER

   South Carolina's Dept. of Consumer Affairs said the state's Public
Service Commission made ``a serious mistake'' in late December when it
approved--as part of a general rate increase for South Carolina Electric &
Gas--an SCE&G proposal to shift nearly $257-million in depreciation
reserves from the utility's transmission and distribution assets to its
nuclear generation assets.
   The state consumer agency said that if the approved transfer holds up to
regulatory and legal challenges DCA expects to mount, it would give SCE&G
an unfair competitive advantage over other electricity generators, and
would improperly shift costs from large industrial customers to small
commercial and residential classes.
   In its Dec. 27, 1995, ruling (Docket No. 95-1000-E), the PSC granted
SCE&G a 7.34%, $67.5-million general rate increase to be implemented in two
phases. The first phase is a $59.5-million hike as soon as its new 385-MW
baseload plant in Cope, S.C., begins commercial operation later this month,
and the second is an $8-million increase next Jan. 1.
   The utility had requested a two-step increase totaling $76.7-million,
primarily to recoup the $436-million cost of the Cope plant, which is
expected to be the utility's last baseload addition until 2012 (EUW, 24
July '94, 19).
   The commission also said it will allow SCE&G to earn a 12% rate of
return on common equity, which is lower than the 12.25% rate the utility
had requested but higher than both the 11% it had been permitted to earn
and the 11.25% proposed by DCA.
   Nancy Vaughn Coombs, DCA's deputy consumer advocate, took issue with
virtually all the PSC's decisions in the ruling, asserting that the rate
increase is more than three times larger than it should be, and that the
commission failed to pass through to ratepayers some $12.3-million in
savings SCE&G has achieved through restructuring and downsizing.
   She also criticized the PSC's approval of SCE&G's proposed ``storm
damage reserve account,'' under which the utility will collect more than
$4-million a year through rates over the next 10 years to create a
$50-million fund to be used to offset the cost of repairing damage to
SCE&G's uninsured transmission and distribution facilities.
   Coombs said an actuarial expert told the PSC during hearings on the
proposed rate hike that, on average, SCE&G's T&D system is likely to
sustain only $2-million a year in uninsured damage. She added that, in her
view, electric customers in the 1990s should not pay for a fund that may
not be used for another 20 or 30 years.
   But the DCA official said her agency is most concerned about the
depreciation reserve transfer, which she said would result in a lower
``book value'' for SCE&G's two-thirds stake in the 900-MW V.C. Summer
nuclear plant and a higher book value for the utility's T&D assets.
   That would have the effect of shifting SCE&G's costs away from its
generation sector, which is likely to face increasing competition as
electric industry deregulation takes hold, to its transmission and
distribution sector, which is likely to remain a monopoly, Coombs said.
   As a result, SCE&G will have ``a significantly increased probability''
of recouping--through T&D rates--nuclear investment costs that ``otherwise
would have been subjected to an uncertain policy regarding the recovery of
costs of uneconomic generation capacity.''
   Coombs said the DCA will ask the PSC to reconsider its ruling and added
that if the commission fails to do so, her agency is likely to file a legal
challenge in state court, asserting the depreciation reserve transfer
violates South Carolina law by shifting costs from one customer class to
another.
   Belton Ziegler, SCE&G's general counsel, dismissed Coombs' claims and
asserted that the PSC ruling ``will help us prepare for competition.''
Among other things, Ziegler said the depreciation reserve transfer is a
necessary preemptive step to ensure that any large retail customers that
leave the utility for other suppliers help pay for assets SCE&G had
developed to serve them.
   Without the shift, the SCE&G attorney said, residential and small
commercial customers would likely end up paying for ``100%'' of the
utility's stranded investment, ``and we don't think that would be fair.''
   Regarding the storm fund, Ziegler said that after Hurricane Hugo
battered SCE&G's service territory in September 1989, the utility looked
into ways it could prepare for the next big storm. ``It became clear that
commercial insurance would be prohibitively expensive, and that it would
make more sense to set up a fund'' like the one the utility proposed and
the PSC just approved.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

SOCAL ED AFFILIATE CLOSES $1-BILLION PURCHASE OF 2,088-MW U.K. GENERATOR

   Southern California Edison affiliate Mission Energy has reached
financial closing on its $1-billion purchase of First Hydro Co., the
company controlling two pumped-storage hydro facilities in Wales totaling
2,088 MW, from the U.K.'s National Grid Co.
   Mission beat two other finalists for First Hydro, Scottish
Hydro-Electric and Virginia Power affiliate Dominion Energy Inc. (EUW, 27
Nov '95, 15).
   First Hydro will operate as an independent generating company selling
power into the U.K. power pool on a competitive basis.
   Mission, which closed on First Hydro Dec. 22, noted the acquisition is
being financed with about $400-million of equity and $600-million of
non-recourse debt underwritten by Barclays de Zoete Wedd Limited (BZW). A
significant portion of the debt will consist of long-term bonds, Mission
said. BZW also served as Mission's financial advisor.
   The two pumped-storage stations in North Wales are at Dinorwig and
Ffestiniog. The Dinorwig plant, commissioned in 1983, consists of six units
totaling 1,728 MW. The Ffestiniog station, in service since 1963, is made
up of four units totaling 360 MW.
   The Dinorwig and Ffestiniog facilities function as peaking units and
provide rapid generation response to sudden changes in electricity
demands.
   Edward Muller, Mission Energy president and chief executive officer,
said ``First Hydro represents a permanent investment in some of the most
strategically important generating plants in the electricity system of the
United Kingdom.''
   Acquisition of First Hydro means Mission is a key U.K. power generator,
with total generating capacity of 2,522 MW, including 80% of a 220-MW
gas-fired plant in Roosecote, Cumbria, and 33% of a 214-MW gas-fired,
cogeneration plant at Derwent.
   It also apparently catapults Mission Energy, an affiliate of Southern
California Edison, back to its earlier position as the world's largest
independent power producer, with 5,551 MW of financed net equity.
   In July 1995, the U.K.'s National Power held the top spot with 4,465 MW,
followed by Consolidated Electric Power Asia of Hong Kong with 4,391 MW,
PowerGen of the U.K. with 3,955 MW, and Mission Energy, 3,463 MW, according
to The McGraw-Hill Companies' 155 Independent Power Companies--Profiles of
Industry Players and Projects (EUW, 31 July '95, 15).

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

3,500-MW BRAZILIAN UTILITY SPLIT IN TWO IN PREPARATION FOR AUCTION

   Brazil's Servicos de Eletricidade SA (Light), the 3,500-MW utility
serving Rio de Janeiro, will be split into two companies to facilitate its
sale early this year, under a law approved by Brazil's congress.
   A new company, LightRio, will continue to generate and distribute
electricity to Rio de Janeiro and will be offered at auction to private
investors. The other company, LightPar, will hold Light's 47.5% stake in
Sao Paulo Electric Co. (Eletropaulo), one of the utilities serving Sao
Paulo.
   Light was scheduled to be privatized in an auction by year-end 1995, but
will now likely be auctioned ``in the first few months'' of 1996.
   The privatization of Light has been under discussion and planning for
many years, but Light's stake in Eletropaulo and the fact that Eletropaulo
owes Light about $1.24-billion had been a barrier to the sale (EUW, 15 May,
16).
   The issue came to a head over whether or not previously passed
legislation was sufficient for the division of Light. In the end, it was
decided the more prudent course would be to pass a separate law to cover
the splitting of Light, said Bernardo Braune, assistant to the director of
privatization at Banco Nacional do Desencolvimento Economico de Social
(BNDS, National Bank for Economic & Social Development).
   The resulting law, No. 9163, was ratified on Dec. 15 and allows for the
creation of subsidiaries from Brazil's main electric utility, Centrais
Eletricas Brazileiras SA (Eletrobras).
   According to government estimates, LightRio has a book value of about
$3-billion and annual revenues of about $1.4-billion. LightPar has a
nominal value of $3.6-billion, according to the government. Only about
$545-million of Light's total $1.24-billion Eletropaulo debt will be
transferred to LightRio.
   The sale of LightRio is part of a much larger privatization process
underway in Brazil. The first electric utility sold in this program was
Escelsa, which was won at auction by Brazil's Iven Group in July.
   As part of this program, Eletrobras' four main utilities--Eletronorte,
Eletrosul, Chesf, and Furnas--will also be privatized. But the size and
cross ownership between Eletrobras and its subsidiaries complicates
privatization.
   The next step in the privatization of Eletrobras will be a solicitation
for consultants to advise the government on how best to privatize the
45,500-MW utility. The Ministry of Mines & Energy will in the first half of
1996 issue a request for proposals for the consulting contract.
   The consultants will advise the ministry on the model for privatization,
the creation of an independent regulatory agency, interconnecting the
transmission grid, setting tariffs and other issues.
   In a separate solicitation process, BNDS will issue an RFP for a
consultant to advise on the actual ``objects of sale,'' said BNDS' Braune.
The consultant will help determine, for instance, whether Eletrobras
subsidiaries should be sold entirely or if generating plants should be sold
individually or in packages of more than one generating plant.
   The BNDS solicitation will be run concurrently with the ministry's
solicitation for consultants.
   The recommendations of the consultants will be forwarded to a specially
created Council of National Privatization, which will decide on the final
structure of the privatization process. The council will be formed from the
Ministry of State Planning--which will serve as the president of the
council--the Ministry of the Civil House, the Ministry of Finance, the
Ministry of Administration, and the Ministry of Tourism, Industry & Trade.
   Meanwhile, Brazil is moving forward with its planned solicitations for
private sector companies to invest in the completion of stalled
hydroelectric projects.
   The first projects being put out to bid are in Sao Paulo and include
Canoas, a two-unit, 154-MW hydro plant. The Canaos solicitation will be
followed by solicitation for Porto Primavera, an 1,800-MW hydro plant.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

NSP UNIT, TRANSFIELD SIGN 180-MW POWER-SALES PACT IN AUSTRALIA

   Northern States Power unit NRG Energy Inc. and Transfield Technologies
Pty Ltd. of Sydney, Australia, have signed a power-purchase agreement with
the Queensland Transmission & Supply Corp. for supplies from the 180-MW
Collinsville coal-fired steam turbine station, which will be
recommissioned.
   The plant was decommissioned in 1989 and will again supply power to the
grid in early 1998. An interim agreement for the sale of the Collinsville
plant was signed in March as part of the government's Energy Policy
Statement (EUW, 27 March, 16).
   The plant is being refurbished in a joint venture between NRG Australia
Pty Ltd., a Brisbane-based subsidiary of NRG Energy that will operate the
station, and Transfield, which will construct and maintain the plant.
   Robert McClenachan, NRG's vice president of international business
development, said the project ``furthers NRG's objective to actively seek
and secure independent power projects throughout Australia, New Zealand and
Southeast Asia.'' NRG Australia also has a 37% stake in the 1,680-MW
Gladstone Power Station, which it operates in Queensland (EUW, 11 April
'94, 17).

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

CSW FORMS VENTURE WITH MEXICAN INDUSTRIAL FOR 100-MW PROJECT

   Central & South West unit CSW International has formed a joint venture
with Monterrey, Mexico-based petrochemical group Alpek to build, own and
operate a 100-MW cogeneration project at Alpek's Altamira petrochemical
complex.
   The project, which will function primarily as an industrial power plant,
will supply electricity and thermal heat to two existing Alpek units
operating at Altamira--Petrocel and Indelpro--and a new Temex plant now
under construction.
   All of the cogeneration project's production will be used by the
industrial facilities, although some excess capacity may be available to
other industrials in the area.
   Petrocel and Temex will serve as the facility's steam hosts, CSW
International said.
   CSW International and Alpek each hold a 50% equity stake in the project.
Construction is scheduled to begin in March 1996, with commercial operation
set for fourth-quarter 1997.
   Alpek is significantly expanding petrochemical production at its
Altamira complex, with most of the expansion in operation by the fourth
quarter of 1997.
   Efforts to finance the project will be made in 1996, after solid
equipment and construction costs are available.
   ``CSW has long and cordial working relationships with business and
governmental entities in Mexico,'' said Terry Dennis, CSW International
president and CEO, in a statement. CSW officials said similar industrial
energy projects are being sought in Mexico, although no additional project
announcements are expected soon.
   Recently, Central & South West successfully bid $2.52-billion to acquire
Seeboard PLC, a U.K. regional electric company, in a friendly takeover
arrangement (EUW, 13 Nov, 1).
   Alpek is a major petrochemical manufacturing group in Mexico, with
annual revenues of $1.3-billion.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A>Copyright
ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet
January 8, 1996   

ENRON SECURES RIGHTS TO BUY 5,400-MW OUTPUT FROM OGLETHORPE POWER SYSTEM

   In a precedent-setting marketing deal, Enron Power Marketing will have
rights from January to April 1996 to buy the total energy output from the
5,400-MW Oglethorpe Power system and at the same time will meet the energy
requirements of Oglethorpe's 39 member cooperatives between January and
April.
   The deal, which was announced Dec. 22, 1995, and was being finalized
over the New Year's break, is a major coup for Enron, which will double the
current energy volumes it markets and could get a leg up on future
longer-term deals with Oglethorpe and its members.
   Oglethorpe already announced in early December that it had decided to
carry out a major restructuring that would split the company up into
separate generation, transmission and system operating companies and give
the 39 members more freedom to buy and sell power supplies on the wholesale
market (EUW, 11 Dec '95, 1).
   Under the deal with Enron, the 39 members will be able to cover their
energy needs at a lower price than before and at the same time will be able
to sell excess energy allotments from Oglethorpe through Enron, saving more
money.
   Enron will have access to Oglethorpe's system energy to both supply the
members and sell excess amounts on the regional markets. Enron was selected
by Oglethorpe for the deal from among eight bidders who responded to a
request for proposals in early December. The deal only covers energy and
does not affect the members' commitments to buy capacity directly from
Oglethorpe under existing contracts.
   The four-month arrangement with Enron will cover the rest of the winter
heating season and provide a convenient way for Oglethorpe members to
benefit from marketing opportunities while they work out the restructuring
plan with Oglethorpe.
   While other marketers have had similar arrangements with small utilities
elsewhere, the Enron-Oglethorpe deal appears to be the first time that a
marketer has provided full energy trading services for such a large
utility.
   Once Oglethorpe completes its restructuring in the coming months, a
group of six member co-ops called Cooperative Power Inc. is expected to
contract on their own for a marketer to manage their energy procurement and
trading. CPI already has issued a request for proposals for such services
and is expected to choose a winning bidder soon.
   Other Oglethorpe members appear likely to set up similar trading groups,
and Oglethorpe itself has said it plans to offer a regional pooling
arrangement for its system energy that will be managed by a separate
Oglethorpe operating company.
   Separately, the Oglethorpe restructuring plan got an initial boost from
Rural Utilities Service administrator Wally Beyer, who endorsed the general
concept in a Dec. 12, 1995, letter to the Oglethorpe board.
   Beyer called the restructuring plan a ``forward looking solution'' that
would keep the group intact and still address the growing diversity among
its members. He instructed his staff to move as quickly as possible to
review the plan and make final decisions on it.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B34-13</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B030-266</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey03.html 205.156.212.5 19970114230719 text/html 286134
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:03:39 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:46 GMT
Content-length: 285946
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ey03.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. <BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>THE LEARNING CURVE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>BENEFITING FROM IT: A GUIDE FOR PUCS AND UTILITIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(934 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FINANCE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>WHY USE FUTURES CONTRACTS?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1604 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>THE CHANGING WORLD OF UTILITY INVESTOR RELATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2041 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>SERENDIPITY OR SAVVY INVESTMENT? A CABLE VENTURE PAYS OFF</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1771 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>REGIONAL REPROT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>STATE EXPERIMENTS WITH RETAIL WHEELING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(551 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>SAN FRANCISCO LEADS THE WAY FOR MUNIS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(114 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>WEEKLY OUTPUT, 1-MILLION KWH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(142 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FINANCIAL NOTES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>DIRECT ACCESS THREATENS UTILITY REVENUE&nbsp;News and information about financial matters relevant to the electric power&nbsp;industry provided by Standard & Poor's, a division of The McGraw-Hill&nbsp;Companies</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1018 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>POWER MARKETING</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>FYI&nbsp;Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in&nbsp;McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and&nbsp;Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(26 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>AGREEMENT&nbsp;Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in&nbsp;McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and&nbsp;Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(36 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>LEGALITIES&nbsp;Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in&nbsp;McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and&nbsp;Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(94 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS&nbsp;Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in&nbsp;McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and&nbsp;Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(54 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>POWER MARKETING:NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>CEGELEC ESCA&nbsp;Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in&nbsp;McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and&nbsp;Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(123 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>ELECTRICITY ALERT&nbsp;Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in&nbsp;McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and&nbsp;Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(64 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>POWER MARKETING: RATE PROPOSALS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><LI>ENRON CAPITAL & TRADE RESOURCES&nbsp;Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in&nbsp;McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and&nbsp;Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(78 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>TALLAHASSEE (FLA) ELECTRIC DEPT&nbsp;Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in&nbsp;McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and&nbsp;Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(54 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><LI>TAMPA ELECTRIC CO&nbsp;Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in&nbsp;McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and&nbsp;Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(38 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(134 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(214 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PEOPLE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>ALLEGHENY POWER SYSTEM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(69 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>AIR MOVEMENT & CONTROL ASSN INC</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(35 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>AMERICAN ELECTRIC POWER CO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(121 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>AMERICAN GAS ASSN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(28 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>BECHTEL GROUP INC</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(57 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>CANADIAN IMPERIAL BANK OF COMMERCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(56 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>CANADIAN STANDARDS ASSN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(25 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>CENTRAL HUDSON GAS & ELECTRIC CORP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(35 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>CMS ENERGY CORP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(41 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>CONSOLIDATED NATURAL GAS CO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(46 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>COOLING TOWER INSTITUTE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(19 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>COOPERS & LYBRAND LLP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(43 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>CSW ENERGY INC</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(43 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>DOW ENVIRONMENTAL INC</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(29 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#34"><LI>DUKE ENGINEERING & SERVICES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(46 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#35"><LI>EDS APPOINTS WILLIAM J. GRABSKE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(34 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#36"><LI>ELSAG BAILEY PROCESS AUTOMATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(62 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#37"><LI>FLUOR DANIEL INC</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(34 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#38"><LI>IBM UTILITY AND ENERGY SERVICES INDUSTRY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(56 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#39"><LI>INSTITUTE OF NUCLEAR POWER OPERATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(41 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#40"><LI>LURGI CORP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(22 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#41"><LI>MIDLAND COGENERATION VENTURE LP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(40 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#42"><LI>MISSION ENERGY CO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(24 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#43"><LI>NEW YORK POWER AUTHORITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(36 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#44"><LI>NOOTER/ERIKSEN INC</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(60 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#45"><LI>PECO ENERGY CO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(46 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#46"><LI>PLANMETRICS INC</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(32 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#47"><LI>SCECORP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(70 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#48"><LI>SIEMENS CORP, POWER GENERATION GROUP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(65 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#49"><LI>THE SOUTHERN COMPANY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(54 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CONFERENCE REPORT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#50"><LI>GLOBALIZATION OF ELECTRICITY MARKETS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(7344 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>SHOW PREVIEW: DA/DSM '96</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#51"><LI>DISTRIBUTECH CONFERENCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1471 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#52"><LI>COMPANY PROFILES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(704 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>SHOW PREVIEW: DA/DSM '96: EQUIPMENT ON DISPLAY</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#53"><LI>METER READING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(63 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#54"><LI>CONTRACT SERVICES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(47 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#55"><LI>MOBILE TECHNOLOGY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(109 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#56"><LI>GIS SERVICES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(82 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#57"><LI>TELECOMMUNICATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(73 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#58"><LI>WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(36 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#59"><LI>HANDHELD COMPUTER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(46 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#60"><LI>MOBILE COMPUTER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(49 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#61"><LI>SCADA PC-SOFTWARE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(50 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#62"><LI>POWER METER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(55 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#63"><LI>UNDERGROUND AUTOMATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(68 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#64"><LI>DISTRIBUTION AUTOMATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(64 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>COVER STORY</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#65"><LI>WHO CONTROLS THE 'LAST INCH'?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3588 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>COMPANY NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#66"><LI>ALLIANCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(57 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#67"><LI>BRIEFS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(55 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#68"><LI>ALLISON ENERGY CO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(36 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#69"><LI>LEGALITIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(51 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#70"><LI>MERGERS & ACQUISITIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(29 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#71"><LI>PROFILE IN BRIEF</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(125 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#72"><LI>WEB SURF SITES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(54 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#73"><LI>B&W RINGS IN THE NEW YEAR WITH BIG CONTRACTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(303 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>COMPANY NEWS: CONTRACTS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#74"><LI>SARGENT & LUNDY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(68 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#75"><LI>WESTINGHOUSE ELECTRIC CORP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(31 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#76"><LI>FRAMATOME TECHNOLOGIES INC</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(71 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>COMPANY NEWS: MERGERS & ACQUISITIONS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#77"><LI>FOSTER WHEELER ENERGY CORP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(30 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>COMPANY NEWS: NEW PROJECTS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#78"><LI>GRAPHIC DATA SYSTEMS CORP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(37 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#79"><LI>CSW ENERGY INC AND PHILLIPS PETROLEUM CO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(45 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#80"><LI>WESTMORELAND ENERGY INC</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(42 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>THE CORPORATION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#81"><LI>INSIDE UTILITY MERGERS: TRENDS WITHIN THE TREND</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3113 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#82"><LI>WHY UTILITY BOARD MEMBERSHIP IS CHANGING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(806 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>THE 1995 JAMES H. MCGRAW AWARDS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#83"><A HREF = "#83"><A HREF = "#83"><LI>THE 1995 JAMES H. MCGRAW AWARDS&nbsp;`Industry is always ready for leadership' James H. McGraw, founder, The&nbsp;McGraw-Hill Companies</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1003 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#84"><LI>THE HISTORY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(204 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ANALYSIS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#85"><LI>HYDRO PACTS REVAMP OPERATIONS AND MARKET STRATEGIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1933 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#86"><LI>THE NAME GAME: A LEXICON FOR DISTRIBUTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1880 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#87"><LI>CAN RETAILING WORK?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1814 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#88"><LI>NOPR PRICING DEFINED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(250 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>WASHINGTON REPORT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#89"><A HREF = "#89"><A HREF = "#89"><A HREF = "#89"><LI>CONGRESS TO DOE: TAKE THE WASTE&nbsp;Profiles of current matters of regulatory interest and note as reported in&nbsp;McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week,&nbsp;Inside NRC, and Inside FERC newsletters</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(417 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#90"><A HREF = "#90"><A HREF = "#90"><A HREF = "#90"><LI>PARK SERVICE HUNTS FOR POWER SAVINGS&nbsp;Profiles of current matters of regulatory interest and note as reported in&nbsp;McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week,&nbsp;Inside NRC, and Inside FERC newsletters</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(180 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#91"><A HREF = "#91"><A HREF = "#91"><A HREF = "#91"><LI>GAS INDUSTRY SEES OPPORTUNITY IN ELECTRIC'S REVAMP&nbsp;Profiles of current matters of regulatory interest and note as reported in&nbsp;McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week,&nbsp;Inside NRC, and Inside FERC newsletters</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(291 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#92"><A HREF = "#92"><A HREF = "#92"><A HREF = "#92"><LI>CARE TO COMMENT ON HYDRO RELICENSING?&nbsp;Profiles of current matters of regulatory interest and note as reported in&nbsp;McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week,&nbsp;Inside NRC, and Inside FERC newsletters</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(122 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

BENEFITING FROM IT: A GUIDE FOR PUCS AND UTILITIES

Technology, and the competitive markets made possible by technology, have
radically reshaped the public utility industry and its regulation. One set
of technologies with the potential to help utilities remain financially
viable in competitive markets--as well as help utilities and regulators
better serve the public--is information technologies (IT).
   Typically, utilities focus on reducing costs as a primary means of
competing with rivals. Unfortunately, the ability to become the low-cost
provider is affected by many irreversible investment decisions made during
less-competitive times. As a result, most utilities will need to make new
investments that better position the company to provide competitive
services that are valued by customers. Investment in information systems
and IT is one strategy that allows utilities to better identify and track
potential customers and their needs and to provide many new services
specifically tailored to customer needs.
   In order to make optimal use of information, utilities and regulatory
commissions will need to make the transition to being information-based
organizations (IBOs). IBOs recognize that, although they produce a tangible
product--utility service--the most important product of the organization is
information. Furthermore, IBOs are ``flatter'' than traditional
organizations. Rather than a corporate management structure that is bloated
at the top, such enterprises:
   -- Rely on the expertise of those who create new information and
knowledge.
   -- Employ task-focused teams as the basic unit of work.
   -- Transform data into useful information.
   Together these tactics allow informed decisions to replace opinions.
Through the skillful use of information, IBOs identify the needs of those
they serve, adapt their work and organization to the optimal service of
their customers, and generate a fair return for their shareholders.

The transition
   Making the transition to an IBO is a challenge. It requires building
powerful and flexible information systems that can bring internal and
external sources of information together into a system with graphics,
analytic, modeling, and communications capabilities. It requires a careful
evaluation of information requirements, effective system-development
strategies, and thorough cost/benefit analyses.
   Cost/benefit analyses of information systems need to take into
consideration the strategic benefits of information systems because those
systems may be used to attract new customers, to support customer-specific
programs and services, and to develop a better understanding of a
competitor's capabilities. Indeed, labor savings typically account for only
30 to 40% of projected system benefits. The recommended steps of
information-system cost/benefit analysis are (1) determine baseline costs;
(2) develop a strategic implementation plan; (3) determine benefits; (4)
compare costs and benefits; and (5) perform sensitivity analysis and risk
assessment.

Where?
   Because geography is such an important part of an electric, natural-gas,
telecommunications, or water utility's service-delivery system, geographic
information systems (GIS)--which encompass transmission and distribution
facilities--are used by many utilities and are being planned by many
others. One estimate is that utilities may invest as much as $48-billion in
GIS technology and data in the next decade.
   Public utility commissions (PUCs) are also investing in GIS. As a
result, GIS is a key IT tool, with the capability to assist utilities and
regulatory commissions in their transitions to IBOs. GIS has replaced paper
maps and records at some utilities and PUCs and is now being used to
provide those entities with strategic advantages.
   Among the important trends driving the need and specific planning for
the use of information systems are downsizing, the rise of outsourcing,
safety and regulatory compliance issues, environmental impacts, new
competition and competitive alternatives, deregulation, and
re-engineering.
   Re-engineering focuses on the outcome of work processes as opposed to
total quality management, which focuses on the processes themselves.
Information systems can support the efforts necessary to fundamentally
redesign business processes and support strategic business decisions.

Justification to the PUC
   Under traditional, rate-base/rate-of-return regulation, there are three
options for the regulatory treatment of information-system investments:
expensing costs immediately, amortizing them over a longer period, or
including them in the rate base. Other issues include determination of the
prudency of information system investments, establishing the appropriate
depreciable life, and the allocation of costs and benefits between
regulated and unregulated business segments.
   Under incentive regulation and price-cap forms of regulation, the
regulatory treatment of utility information-system investments will only be
initially important as regulators set baseline rates or price caps. It will
be difficult for regulators to separate the benefits of information systems
into those that serve the interests of captive ratepayers and those that
position the utility to compete in new environments.
   Therefore, the most significant challenges for utilities and regulators
will not be to find new ways to use information to benefit
consumers--opportunities to use information to benefit customers are
virtually endless. The challenges will be funding, designing, and building
effective systems, performing adequate cost/benefit analyses, and
convincing others that there will be long-term payoffs for many
information-system investments.
   For a copy of the complete report, contact The National Regulatory
Research Institute, Ohio State University, 1080 Carmack Rd, Columbus, Ohio
43210-1002.
   Editor's note: The following is an excerpt from The Use of Information
Systems to Transform Utilities and Regulatory Commissions: The Application
of Geographic Information Systems by David W. Wirick, The National
Regulatory Research Institute (NRRI), Columbus, Ohio; Glenn E. Montgomery,
and David C. Wagman, Convergent Group, Englewood, Colo; and James Spiers,
Consultant/Attorney, Boulder, Colo. It was prepared by NRRI with funding
from the National Assn of Regulatory Commissioners. Convergent Group
donated its time to the study.


Photograph(s):
Photograph: One estimate places utility investment in GIS technology in the
$48-billion-range in the next decade. As a result, GIS is a key information
technology in the drive to make utilities and regulatory commissions
information-based organizations

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

WHY USE FUTURES CONTRACTS?

By:
Preston D. Head

   Futures contracts and risk management are quickly becoming as much a
part of the electric power business as gas turbines and alternating
current. Accordingly, to understand where the industry is headed, it is
important to understand how these financial tools work.
   Although the explanations presented here will primarily deal with
futures contracts (see box), risk management as it applies to
exchange-traded options and over-the-counter (OTC) transactions will also
be covered.
   Each of these financial tools--futures contracts, exchange traded
options, and OTC transactions, collectively referred to as derivatives, has
specific characteristics and applications, and together they can provide
tremendous flexibility. Essentially, they give participants in the
marketplace the capacity to affect the outcome of risk exposures they may
have.

Setting sail
   In a competitive, free-market environment, a firm must either accept the
risks to which it is exposed or make a conscious effort to deal with them.
Those that optimize their risks in the marketplace win. Therefore, the
primary message is design and build your ``risk-management'' ship well.
Find, train, and continuously tune the best crew you can--as well as you
can. This is not a one-time crossing or a protected cove. The electricity
industry is embarking on a competition in the open seas. The weather and
conditions will be forever changing and sometimes unexpectedly. Therefore,
managing risks will be a constant necessity, and companies must learn to
embrace futures and other derivatives because their use within the electric
power industry will increase unless deregulation is reversed.
   Why use futures? Because futures can play many valuable roles--such as
addressing price volatility, facilitating price discovery, enhancing
marketing flexibility, and providing transactional safety and anonymity.

Profiting from volatility
   As natural gas made the transition to market-based pricing through
deregulation, that market became more efficient internally, but price
volatility increased. The ability to mitigate--or even better--to profit
from price volatility, is an important aspect of futures.
   Natural-gas prices have been among the most volatile of global
commodities. Consequently, the natural-gas futures contract has been one of
the fastest growing futures markets in the world. By the third year of
trading, in 1992, over 2-million natural-gas futures contracts were traded.
Over 6-million contracts were traded in 1995, representing a national
transaction value exceeding $100-billion. In fact, the New York Mercantile
Exchange (Nymex) seat prices have more than doubled during this same time
period to over $400,000 today. This seems to provide testimony recognizing
the value of these markets.
   So, who is watching over these dynamic transactions? Ultimately, futures
contracts are governed by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC).
Futures exchanges represent a well-capitalized clearing system, enforcing
strict compliance and operational standards to ensure fair and orderly
markets. These exchanges are backed by some of the most significant
financial institutions in the world. Thus, when firms use futures as a
means to buy or sell a commodity--such as electricity--they can feel
comfortable with their counterparty.
   Also, the public forum of futures exchanges provides for efficient price
dissemination. The liquidity and transparency it provides establish futures
exchanges as ideal pricing benchmarks for portfolio managers, industry
regulators (performance-based ratemaking), and as a reference for other
commercial contracts.

Delivery schedule
   A small percentage of traded futures contracts result in actual
delivery. However, there are various futures contract delivery mechanisms
that provide commercial flexibility among participants. In the case of
Nymex futures contracts, a firm may stand for delivery by ``standard
delivery procedure,'' ``alternative delivery procedure'' (ADP), or
``exchange for physical procedure'' (EFP). The most widely used among
commercial participants is the EFP.
   Essentially, two entities with opposite futures positions may enter into
an EFP. Mutual offset of their opposite positions involves an agreement for
delivery of an actual commodity that does not necessarily conform to
contract specifications in all terms. Firms use EFPs to offset their
futures contracts, thereby gaining the ability to select their own mutually
agreed upon delivery location.
   Participants may preselect their counterparty, price the transaction at
any level, and eliminate futures execution risk. For example, two firms
desiring to trade a given quantity of electric power under given terms--but
without pre-agreement on price--may index the transaction to the futures
contract. Each firm manifests its separate belief on price by the timing of
its entry into its respective, but eventually offsetting, futures position.
The required cash or physical commodity moves as needed, with each firm
independently determining its own net price.
   In the oil and gas industries, many firms conduct a substantial portion
of their commercial trading activity by using EFPs, often each month, with
the same counterparties. Simply put, futures contracts change the method of
pricing among parties, greatly increasing flexibility.

Hedging, to start
   Risk management is often used interchangeably with the term ``hedging.''
And although risk management covers other areas, hedging is a start.
Hedging (a position in the futures market that is equal and opposite to a
position at risk in the cash market) allows commercial participants to
shift unwanted risks to other market participants with inverse risk
profiles. If you do not hedge, you accept total price risk.
   Hedging is rarely, if ever, a pure science. One of the most important
concepts in hedging may be understanding ``basis.'' Basis (cash
price-futures price) is the relationship between the price of the cash
position being hedged and the futures contract price. If a futures is being
used to hedge an exposure other than one with terms identical to the
futures contract, the basis will fluctuate.
   In addition, there is basis risk, which is an undesired change in the
basis. Professional hedgers consciously weigh outright risk vs basis risk.
And, delivery causes the basis to disappear as cash and futures prices
converge at the expiration of the futures contract. Therefore, hedging is
used by commercial participants to protect:
   -- Prices and costs (fuels, power, inventory, base load.
   -- Margins.
   In the broader context, risk management may:
   -- Provide a competitive advantage.
   -- Afford more confident budgeting and planning.
   -- Allow monetization of poorly performing assets.
   -- Temper earnings volatility.
   -- Focus corporate strategy.
   -- Enhance a firm's ability to borrow.

What to ask
   Preparing for the new competitive environment means analyzing a firm's
exposures to risks. What are the risks, how do they fluctuate, which
risk-management tools are appropriate? What is the corporate objective and
what is the level of sensitivity to risk? Coordinate with knowledgeable
accountants, auditors, attorneys, and brokers. Develop meticulous
procedures and controls incorporating highest levels of management and
oversight groups. Make sure that futures, derivatives, and cash market
transactions are viewed in the aggregate when assessing results. Other
industries have embraced futures markets for decades. The electric power
industry has an ideal opportunity to benefit from those industries sailing
the seas before it.

What is a futures contract?
   A futures contract is a firm commitment to deliver or to receive a
specified quantity and grade of a commodity at a specific location within a
designated month. Typically, there are simultaneous offerings for trading
of successive delivery months, prices are not predetermined, and there are
obligations governing financial performance--with penalties levied for
non-performance.
   For example, the proposed New York Mercantile Exchange (Nymex),
California Oregon Border and Palo Verde Switchyard futures contracts call
for 736 MW of firm energy to be delivered during on-peak hours (16 hours
from 07:00 to 22:00), at a rate of 2 MW, over 23 delivery days (Monday
through Friday with makeup on Saturdays and Sundays if necessary), with a
minimum price fluctuation of $0.01/MW ($7.36/contract).
   Successful futures contracts reflect terms and conditions consistent
with cash market practices. The Nymex contracts reflect careful
collaboration with the electric power industry.
   The possibility to actually make or receive delivery, in the case of the
proposed contracts, serves to precipitate convergence between futures and
physical prices as a futures contract approaches expiration.
   To establish the viability of a futures contract, futures exchanges look
to the commercial importance of a commodity, uniformity of product, an
efficient cash or physical market, an efficient way to deliver the product
(bulk transmission market), a large number of buyers and sellers, and a
market that needs price transparency and risk management--in other words, a
price-driven market.

Real-time information for the electric power market
   Electricity Alert combines the editorial expertise of Power Markets Week
newsletter and Platt's commodity information service--both part of The
McGraw-Hill Companies--to create the definitive market information service.
Electricity Alert delivers: news and market coverage of the US electric
power industry; real-time electricity spot-market transactions reported as
deals are completed--as well as bid/ask information gathered by Electricity
Alert's price reporting team; regular reports on market-moving
developments, such as nuclear plant outage schedule; influential price
indexes and ranges from Power Markets Week; up-to-the-minute commentary and
analysis identifying and explaining market movements; a comprehensive
weather service designed specifically for electricity traders; and weekly
production figures for nine regions provided by the Edison Electric
Institute.
   Electricity Alert features a flexible display and delivery options
developed in partnerships with leading network and software providers to
offer custom solutions for integrating information into a company's
operation.
   For more information, or for a demonstration, call Platt's sales office,
212-512-4047; 1-800-459-6521, or fax 212-512-2596.


Illustration(s):
Screen: Platt's Terminal

Photograph(s):
Photograph: Companies must learn to embrace futures contracts and other
derivatives because their use within the electric power industry will
increase--unless deregulation is reversed


About the Author(s):

Preston Head is a principal in the firm of Preston Head Ltd, New York, NY,
an energy futures and derivatives brokerage firm registered as an
Introducing Broker and Commodity Trading Advisor with the National Futures
Assn.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

THE CHANGING WORLD OF UTILITY INVESTOR RELATIONS

By:
Jeffrey D. Bogart

   A New York utility considers how to explain its proposed unbundling
program to investors. A diversified utility holding company fields
questions from traditional investors trying to understand its oil and gas
exploration and production business; a West Coast utility appoints its
first full-time investor relations manager to communicate actively with
major investors and explain its growth strategy.
   Deregulation is posing new and intensified investor relations (IR)
challenges for utility companies--which are putting IR executives on the
front lines of the competitive battlefield. How well utility companies
succeed in their fight for funds and for reduced financing costs may well
depend upon their ability to upgrade their IR programs. That won't be
simple. With retail wheeling increasingly certain, mergers and
diversification on the rise, and unbundling more than a possibility,
investors are seeking new information for use in evaluating utility company
stocks. Meanwhile, some utility companies without active IR programs are
taking steps to increase investor appreciation for their business
strategies--and the quality of their management. Still others are seeking
to attract non-traditional utility investors, interested in more than
dividend yield.
   As Laura Mountcastle, vice president of investor relations at CMS Energy
Corp, notes, ``Utility-company investor relations is more demanding than
ever.''
   ``And certainly different,'' adds W. Scott Dudley Jr, IR manager at FPL
Group Inc.
   Security analysts, for example, are digging for data that did not
interest them five or 10 years ago. Witness Edward J. Tirello Jr, who
covers utility companies for NatWest Securities, New York, NY. ``I'm
seeking information from companies about market share and competitive
position--but then, everyone is.''
   Underscoring the industry's reformation, Tirello observes the novelty of
the information that attracts him: ``What mattered before doesn't matter
now,'' he says. ``Before, you were very concerned about regulation, whether
the utility got its rate case, and what its kilowatt-hour-sales growth
potential was.'' Now, ``What I am looking for is almost what you would look
for in a manufacturing company,'' he explains. ``That wasn't the case 10
years ago; you didn't care about those factors. A utility was a regulated
monopoly, and those factors didn't matter.''

Mining for information
   So what are analysts looking for these days? They are much more focused
on industrial customers than they have been in the past, because that is
the group that has the market power right now, asserts Allan J. Stewart, IR
manager at Duke Power Co. ``Analysts are seeking to determine how
susceptible we are to customers selecting some other type of energy
supplier.''
   At Oppenheimer & Co, New York, NY, utility analyst Craig Lucas agrees:
``We need more information in terms of industrial load,'' he says. ``We
need more in terms of customer mix and the prices being charged each
consumer group.''
Cost reduction is another concern for analysts. There is a tremendous
emphasis on busbar costs, or all-in generating costs, instead of the more
traditional questions about rates of return, says Jeffrey Kotkin, Northeast
Utilities' IR manager. ``The lower your costs, the easier it is to sell
your power''--thus, the easier it may be to attract investors.

The shock of open access
   ``In the stock market, low-cost producers carry a premium to the
industry as a whole,'' observes Tirello. Higher margins, after all, do
affect the bottom line. They also influence an analyst's interpretation of
a company's ability to stand the shock of open access. ``Assume, for
example, that in the year 2003, there is direct access and no more
stranded-investment recovery,'' says Oppenheimer's Lucas. ``Then, the
utilities that are able to get their cost profiles in shape in the seven
years from now until then will be the strongest utilities. Right now,
electric utilities trade at from eight to 15 times earnings, a function of
a competitive position. Are you going to pay the same amount for a company
whose costs are higher than another company's, assuming the earnings are
the same?''
   IR officers also are encountering more questions and providing more
information about their companies' unregulated operations. For instance,
Duke Power's Stewart comments that as the regulated electric power business
matures, analysts are asking whether unregulated, diversified operations
will enable utilities to maintain the earnings growth that will translate
into continued dividend growth.
   The challenge for the IR executive is to disseminate the new information
in a way that helps analysts and others understand and value the
unregulated businesses. That means that in some cases, the traditional
electric-utility analysts will need additional education about unregulated
energy businesses. For example, many people following CMS Energy Corp do
not have a good feel for the oil and gas business, says Mountcastle.

M&A quiz
   Utility IR officers are also fielding questions about their companies'
plans to acquire or be acquired, stimulated by the industry's stream of
mergers. ``When the industry's consolidation finishes, there will be 20 to
50 companies left, down from 125 to 150 today,'' suggests Tirello, perhaps
the first among analysts to predict that mergers would occur (``I was the
earliest,'' he claims. ``I was a visionary; everyone else called me
crazy.'')
   Merger information requests can be tricky for IR officers to answer--or
not answer. ``There was a time when I could joke about utility mergers,''
says Stewart, implying no market activity. ``Now I don't say anything. I
don't know about our plans. There are boardroom discussions going on, and I
just don't know what they are. So instead of risking saying that nothing's
happening when it could be, I don't respond to those questions any longer.
There is going to be industry consolidation, and I think we are going to be
involved in it in some form or fashion. I just don't know when or with
whom.''

Close to the vest
   Merger and acquisition information is not the only subject that is
causing utility IR officers pause. Despite analysts' increased need for
information, today's competitive environment is making some companies less
forthcoming about cost information as well. FPL Group Inc, for example, has
stopped filing its Uniform Statistical Report with the Edison Electric
Institute, Washington, DC, because of concern about revealing cost data to
competitors. ``We have always been good information gatherers and
disseminators,'' says FPL's Dudley, ``and in a regulated environment, you
really didn't care who had your information. Today, we are being challenged
to balance the need of the financial community to understand our business
environment with our need to protect our competitive position.''
   Deregulation has also increased the importance of corporate positioning
and corporate credibility in utility IR programs. ``The nature of the
issues and the way you evaluate a company is different,'' says Dudley,
``and our message has changed as well.''
   He adds that companies must find things that are unique about their own
situation, and cautions that the electric power sector is no longer a
homogeneous industry. ``We think we are one of the more uniquely situated
companies,'' says Dudley. ``FPL has a very low exposure, for example, to
industrial customers. We have taken a very aggressive position with regard
to our dividend and our depreciation policy. Taking a marketing-oriented
approach with analysts, Dudley asks Wall Street ``not to treat all
utilities the same; don't analyze us the way you always did, because those
things may no longer work.'''

Not just a regular utility
   As for corporate credibility, it can be key to helping companies bridge
the gap perceived by many investors to exist between the announcement of a
corporate positioning strategy and its accomplishment. Investor skepticism
at corporate pronouncements is evident in a remark by Goldman Sachs' (New
York, NY) Utility Analyst Ernest Liu: ``There's not one company that comes
into a meeting with investors without saying, `We're not just another
regular utility.' The question is just how much you want to believe it.''
   Credibility also comes into play during mergers and in financing
independent power projects. ``Everyone tells you what they do is
non-dilutive,'' says Tirello. ``That's their basic [line]. Sometimes it's
true, sometimes it's not. I take it with a grain of salt.''
   Knowing management well can help analysts gauge the probability that a
company will arrive at its planned destination. As companies unfold their
strategies for doing business in a deregulated environment, says Earl R.
Dunn, IR manager at Puget Sound Power & Light Co, analysts will
increasingly be asking themselves, ``I know these guys; can they pull this
off?''
   For that reason, companies are increasingly inviting analysts and
investors for on-site visits to give them a chance to size up operating
management. Dunn says that in the past, when the business was based on
``cost-plus,'' there was no need for the analyst to go out and ``kick the
tires;'' but today, the analysts are kicking the tires and more than ever
want to understand and know the management.
   These visits differ from the time-honored plant tour. CMS Energy, for
example, conducts almost a full day of presentations with the heads of the
company's different business units, says Mountcastle.
   This enables analysts and investors to see, hear, and actually meet
informally--CMS hosts a dinner the prior night--the people running the
business.

Pounding the pavement
   Besides affecting the substance of investor communications, deregulation
is also stimulating some utilities to expand their interaction with
investors. A New England utility, for example, engages an outside IR firm
to help it target and meet with institutions. Five years ago, Puget Power
did not have anyone handling IR for it, says Dunn. ``We believed that
because utility stocks traded somewhat like bonds, we did not have to get
out there and do anything.'' Is Puget Power doing anything different?
``Yes,'' says Dunn, ``I'm the first in-house investor relations manager
that Puget Power has ever had.''
   The approach is to be more proactive and less reactive, says FPL's
Dudley. In 1994, FPL increased efforts to explain the company's changed
dividend and financial policies. Dudley expects that in 1996, FPL will be
more active than in 1994, when, he estimates, the company's senior
management spent 14 days on the road in company-sponsored meetings in 14
cities with some 80 different investment firms. In 1996, he expects
management's time on the road to increase to as many as 20 days.
   Some diversified companies are seeking to ``target'' and attract
investors interested in more than dividend yield. ``We have been working to
expand the investor base beyond traditional utility investors,'' says CMS
Energy's Mountcastle.
   Both investor and analyst interaction is being made easier by using new
technology. Electronic media offer new avenues of communications. FPL, for
example, plans to launch a site on the Internet within the next few months,
says Dudley. The company, he adds, is also investigating the use of
fax-on-demand and CD-ROM.

Winning ways: A checklist for improving investor relations in a competitive
marketplace
   -- Targeting: Expand the existing base of actual and potential
investors, identifying new categories of potential investors.
   -- Strategy: Build awareness of and appreciation for the company's
approach to survival and growth.
   -- Positioning: Differentiate the company from its industry peers
nationally, regionally, and next door.
   -- Context setting: Identify new benchmarks or criteria against which
to evaluate the company's growth potential and success in achieving its
goals.
   -- Credibility: Manage corporate credibility by avoiding overoptimism;
showcase operating management.
   -- Intelligence: Through systematic perception studies, provide senior
management with insight into how buy-side and sell-side analysts and
investors view the company's potential.
   -- Alternative media: Evaluate and be prepared to adopt new electronic
forms of communications, such as fax-on-demand, the Internet, and CD-ROM,
as their popularity among investors increases.
   -- Background: Explain the basics of new, unregulated businesses to
investors unfamiliar with them, providing investors with an analytical
framework, data, and insight into the investment potential of these new
areas.
   -- Engagement: Seek out investors rather than wait for them to express
interest.


Photograph(s):
Photograph: Financial analysts are much more focused on industrial
customers than they have been in the past, because that is the group that
has the market power right now

Photograph: ``Companies are less forthcoming about M&A and cost
information''
Jeffrey Bogart

About the Author(s):

Jeffrey D. Bogart is president of Bogart & Co, a New York City-based
investor relations and public affairs consultancy.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

SERENDIPITY OR SAVVY INVESTMENT? A CABLE VENTURE PAYS OFF

   In 1986, buying a cable company seemed like a good idea to Houston
Industries (HI). And as it turned out, it was--but for unexpected reasons.
Almost a decade ago, HI, the parent company of Houston Lighting & Power Co
(HL&P), the US's ninth largest investor-owned utility with $11.4-billion in
assets, entered the cable television business. The venture, which recently
ended with the sale of HI's KBLCOM, was important--not because it gave HI
cable expertise--but because the sale added $700-million to HI's books,
thus providing the company with overseas purchasing power.

The genesis
   Like other utilities, HI was coming out of the heavy construction period
of the 1970s and early 1980s, and was looking for diversified business
opportunities. Company executives were specifically interested in a
business that had some of the essential qualities of a utility-type
company: A large volume market with a captive audience.
   At the same time that HI was exploring diversification options, a
joint-venture deal between the New York City-based Warner Communications
and American Express Corp dissolved, sparking rumors that Warner's Dallas
and Houston cable properties would be sold. The speculation was enough to
send HI executives to Time Inc, New York, NY--owner of cable programming
giant Home Box Office--to consult with Time's cable experts about entering
the market.
   The meetings with Time eventually turned into a 50/50 joint venture
between HI and Time, called Paragon Inc. Although Paragon never acquired
Warner's Texas properties, in 1986 it did purchase 22 cable television
systems from Westinghouse's Group W, Pittsburgh, Pa. For the bargain price
of just over $500-million, Paragon took on almost 560,000 customers at a
historically low price of $900 per subscriber.
   Through Paragon, HI entered the cable business in such diverse locales
as upper Manhattan, NY; Tampa Bay, Fla; El Paso and Dallas/Fort Worth, Tex;
and Los Angeles County, Calif--and became involved in a business that
seemed tailored for anyone able to string new lines into thousands of
interested homes.

Growing a subscriber base
   By 1989, HI, independent of Paragon, sold off its once profitable oil
and gas business that it had operated since the early 1970s to pay
$1.3-billion for Canada's Rogers Communications. That deal gave HI access
to an additional 550,000 subscribers (at the significantly increased market
value of $2360 per head), who were tied to cable franchises in San Antonio
and Laredo, Tex; Minneapolis, Minn; Portland, Ore; and Orange County,
Calif.
   HI then formed a new cable subsidiary, KBLCOM, which combined its 50%
share of Paragon into the recently acquired Rogers properties. KBLCOM's
subscriber list was growing each year, and in 1994, it made its last
acquisition--this time paying just under $2000 per head for 47,000 new
subscribers in the Minneapolis area. In roughly an 8-yr period, HI had
formed a business that served a total of 967,000 cable customers on an
overall investment that reached $1.65-billion. Yet, what was HI's real
strategic goal?

An evolving vision
   At the end of the 1980s and into the early 1990s, the prevailing wisdom
was to get into the consumer's home, via cable, and hopefully extract
marketing information from customers that could be used in unforeseen ways
in the future. HI's management believed that within cable technology was
some kind of marketing enhancement capability that could be applied to
HL&P's existing 1.5-million electricity customers--the vast majority of
whom are residents in the Texas Gulf Coast area.
   By the end of 1994, HI was a utility holding company that reported
$399-million in income on revenues from continuing operations of
$3.7-billion. Arriving at this juncture, however, seems more like an
evolution rather than a direct path for HI.
   Since its inception in 1882, HI has been a company that was defined by
the history of its market. For example, HL&P, in 1901, became one of the
first utilities to burn oil instead of coal because of the huge oil finds
at Spindletop, Tex, only a few miles east of its generating plant. By the
1930s, natural gas from western Texas became plentiful--and today almost
65% of its 13,660 MW of installed capacity is gas-fired.
   However, challenging times were ahead. Since World War II, the so-called
big 19 oil refineries and petrochemical companies, (Exxon Corp, Dow
Chemical Co, DuPont Co, etc), increasingly began producing their own power.
The far more recent threat of retail wheeling is something HI has been
dealing with for a considerable period of time. Also, the debacle of the
South Texas nuclear project in the 1980s didn't help its image with many
customers.
   Already imbued with a view toward deregulation, HI went into the cable
business, thinking that it would lead the company into the
telecommunications age, and change the firm's status as only an energy
supplier. ``We saw the cable business as potentially profitable, with good
operating cash flow,'' says William A. Cropper, HI's vice president and
treasurer. ``We had good book earnings, but we were also pumping a lot of
money back into the business.''
   Along the way, adds Cropper, ``we were visiting with other cable firms
and telephone companies as well. And nobody seemed to be certain as to what
the technology advances meant.'' That was the main concern: Nobody could
say where, exactly, the future of cable or telecommunications was headed.
``Many said they knew, but few were right,'' says Cropper.

A time to sell
   In the early 1990s, Time Inc and Warner Communications merged, forming
Time Warner (TW). Because Denver (Colo)-based baby bell US West took a
$2.5-billion position in that merger, the pact became more significant.
But, even that deal paled against the proposed mega-deal between baby bell
Bell Atlantic, Newark, NJ, and the number one US cable company,
Tele-Communications Inc (TCI), Englewood, Colo, in the summer of 1994.
   Once again, the market sparked HI into action. The announcement of the
Bell Atlantic/TCI deal--which eventually collapsed--convinced HI that it
was time to assess its portfolio and cable holdings. Although HI's cable
operations were stable, it was still going to be several years before it
could be considered a major profit center, large enough within the industry
to be able to control its own destiny. Moreover, the business was requiring
more programming arrangements and product marketing than HI's executives
felt comfortable with.
   By August 1995, HI sold KBLCOM, including its 50% share in Paragon, to
TW. The deal drew little public attention. Nonetheless, TW paid HI almost
$2500 per subscriber as part of its $2.4-billion package.
   In the deal, TW assumed $650-million of KBLCOM external debt and other
liabilities, and purchased HI/KBLCOM intercompany debt for approximately
$620-million cash. The sale gave HI 1-million shares of TW common stock,
and 11-million shares of TW convertible preferred, with a total value of
approximately $1.1-billion. ``We booked a gain on the deal of $700-million
after tax, and we are also left with $1-billion in TW stock,'' says
Cropper. ``This made our balance sheet healthy--real fast.'' Indeed, HI has
seen equity vs debt rise from 39 to 48% since the end of 1994.
   With its cable sale has come a deepened commitment to the strategy it
has turned to replace diversification: overseas expansion of its core
utility business. HI's most recent international venture took place last
September in South America.

Global now, then
   In 1988, after HI had already entered the cable business, a new
opportunity surfaced. With very little international fanfare or support,
then embattled Argentine President RaPound l Alfonsn launched his so-called
Houston Plan. With it, formerly nationalistic Argentina was turning a
corner and reaching out to the oil and gas company executives in
Houston--still the world's energy capital. Within 18 months, Alfonsn's
successor, Carlos Menem, accelerated the process, cementing the new Houston
outreach program via a major privatization effort. In 1993, an HI-led
consortium assumed La Plata and Santiago del Estero electricity
distribution rights through the privatization process.
   HI's next global venture brought the company to the UK. There, last
September, HI's unregulated subsidiary, HI Energy, teamed with Central &
South West Corp (CSW), to make a run at acquiring Norweb plc, the electric
distribution company that serves 2-million customers in the northwestern
part of England, near Manchester. In what turned out to be a nerve-wracking
bidding war, HI and CSW saw their $2.7-billion bid topped in the end by the
UK-based North West Water Group, which won the distribution firm with a
price of $2.89-billion.
   According to Steve Schaeffer, senior vice president of finance at HI
Energy, the company's specific aim in Britain was to expand its
international distribution operations. While the company does not rule out
expansion of generation, executives believe that HI Energy is one of a
handful of international companies that can bring ``state-of-the-art''
billing and record-keeping systems to the table. ``We know that
distribution is often a political exercise, but we believe that is the area
we have the ability to add value,'' says Schaeffer.
   Indeed, HI Energy's experiences in Argentina, with its 350,000 customers
in Buenos Aires and Santiago del Estero provinces, has given it confidence
that it can work out kinks in distribution systems just about
anywhere--particularly in Latin America.
   Very much on the mind of HI executives today, is the perceived opening
of the Brazilian industry. ``Brazil is clearly in the same league as India
and China, in terms of potential,'' says Schaeffer. ``However, its
advantages may lay more in distribution than in generation. If the
government is going to continue building hydro facilities, I'm not sure I
want to build gas-fired units there.''
In India, where HI Energy is building the largest coke-calcining plant in
Asia, HI supports behind-the-fence projects, given the comparatively high
rates of return from Indian industrial customers. Schaeffer also believes
that India's local capital market is developing at such a fast rate that
before long, foreign companies will mainly be sought after for their
technical skills, and not for how deep their pockets are.
   For the moment, HI's pockets are plenty deep, thanks to its brief fling
in the cable business. The company is going to have to plow those profits
into something soon--or shareholders could be headed for a big windfall.

Photograph(s):
Photograph: Houston Industries Energy has 350,000 electric-utility
customers in Argentina--and expertise to run a distribution system
anywhere, say company executives

Photograph: ``We booked a gain on the [cable] deal of $700-million after
tax, and . . . $1-billion in Time Warner stock'' William Cropper, Houston
Industries

Photograph: ``Brazil is clearly in the same league as India and China, in
terms of potential'' Steve Schaeffer, Houston Industries Energy

About the Author(s):

Jeffrey Ryser is a business writer based in Houston, Tex.


Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

STATE EXPERIMENTS WITH RETAIL WHEELING

Last October, the New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission (PUC) announced
a 3-yr retail wheeling pilot program that hasn't left the spotlight since
its introduction. Source of both controversy and consideration, the program
is continuing efforts to open the electric power market to competition.
Yet, project implementation faces high hurdles, such as recovery of
stranded costs and resolution of federal and state jurisdictional issues.
   With most industry groups taking direct access as a matter of
inevitability, New Hampshire is seen as the test case. At issue for the
electric power industry in part is stranded cost recovery and its
implications for balance sheets and credit ratings. Standard & Poor's
(S&P), a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies, is carefully watching the
terms the state PUC is devising for stranded-cost recovery. For the
utilities involved in the pilot, however, the news is good, notes S&P:
``[Its relatively small size] should allow the financial impact to be
manageable for the utilities involved.''
   The program is scheduled to begin May 1 and include 3% of the state's
electric peak load--about 60 MW. Although Michigan has announced a retail
wheeling program, it only covers incremental load growth and not existing
load. The New Hampshire program will involve the state's six major
utilities, including Public Service Co of New Hampshire (PSNH) which will
account for 44 MW of the pilot load.
   The project is expected to include all customer classes allocated
proportionately with random customer selection of interested parties.
Customers will be expected to bear the risks involved with the transactions
in making their own arrangements for a power provider and backup supplier.
However, these initial guidelines may be revised. Final guidelines were
expected on Dec 22, after press time.
   The PUC's preliminary guidelines divide the cost of stranded investments
equally between customers and shareholders. Therefore, according to S&P,
state utilities will not be able to fully recover stranded-investment
costs. The mechanism itself may be financially damaging to utilities if
finalized as New Hampshire's permanent mechanism in dealing with stranded
investment. This inability to fully recover costs that were allowed under
previous regulatory practices will almost certainly impact negatively on a
utility's credit-worthiness.
   Although the PUC notes that the stranded-cost mechanism is temporary and
subject to full review after the pilot program's first year, it conflicts
with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission's (FERC) position that
utilities get an opportunity to recover identifiable and verifiable
stranded costs. But the PUC contends that it has exclusive jurisdiction on
intrastate transactions despite FERC's jurisdiction on wheeling. Result:
The jurisdictional conflict between state and FERC will most likely
escalate as the pilot progresses.
   In fact, the pilot has yet to begin and PSNH has already asserted its
claim that state regulatory commissions do not have the authority to order
retail wheeling--an echo of Detroit Edison Co's claim in its issue with the
Michigan PUC over its experimental retail wheeling program.
   To add fuel to the fire, a New Hampshire attorney is proposing a new
public utility to serve industrial customers with low-cost power available
on the wholesale market. The PUC could approve the utility-- Freedom
Electric Power Co--under a state law allowing competition in the public
interest. Freedom has already arranged to purchase 20 MW of capacity from
North Atlantic Energy Service Co's nuclear powerplant, Seabrook.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

SAN FRANCISCO LEADS THE WAY FOR MUNIS

In a move closely watched by industry observers, the city of San Francisco,
Calif, is studying the formation of its own electric utility. Through its
consultant, Strategic Energy Ltd, Pittsburgh, Pa, the city is evaluating
whether or not it makes economic sense for its citizenry to break from
Pacific Gas & Electric Co and establish its own electric utility. Under
current federal regulations, municipal utilities can shop around for
low-priced power.
   However, at this point, San Francisco is just examining its options.
According to the consulting firm, the question posed by the city is whether
competition for the city's business would result in lower electricity
prices for consumers.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

WEEKLY OUTPUT, 1-MILLION KWH

        Weekly output, 1-million kWh

           November 11:  59,890
November 4: 57,682      October 28: 57,049
October 21: 57, 046     October 14: 57,917
Cumulative year to date
Total US: 2,807,683 kWh (-10 superscript 6)
Change over 1994, % 3.0

                         LATEST WEEK           52 WKS TO DATE
                                    % chg
                         kWh        over       kWh              %
               (-10 superscript 6)  1994  (-10 superscript 6)  chg
New England              2217       7.0     116,163            0.6
Middle Atlantic          7852       7.3     418,652            0.5
Central Industrial     12,718       9.0     661,933            3.9
West Central             4452       8.5     236,664            4.3
Southeast              14,594       9.7     778,542            3.8
South Central            7299       2.9     429,085            2.8
Rocky Mountain           2878       3.1     160,540            0.1
Pacific Northwest        3502       0.4     167,919            2.1
Pacific Southwest        4378       0.5     243,820            2.7
Latest seasonally         148              Previous week       144
 adjusted index
Year ago                  137

Source: Edison Electric Institute

Illustration(s):
Illustration: Graph:l Weekly output, 1-million kWh


Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

DIRECT ACCESS THREATENS UTILITY REVENUE
News and information about financial matters relevant to the electric power
industry provided by Standard & Poor's, a division of The McGraw-Hill
Companies

   Revenue--rather than stranded assets--is the key to credit quality when
the US electric power industry retail markets open to direct access,
explains Standard & Poor's (S&P), a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
A recent S&P study has determined that if direct access were to happen
today, industry revenues would decline between a moderate $10-billion
annually (6%) and a more troublesome $26-billion (16%). The range is based
on two scenarios that make assumptions about the extent to which customers
will opt for direct access and the degree to which lost revenue will be
recovered.
   Companies whose credit rating could be in jeopardy are those with the
potential for the most revenue deterioration. Each utility's potential lost
revenue indicates the degree of cost reduction it must effect to stave off
financial erosion under a direct-access scenario.
The financial risks occur when a utility's embedded costs cannot be
recovered in a declining price environment. At most risk are a utility's
own generation expenses and purchased-power contracts, since it appears--at
least for now--that the transmission and distribution end of the business
will remain regulated and insulated from competitive threats. Most
utilities are well aware of the exposures and are working toward a more
competitive cost structure.

Who is vulnerable?
   The severe case contemplates a situation in which direct access occurs
immediately for all customer classes and assumes no surcharge mechanism to
recover lost revenue.
   The more expected scenario assumes direct access for commercial and
industrial users only. While all customer classes are likely to have
competitive choices, as a practical matter, only the larger users are
expected to exercise that choice--at least initially. Residential customers
are initially less likely to switch from their local utility supplier.
   This scenario also assumes that 50% of commercial and industrial lost
revenue will be recovered in rates. In reality, S&P believes that
regulators will permit recovery of a higher percentage of lost revenue;
however, the exact portion will vary greatly among states. And, in the
final analysis, the market will decide how much it can bear.
   Under the moderate (6%) revenue-loss scene, utilities with the most to
lose are those with high generation costs and possibly a heavy industrial
load. Most utilities will be hard-pressed to cut costs sufficiently to
offset a potential double-digit reduction in revenue. On the other hand,
various risk-mitigation strategies are available to all utilities, and many
have already begun to implement cost-cutting measures in an effort to
preserve financial integrity.
   Utilities with the least vulnerability to direct retail access are those
with low generating costs and a modest industrial customer base. In
addition, utilities that will also do well will have competitively priced
excess-generating capacity and the ability to market that power nationwide.
Nevertheless, as the competitive landscape changes, even those companies
will need to adjust periodically to maintain their competitive advantages.

Market forces drive risk
   Market forces will continue to drive retail prices down, as long as
there is excess generating capacity. Moreover, customer self-generation and
fuel switching are tempting alternatives that will contribute to pricing
pressure.
   A large and efficient spot market for electricity is poised to emerge.
This too will contribute to pricing pressures. While regional pricing
differences now reflect supply and demand, prices will become more
homogeneous nationwide over time as cross-country power swaps expand
customer access to additional power sources. These displacement and
exchange deals, as well as technological advances, should highlight the
inefficiencies of the transmission grid and encourage improvements to
lessen any existing constraints and bottlenecks.
   Flexibility may dictate customer buying patterns--forcing some to rely
heavily on the spot market and short-term contracts. This would increase
competition for customers and possibly entice generators to run on smaller
reserve margins, freeing up even more generating capacity and driving
prices down further.
   Utilities with firm contracts with customers are less likely to lose
those customers but not completely immune from the risks of price and
revenue decline. To illustrate: Raytheon Corp asked for--and got--price
reductions from Massachusetts utilities so it would remain in-state.
   Nevertheless, with all of the proposals floating around, mandated direct
access is likely to emerge from federal or state regulators or legislators.
Utilities will continue to discount rates until the market rate drops to
the variable cost to generate power. If market rates are below variable
costs, a utility will no longer generate power from its most inefficient
plants, at least in theory.
   So why not do a plant-by-plant analysis to reveal uneconomic power
stations? S&P feels that most utilities run their systems as a portfolio.
Operating statistics for individual plants, such as capacity factor, change
constantly with fluctuating load patterns, fuel choices, plant
availability, and other management decisions. However, in the long term,
some plants will be closed and others built to take their places for
peaking and base-load capacity.

Mitigating risk
Most US utilities are already re-engineering their way to lower generation
costs. In the future, many may also decide to write off high-cost
assets--particularly if generation-related revenue is no longer regulated.
The resulting equity reduction is not a concern from a credit-quality
stance because it is a non-cash event. However, the eventual drop in
revenue as prices decline is a concern. But there are additional ways to
mitigate stranded costs other than reduction.
   One method is to seek recovery through rates. While the bulk of stranded
costs may be charged to ratepayers, the actual dollar amount is likely to
be tempered by political and market forces. Other strategies, such as
accelerated depreciation of plants or reallocation of costs to reduce
industrial subsidies, will continue to proliferate. The potential for lost
revenue is lower if generation assets can be further depreciated before
direct access becomes effective or if industrial rates can be reduced
without affecting cost recovery.
   Other options include aggressive marketing efforts to boost sales and
changes in purchased-power strategies. Some utilities may absorb part of
the above-market power-purchase costs to stay competitive-- despite a
regulated pass-through to customers.
   For more information on the revenues-at-risk study by the corporate
utility group, contact John Bilardello at 212-208-1525 or Michael Cole at
212-208-8704.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

FYI
Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in
McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and
Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute

   As of Nov 11, 1995, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) has
approved 136 power marketers; 25 more are pending.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

AGREEMENT
Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in
McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and
Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute

   New Energy Ventures signs an agreement with the California Retailers
Assn to negotiate power and natural-gas supply contracts and provide a
variety of other energy services to individual association members.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

LEGALITIES
Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in
McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and
Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute

   Dept of Energy (DOE) selects three power suppliers for the Nevada Test
Site and North Las Vegas facilities, but has delayed awarding the contracts
because of litigation over service territory rights. Estimated value of the
contracts is $55-million for the test site and $19-million for North Las
Vegas over the 10-yr contract duration. DOE proposes 2-yr contracts with
four 2-yr options.Valley Electric Assn filed the lawsuit, now pending
before the Nevada Supreme Court, seeking clarification of the boundaries of
its service territory on part of the test site.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in
McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and
Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute

   University of Missouri's Columbia campus issues an RFP for electricity
and natural-gas supplies. The school intends to purchase up to 48,300
MWh/yr with purchases of up to 10 MW in certain hours. Supply will begin
Apr 1. The campus also seeks up to 2-million ft3/yr of natural gas.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

CEGELEC ESCA
Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in
McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and
Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute

   Cegelec ESCA launches The Electronic Energy Exchange, a 24-hr,
real-time, bilateral service designed specifically for trading electricity.
The exchange combines the convenience of electronic public bulletin boards
with the security of private telephone negotiations in an on-line service
using advanced computer technology. Subscribers can post offers to buy or
sell products for any duration--from minutes to months. There are no
transaction fees.
   Transactions can be handled in several ways. A subscriber needing
resources quickly can accept a seller's posted terms or strike a better
deal by negotiating concurrently with multiple sellers through private
screens. All transactions among the exchange users are secure; all deal
confirmations are private. Information for market analysis is also
available to each subscriber.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

ELECTRICITY ALERT
Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in
McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and
Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute

   Electricity Alert, a real-time information service for the electric
power industry, is now available from Platt's and Power Markets Week,
divisions of The McGraw-Hill Companies. It combines the editorial expertise
of Power Markets Week and Platt's commodity information services to create
a definitive market information service with real-time news, commentary,
and prices (see p 52 for more information).

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

ENRON CAPITAL & TRADE RESOURCES
Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in
McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and
Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute

   Enron Capital & Trade Resources makes an offer to the Long Island Power
Authority (LIPA) to help restructure Long Island Lighting Co, even
guaranteeing rate relief under some structures if LIPA opens Long Island to
retail competition. The proposal was one of 13 made public by LIPA in its
efforts to develop a restructuring plan for the Long Island utility, which
charges the highest electric rates in the country, averaging 15.3
cents/kWh.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

TALLAHASSEE (FLA) ELECTRIC DEPT
Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in
McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and
Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute

   Tallahassee (Fla) Electric Dept receives three proposals from outside
sources and two from itself for a total of 964 MW in response to an RFP
seeking 250 MW for a minimum of 11 years. All the proposals are for new
generation. A decision is expected in the spring.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

TAMPA ELECTRIC CO
Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in
McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and
Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute

   Tampa Electric Co seeks PSC approval of a new optional
Commercial/Industrial Service Rider, which would allow the utility to
negotiate special rates with large power consumers without the need for PSC
approval.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in

Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in
McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and
Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute
Table I: Power marketer applications, fourth quarter, 1995*

Company                         FERC Docket No. Status

Dartmouth Power Associates LP   ER96-149-000    Pending
Eastex Power Marketing Inc      ER96-118-000    Pending
Energy-Online Inc               ER96-138-000    Pending
Energy Transfer Group LLC       ER96-280-000    Pending
Enerserve LC                    ER96-182-000    Pending
Enova Energy Marketing Inc      ER96-41-000     Pending
Greenwich Energy Partners LP    ER96-116-000    Pending
Multi-Energies USA              ER96-203-000    Pending
Nordic Electric LLC             ER96-127-000    Pending
Norstar Energy LP               ER96-10-000     Pending
Southern Energy Marketing Co    ER95-976-000    Approved
USGen                           ER95-1625-000   Pending
US Power & Light Inc            ER96-105-000    Pending
Yankee Energy Marketing Co      ER96-146-000    Pending

*From Sep 30 through Nov 11   Source:UDI/McGraw-Hill

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in

Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in
McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and
Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute
Table II: Power marketer transactions, third quarter, 1995*

Power marketer                      MWh sold         MWh purchased
AES Power Inc                           55,200           55,200
Aquila Power Corp                       71,446             9600
Associated Power Services Inc          203,556          203,076
Catex Vitol Electric Inc               371,695          135,151
CNG Power Services                     435,098          421,518
Citizens Lehman Power LP               247,915          247,915
Coastal Electric Services Co           111,250          111,250
R. J. Dahnke & Associates              438,840           49,560
Destec Power Services                     7300             7300
Electric Clearinghouse Inc           1,180,374        1,194,938
Engelhard Power Marketing Inc           83,676           87,980
Enron Power Marketing Inc            2,427,703        2,193,264
Hartford Power Sales LLC                14,331           14,379
Heartland Energy Services Inc          155,480          158,219
Illinova Power Marketing Inc            20,800           20,800
InterCoast Power Marketing Co             1400             1400
Koch Power Services Inc                   9420             9420
LG&E Power Marketing Inc               650,701          672,073
Louis Dreyfus Electric Power Inc     1,457,156        1,434,002
Morgan Stanley Capital Group              1600             1600
NorAm Energy Services Inc              333,828          303,542
North American Energy Conservation Inc    6950             6950
Power Exchange Corp                         50               50
Rainbow Energy Marketing Corp           54,738           55,246
Stand Energy Corp                       18,816           18,816
Tennessee Power Co                        4800             4800
TransCanada Northridge Power Corp       43,200           30,000

Total                                8,421,723        7,462,449
*Source:UDI/McGraw-Hill

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

ALLEGHENY POWER SYSTEM

   Allegheny Power System consolidates its bulk power supply functions at
the Greensburg (Pa) office, establishing three major business units:
generation, headed by Donald R. Feenstra, executive director, operating;
transmission, led by David C. Benson, director, system operations; and
planning and compliance, headed by Karl V. Pfirrmann, director,
transmission planning. All three men are elected vice president as a result
of their new positions.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

AIR MOVEMENT & CONTROL ASSN INC

   Air Movement & Control Assn Inc elects David W. Wolbrink president. He
is vice president of research and development for Broan Manufacturing Co.


Photograph(s):
Photograph: D.W. Wolbrink

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

AMERICAN ELECTRIC POWER CO

   American Electric Power Co names a management team to pursue global
energy investment and development projects involving power systems
engineering, design, consulting, and project-management services. Donald M.
Clements will lead the reorganized business unit as president of AEP Energy
Services, AEP Resources, AEP Resources International Ltd, and AEP
Investments. C. David Mustine, who was general manager of AEP Energy
Services, is elected vice president of the four entities. John H.
Provanzana, formerly manager of support services in AEP's T&D Services
Dept, is named to the newly created position of general manager of
transmission and distribution for AEP Energy Services. Stephen A. Molick, a
principal engineer in AEP's Technology Applications Div, becomes director
of industrial projects.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

AMERICAN GAS ASSN

   American Gas Assn elects Susan Glasmann, vice president of marketing and
sales with Mountain Fuel Supply Co, chair of the marketing section.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

BECHTEL GROUP INC

   Bechtel Group Inc elects Frederick W. Gluck vice chairman and Adrian
Zaccaria president and chief operating officer. Riley P. Bechtel continues
as CEO, in addition to his new duties as chairman. Gluck was an executive
vice president and member of the executive committee. Zaccaria was
president of Bechtel's Global Energy Industries.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

CANADIAN IMPERIAL BANK OF COMMERCE

   Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce appoints Michael K. Burke director in
its CIBC Wood Gundy Project Finance Unit, under which it offers credit and
capital market services globally, primarily to the power industry. Burk was
with Barclays de Zoete Wedd as director of project finance in the
Structured Finance Div.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

CANADIAN STANDARDS ASSN

   Canadian Standards Assn elects Nick Maalouf vice president,
certification and testing; he was vice president, operations-North America
and Europe.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

CENTRAL HUDSON GAS & ELECTRIC CORP

   Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp names Gladys Cooper assistant vice
president-governmental relations. She was corporate secretary prior to a
leave of absence used to obtain a juris doctorate.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

CMS ENERGY CORP

   CMS Energy Corp elects President Victor J. Fryling to the additional
post of chief operating officer. Michael G. Morris is named executive vice
president. He will remain president and CEO of subsidiary Consumers Power
Co.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

CONSOLIDATED NATURAL GAS CO

   Consolidated Natural Gas Co announces that David M. Westfall will assume
the responsibilities of chief financial officer in addition to his role as
senior vice president. He succeeds Lester D. Johnson, vice chairman and
chief financial officer, who is retiring.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

COOLING TOWER INSTITUTE

   Cooling Tower Institute elects Ken Kozelski of DuPont Co president and
board chairman.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

COOPERS & LYBRAND LLP

   Coopers & Lybrand LLP expands its Utilities/Energy Consulting Div,
adding Robert A. Irvin to lead the group, which now includes Palmer
Bellevue, an energy consulting group acquired in 1993. He was a principal
at McKinsey & Co.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

CSW ENERGY INC

   CSW Energy Inc names Floyd W. Nickerson to the newly created position of
vice president of corporate resources for both the firm and affiliate CSW
International Inc. Nickerson was vice president of corporate services for
Transok Inc.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

DOW ENVIRONMENTAL INC

   Dow Environmental Inc announces that Paul Goldstein will succeed Barry
N. Naft as president. Goldstein was vice president of marketing and
business development.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

DUKE ENGINEERING & SERVICES

   Duke Engineering & Services names Charles B. Aycock vice president of
renewable energy with responsibility for hydroelectric and thermal power
projects, plant operations, industrial power applications, and emerging
technologies--such as solar, wind, and photovoltaics.


Photograph(s):
Photograph: C.B. Aycock

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

EDS APPOINTS WILLIAM J. GRABSKE

   EDS appoints William J. Grabske president of its Utilities Div. He was
with JWP International as vice president with responsibility for that
firm's international energy and environmental business.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "36"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

ELSAG BAILEY PROCESS AUTOMATION

   Elsag Bailey Process Automation announces four key assignments in the
Engineering and R&D Group, naming Richard Allenson director, systems
development engineering; Thomas Fink senior director, consoles and tools
development engineering; Edward Mallinak senior system architect; and Anne
Poorman director, applications product development engineering. Company
unit Bailey-Fischer & Porter names Blake Doney product manager for magnetic
flowmeters.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "37"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

FLUOR DANIEL INC

   Fluor Daniel Inc appoints Bill Wasilewski general manager of the firm's
Philadelphia (Pa) office. He was business development manager for the
company's Chemicals, Plastics, and Fibers operating company.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "38"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

IBM UTILITY AND ENERGY SERVICES INDUSTRY

   IBM Utility and Energy Services Industry names Kevin M. Moonan general
manager of the business unit for North America with responsibility for
defining industry strategy and direction, developing customer solutions,
spearheading sales and marketing in North America, and for coordinating
worldwide activities of the Utility and Energy Services Industry
organization.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "39"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

INSTITUTE OF NUCLEAR POWER OPERATIONS

   Institute of Nuclear Power Operations elects W. George Hairston III to
its board of directors. Hairston is president and CEO of Southern Nuclear
Operating Co and executive vice president, nuclear operations of Georgia
Power Co.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "40"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

LURGI CORP

   Lurgi Corp appoints Alan N. Silberberg president and chief operating
officer. He was senior vice president.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "41"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

MIDLAND COGENERATION VENTURE LP

   Midland Cogeneration Venture LP elects James M. Kevra president and CEO
and Gary B. Pasek general counsel and secretary. Kevra was president of Pan
National Gas Sales Inc; Pasek was with Illinois Power Co.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "42"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

MISSION ENERGY CO

   Mission Energy Co appoints Lawrence C. Grundmann Jr director of
development, USA/Canada. He was with Ahlstrom Development Corp.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "43"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

NEW YORK POWER AUTHORITY

   New York Power Authority Chief Nuclear Officer William J. Cahill Jr is
elected a life fellow of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers.


Photograph(s):
Photograph: W.J. Cahill, Jr.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "44"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

NOOTER/ERIKSEN INC

   Nooter/Eriksen Inc names three to new positions: Donald H. Lange from
general sales manager to vice president-sales and marketing, Timothy S.
Peterson from project manager to manager of projects, and Thomas S. McBroom
from project engineer to project engineering manager.


Photograph(s):
Photograph: D.H. Lange

Photograph: T.S. McBroom

Photograph: T.S. Peterson

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "45"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

PECO ENERGY CO

   PECO Energy Co elects Drew B. Fetters vice president of nuclear station
support, succeeding William H. Smith III, who has a new post with the
company. Fetters' most recent assignment was project director for the
utility's financial information systems project.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "46"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

PLANMETRICS INC

   Planmetrics Inc elects James Pardikes vice president. He has been with
the firm for several years as a consultant in strategy, finance, marketing,
and operational effectiveness.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "47"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

SCECORP

   SCEcorp and its utility subsidiary, Southern California Edison Co, elect
Alan J. Fohrer and Bryant C. Danner executive vice presidents. They will
continue to serve as chief financial officer and general counsel,
respectively. Harold B. Ray is elected executive vice president of Edison
from senior vice president. He remains in charge of the Systems group,
which includes nuclear, power generation, transmission, and substation
organizations.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "48"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

SIEMENS CORP, POWER GENERATION GROUP

   Siemens Corp, Power Generation Group, appoints Dr David G. McAlees
executive director of its Nuclear Fuel Cycle Div, succeeding Helmut Pekarek
who has accepted a new management position for the firm. McAlees retains
his current position as senior vice president and general manager of
Siemens Power Corp's Nuclear Div, headquartered in Bellevue, Wash.


Photograph(s):
Photograph: D.G. McAlees

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "49"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

THE SOUTHERN COMPANY

   The Southern Company names Dave Altman vice president for corporate
communications, succeeding J. R. Harris, who assumes new responsibilities
as vice president of external affairs and assistant corporate secretary at
affiliate Southern Electric International Inc. Altman is currently vice
president of corporate communications at subsidiary Georgia Power Co.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "50"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

GLOBALIZATION OF ELECTRICITY MARKETS

At a recent executive summit, CEOs, presidents, managers, and strategists
shared McGraw-Hill's insights into the current and future state of the
industry. Analysts from four divisions of The McGraw-Hill Companies
explained the what, when, and why of regional economic growth, electricity
demand, capacity expansions, changing structural and regulatory climates,
and trends in fuel prices and technologies. If you didn't attend
Globalization of Electricity Markets, here's what you missed

By:
John Javetski

   As an early-season snowfall blanketed New York City in late November,
electric power executives converged on the headquarters of The McGraw-Hill
Companies to participate in the first annual Globalization of Electricity
Markets conference. Sponsored by IBM's Utility and Energy Services
Industry, White Plains, NY, the two-day executive summit showcased the
collective marketing and technical expertise of personnel from several
divisions of The McGraw-Hill Companies, the world's largest supplier of
information to the global electricity marketplace.
   Energy specialists and technical/business analysts from Standard &
Poor's, DRI/McGraw-Hill (a unit of Standard & Poor's), the magazines
Electrical World and Electric Power International, and Utility Data
Institute (UDI)/McGraw-Hill joined guest speakers in providing a forum for
the audience of executives to discuss and debate the latest trends and
developments that are reshaping the global electric power industry, as well
as traditional relationships between risks and opportunities in the
business.
   The conference also marked the release of DRI/McGraw-Hill's worldwide
and regional forecasts of electricity demand, electricity prices, capacity
needs, regulatory and structural evolution, and fuel prices and mixes. This
report summarizes the conference sessions; unabridged versions of DRI's
forecasts for the 1995-2020 period can be found in its ambitious,
six-volume, multi-client study, titled ``The Future of the Electric Power
Industry Around the World'' (see box).

World economic outlook
   Roger Brinner, chief economist of DRI/McGraw-Hill, Lexington, Mass,
kicked off the conference by presenting DRI's rather upbeat worldwide
economic outlook, which was at the core of DRI's analyses of regional
electricity markets. Brinner began by predicting that GDP growth for the US
would be fairly moderate in the long term, averaging only about 2%/yr
between 1995 and 2020.
   The fundamental reason that economic growth will remain half a point
lower than the 2.5% it has averaged of late, he explained, is that growth
in both the US population and labor force recently shrank to about 1%, and
will remain there over the forecast period.
   But thanks to the North American Free Trade Agreement, in 1995, Brinner
says the US lost about $20-billion worth of export sales to Mexico,
and--because of the devaluation of the peso--the US is now absorbing more
imports from Mexico that may have represented another $10- to $20-billion
of lost US production last year.
   Brinner then revealed why he remains optimistic about the economic
future of the US. Normally, in the late stages of an economic recovery,
capital spending on machine tools, computers, and plant and equipment
declines sharply. But that hasn't happened yet, based on recent figures for
new orders for most non-defense capital goods. Brinner concluded that there
are four unusual, positive elements in the current US economic cycle:
n New technology is economically obsoleting many types of equipment, from
process-control systems to business computers, and corporations can now
justify accelerating their capital-goods spending because of savings in
production and operations costs that they can reap.
   -- For foreign firms that sell into the US market, the dollar has become
so relatively cheap that many are locating their production facilities in
the US to an unprecedented extent, and those investments show up as US
capital spending.
   -- Inflation seems to have topped out in the US, because the Federal
Reserve Bank's 1994 interest-rate hikes were successful in keeping
unemployment from falling below 5.5 to 6%, and capacity utilization from
exceeding 85% --the balance points for today's US economy.
   -- Recent productivity growth has been so good that the manufacturing
sector has been able to keep its rate of price increases below that of
hourly compensation gains, while boosting its capital spending and
profitability. As a result, DRI predicts that the Federal Reserve will cut
interest rates by at least one-half percent over the next six months.

Reining in inflation
   Brinner was somewhat less optimistic about overall long-term economic
prospects for the rest of the world, especially Europe. However, he was
encouraged by worldwide efforts to rein in inflation. In the G-7 nations,
inflation should remain comfortably down at around 3% through the end of
the decade, and even the nations of economically overheated Asia seem to
have capped inflation at about 8%.
   Brinner characterized Europe's expected moderate but extended upswing as
disappointing, for the following reasons. Compared to the US, European
nations are experiencing an even more pronounced decline in their
populations and labor forces, and they're trying to cut their budgets to
meet the Maastricht Treaty requirements. Rampant pessimism among European
business leaders, which is tempering the short-term investment climate
there, is justified by Europe's untenable labor costs, which are twice
those of the US but with only 75 to 80% of its productivity.
   Brinner was more optimistic about Mexico and Latin America. He predicted
that the peso crisis, which cut the influx of international equity to
developing Latin American nations by an order of magnitude two years ago,
would not result in another lost decade like the 1980s. Why? This time, the
Latin American nations responded to the crisis by cutting their deficits,
accelerating privatization efforts, locking in economic reforms, and
reaffirming their integration with global trade.
   For Europe, Japan, and the US, DRI projects that inflation-adjusted
growth will be only 2 to 2.5% from 1995 to 2020. For the Middle East and
Africa, the former Soviet Union, and Eastern Europe, growth will be
3.5-4.5%. For Latin America, GDP growth will be approximately 5%, and for
Asia, about 5.5%.
   Brinner said the greatest opportunities, purely on a GDP basis, are in
the developing world. But in terms of demand for power, the opportunities
in high-GDP-growth regions are even richer because of the even faster
growth of the middle class there.
   Growth in the developing world will continue to exceed the rates of the
1970s and 1980s because of entrepreneurial government initiatives. The
fastest growing countries had higher rates of investment relative to GDP,
much higher rates of secondary-school enrollment, and greater openness to
trade. So, Brinner concludes that if you welcome equity investment and your
workforce is educated enough to make use of transferred technology, you can
grow rapidly.
   But there are risks to investing in emerging markets, Brinner reminded.
DRI recently launched a global risk service that delineates many dimensions
of those risks, recognizing that the risks facing direct foreign investors
are different than those facing, say, a portfolio investor. One conclusion:
today, Asia and Latin America offer the best risk/reward tradeoff of all
regions.

Fuels forecast
   Electric-utility executives care only about the relative--not the
absolute--prices of the fossil fuels that they burn, noted James Osten, a
principal with the Lexington (Mass) office of DRI/McGraw-Hill.
   So, in its fuels-price outlook, DRI also considers the availability,
demand, and end-user costs for oils, natural gas, liquified natural gas
(LNG), and coal on a relative basis. Osten explained that, as a bulk
commodity, the price of crude oil is determined strictly by supply and
demand. He mentioned that, facing sluggish demand forecasts and competition
from non-OPEC sources, OPEC itself may be anticipating that oversupply may
reduce the price of crude oil in the short term.
   But residual oil remains a key fuel whose price is commonly used as an
index in natural-gas contracts, Osten reminded. At present, the price of
pipeline gas--including fixed demand charges, a commodity part that
escalates with fuel-oil prices, and often-significant transportation
costs--appears to be capped by the price of fuel oil on one side, and by
the price of coal on the other.
   Osten then addressed the evolution of demand for the various fossil
fuels by region. He predicted that, across the board, the growth of demand
for oil will lag that for other fuels, even in the developing world. And
although demand for natural gas will grow fastest--in part because of its
penetration of power-generation sectors--eventually coal will become the
new fuel of choice for new base-load capacity as coal producers reduce
their prices in response to the challenge by gas.
   Today, however, natural gas is still the fuel of choice for new capacity
in the US, Osten said, thanks to the low heat rates and low capital costs
of the gas turbines it typically fires. However, the growth of demand for
gas in power generation will vary by region, with most of the developing
world craving more gas, and mature markets less.
   To complete the presentation on fuels, Osten passed the microphone to
Andrew Slaughter, principal, DRI/McGraw-Hill International Energy
Consulting, Paris, France. Slaughter began by summarizing his three key
predictions for coal:
   -- Power generation will remain the most important market for coal in
the developed world, and it will become more important in the developing
world.
   -- Coal will retain its dominant share of the worldwide market for
power-generation fuels, despite competition from gas in certain sectors
over certain periods of time within the forecast period.
   -- Because all signs point to a relatively stable and adequate supply,
and a moderation in its price over the long term, coal's cost advantage
over oil and gas will improve over the forecast period.
   When coal producers lose business with a mature-market utility sector,
he said, they don't recover it anywhere else in the region--which motivates
them to find ways to reduce their prices.
   In the developing world, coal markets are a little more diverse. In
Asia--the world's largest coal consumer--power generation accounts for 40%
of demand for coal, and in Latin America, 29%. However, Slaughter called
coal's penetration of the Latin American power-generation market poised for
growth.
   Slaughter explained that although current pressures--increasing regional
demand, emissions-abatement policies that mandate greater use of low-sulfur
coal, etc--seem to presage an upward movement in coal prices, DRI's
analyses conclude that, in all regions, the moderating influences on coal
prices, including a healthy supply situation, will continue to outweigh the
upward pressures.
   In the US, many long-term, high-price utility contracts for steam coal
are being replaced by shorter-term contracts at lower prices. In Europe,
privatization and the phasing out of subsidies to the coal-mining industry
are pushing coal prices down, nearer international levels. In Asia, with
its mix of subsidized and market prices, the trend isn't as clear, but the
adequacy of supply there is a moderating factor.
   Slaughter concluded his presentation with a prediction: In power
generation, moderating prices will improve coal's competitive position vs
oil and gas, and their rising prices will accelerate the effect. He pointed
out how the thermal-powerplant fuel mixes in the four major markets will
change over the next 25 years. Where coal is already dominant, it will
remain so. Coal's share will be hurt most by gas through the early years of
the next century, but after that, coal will rebound slightly.

Technology trends
   Jason Makansi, editor-in-chief of the magazines POWER and Electric Power
International, based in New York City, next identified discussed five major
technology trends. The most important, he said, is the transition from
steam turbines to gas turbines, many of which could be burning gasified
solid fuels within 10 to 15 years. The worldwide trend away from regulated
markets and toward a free-market orientation will only accelerate the
transition.
   That's why, at least in the short term, Makansi believes that natural
gas will not only cut into the market share now held by oil, but into the
share held by coal as well. In explaining how he came to the same
conclusion as DRI's economic analysts, Makansi cited the superior technical
and economic efficiencies of today's gas turbines, shorter-term financing
horizons, and environmental pressures.
   The second sweeping trend is the use of information-technology (IT)
systems to gain a competitive edge. Makansi explained that, by using
computers and telecommunications systems to run their powerplants and
transmission and distribution (T&D) systems, nations, utilities, and IPPs
alike can:
   -- Capture much of the design margin inherent in existing, older
equipment.
   -- Allow power systems to run more reliably, and with smaller reserve
margins.
   -- Reduce the costs of building and operating generating plants and T&D
systems.
   Makansi predicted that the process of building a new powerplant would
soon routinely entail not just the installation of generation hardware--but
also the integration of software and systems that allow operators up and
down the chain of command to monitor and control that hardware more
efficiently andesponsively. He suggested that there might be greater
potential for adding value and making profits in IT-based equipment than in
supplying or installing traditional gear.
   The third and fourth global trends mentioned by Makansi involve shifts
in priorities. Wherever competition makes electricity a commodity product
produced from a fuel, it becomes imperative for power producers to maximize
their control of that energy source at all points of the production
process. In competitive environments, utilities and independent power
producers (IPPs) might do better to concentrate on making their plants more
fuel-flexible, or using their IT systems to canvass the market for a better
deal on a fuel, rather than on acquiring the latest combustion
system--unless that system offers an immediate bottom-line payoff.
   The fifth technological trend involves reliability. When a developing
nation invites IPPs to build most or all of its expansion capacity, it also
fosters a climate that encourages short-term, profit-driven thinking--and
may discourage development of the very different mindset needed to plan
powerplants and T&D systems that will run reliably for 30 or 40 years. A
balance between private power and state-owned or monopolistic utilities may
be the best approach.
   In conclusion, Makansi noted that the electric power business has always
been driven by crises and catastrophes. Three Mile Island and Chernobyl,
the great Northeast Blackout, the oil shortages of the 1970s, droughts in
South America, and the local health crisis precipitated by an SO2 emissions
incident at the huge coal-fired Mae Moh, Thailand, all drove the industry
in directions that could not be foreseen. Market participants will push the
envelopes for performance, risk, profit, staffing, and reserve margins, but
with less certainty about the outcome--thanks to the parallel influence of
the invisible hand of the free market.

World capacity and structural overview
   Christopher Bergesen, vice president and editorial director of Utility
Data Institute (UDI)/McGraw-Hill, Washington, DC, and Marie Leone,
editorial director of Electrical World magazine, provided brief overviews
of those subjects.
   Bergesen led off with a UDI projection that conventional steam turbine/
generator systems will comprise 44% of worldwide new capacity additions
from 1994 to 2003, which put Makansi's first gas-turbine technology trend
in perspective. Bergesen said that all the diesels, gas turbines,
industrial cogeneration systems, and mini-hydro plants being planned and
installed today collectively don't amount to all that much in terms of
installed base.
   UDI's 10-yr rolling projection of new-capacity additions reflected the
fact that many private-power projects around the world have been stalled.
Bergesen said that after he crunched his numbers a year ago, he anticipated
that 100 GW of new capacity would be installed worldwide in 1995. Now,
however, it looks like only 75 or 80 GW of new plants were commissioned.
   In overviewing the structural and regulatory issues that are guiding the
transformation of the North American electricity market, Leone said that
the shifting ground beneath the feet of US electric-utility executives has
become a breeding ground for innovative business arrangements.
Investor-owned utilities are merging, branding their products, and spinning
off dedicated generation, distribution, and transmission companies.
   But the most interesting activity in the US electric power arena isn't
between utilities, Leone claimed; it's among utilities and companies from
different industries. Electric utilities are partnering with computer
companies, commodity brokers, cable companies, telecommunications firms,
and even their industrial customers. New species--power marketers, load
aggregators, and merchant plants--are evolving to meet the new,
service-oriented, and information-driven needs of the competitive market.
   Leone concluded that participants in the new electric power industry
should prepare for the future by arming themselves with historical
perspective in one hand, and forward thinking in the other.

North America: Regulatory outlook
   Richard Hilt, president of Bright Line Energy Inc, Palo Alto, Calif,
seized on Leone's overview of change in the US electric power industry as a
springboard for delving into specifics. Hilt broke up the restructuring
problem into three critical elements: regulatory reform, the unbundling of
utilities, and new pricing mechanisms.
   He prefaced his discussion by predicting that the industry's transition
from regulation to competition will be neither smooth nor rapid. As
evidence, he pointed out that states are not waiting for the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission (FERC) to follow the notice of proposed rulemaking
(NOPR) it published last spring with final deregulatory rules this spring,
before they try to advance on their own toward competition. But although
California, Massachusetts, and Wisconsin have taken the lead in increasing
consumers' access to lower priced electricity, the implementation of open
access among customers and suppliers at the state level is still years
away.
   At the federal level, Hilt said, a section of the FERC NOPR addresses
the second of his three elements--unbundling. FERC appears to want, at a
minimum, utilities to unbundle themselves into functional entities that
cannot deal directly with each other, similar to the situation that used to
exist between the commercial and trust portions of banks. But utilities
don't currently track their costs that way, he said, so expect additional
delays as they learn how to do that.
   Presently, Hilt explained, electricity rates are set based on
utility-cost allocations to various customer classes, and utilities must
try to recover their costs--largely generation costs--using those rate
structures. With functional unbundling, however, the new pricing mechanism
might base prices on utilities' average production costs, on net production
costs, or even on their average variable costs.
   But if competition and open access are successful in lowering consumers'
electricity bills, Hilt asked, how might utilities reduce their costs and
still make a profit? They could cut their production costs by operating
their powerplants more efficiently, but the economics of that option don't
look too promising to Hilt. Another way that utilities can cut costs is by
writing down their generation assets, Hilt continued. But writing down
assets, he claimed, only changes a utility's fixed production costs;
variable costs--except in the Northeast, where fuel costs are high--pretty
much stay the same. As a result, Hilt again predicted, distribution
companies will be the focus of utilities' attention when they look to
reduce their costs in response to the lowering of tariff rates.

North America: Demand and capacity forecasts
   Susan Haltmaier, a principal based in DRI/ McGraw-Hill's Lexington
(Mass) office, continued Hilt's discussion of US regulatory and
restructuring issues, extended it to Canada, and drew some interesting
conclusions about the implications of DRI's North American
electricity-demand and new-capacity forecasts. First, she introduced the
analytical concept of alternative scenarios--under which restructuring
proceeds at different speeds--that DRI applied to all world regions during
the creation of its six-volume study.
   For the US, the three scenarios make different assumptions about when
retail wheeling will be implemented, and about how much of their stranded
costs utilities will be allowed to recover, Haltmaier explained. She said
that the reference scenario assumes that retail wheeling will arrive
gradually, and that utilities will be forced to unbundle their generation,
transmission, and distribution assets. The reference scenario also assumes
that utilities will be allowed to partially recover their stranded costs,
which complex calculations reveal would be about $88-billion.
   Under the liberalization scenario, the move to open access and retail
wheeling would occur more quickly, and more utility customers would be at
risk of changing suppliers, so stranded costs would be higher, at
$160-billion. However, under this scenario, utilities would be allowed to
recover none of that total. At the other end of the spectrum, the
retrenchment scenario assumes that retail wheeling will not become a
reality by 2020; as a result, fewer customers will leave, stranded costs
will amount to only $58-billion, and utilities will be allowed to recover
all of that total--through surcharges to the industrial sector and slightly
higher prices for residential and commercial customers.
   Haltmaier also predicted that, regardless of the speed with which it
takes place, deregulation will even out electricity prices across all
regions of the US. She said that the biggest beneficiaries of the lower
prices will be commercial users and homeowners, who currently pay for 80 to
90% of utilities' capital charges.
   Turning next to electricity demand, Haltmaier reminded the audience that
US demand is growing at only 1.4%/yr, and net new-capacity needs are a
miniscule 0.8%/yr. However, electricity is taking markets away from oil in
end-use fuel markets, and it is even cutting into natural gas' dominant
share of the residential and industrial sectors.
   Regardless of its pace, deregulation will also affect what type of new
capacity will be added to the US installed base between now and 2020.
According to the DRI study, deregulation favors gas-fired over coal-fired
capacity. Although coal prices and interest rates will fall, coal still
won't be able to compete with gas on a least-cost basis until 2015, when
the 40-yr licenses on many US nuclear plants expire. All three scenarios
assume that those plants won't be repowered; they will just be retired and
replaced by new coal-fired capacity.
   In Canada, where utilities are owned and regulated by the provinces,
under the reference scenario, unbundling would be gradual, but hydropower
development would slow in the face of stagnant demand growth, Haltmaier
said. Under the liberalization scenario, unbundling would occur sooner, and
half of the provincial utilities would be privatized, but there still would
not be much hydro development because the private sector would be dominant.
Under the retrenchment scenario, Canadian utilities would cooperate more
with each other to build some large hydro and coal-fired projects, and then
wheel those new kilowatt-hours through Quebec--whose potential lack of
cooperation makes this scenario least likely.

Western Europe: Regulatory outlook
   Moving on to Western Europe, Silvia Pariente-David, director of
DRI/McGraw-Hill's Global Energy Group, Paris, France, said that there has
been a region-wide trend toward liberalization of national electricity
sectors, including increasing participation by IPPs. The trend has resulted
both from initiatives at the European Union (EU) level to introduce
competition into the sector, and from individual nations' efforts to
increase competition and/or sell off their electric utilities for
much-needed cash.
   Addressing the EU initiatives first, Pariente-David said that full
implementation of the Internal Energy Market (IEM) could radically change
the structure of the industry in Western Europe. But so far, she added,
progress toward the goal of a single market has been painfully slow, and is
currently stalled. In 1992, the EU issued a directive which proposed, among
other things, the phasing in of regulated third-party access (TPA)--the
European equivalent of US retail wheeling--to transmission networks. At the
request of the industry, the directive was amended in 1993 to replace
regulated TPA by negotiated TPA.
   Then, in 1994, before TPA could begin to be implemented, France
suggested that it be replaced by the single-buyer system (SBS), in which a
single entity would buy and sell electricity and prioritize the dispatching
of generation. Since then, the commission has been studying whether and how
SBS could be modified to make it compatible with SBS. If the two concepts
can be made compatible, the EU would allow member states to choose one or
the other.
   At the national level, several governments are taking their own
initiatives to liberalize their electric power sectors and introduce
competition, with or without privatization, according to Pariente-David.
Several camps have developed, she said: The UK and the Nordic countries are
pushing for reform, and the UK and Norway have already taken steps to
unbundle and/or privatize their utilities and introduce competition; France
and Luxembourg oppose liberalization; and the other countries must still be
collectively classified as ambiguous.
   In conclusion, Pariente-David displayed a slide that ranks the EU
nations under the reference scenario strictly by the amount of new capacity
available to IPPs, and delineates that capacity by type--standard
generation, renewable waste and cogeneration (RCW) and combined heat and
power (CHP) autoproduction. Worth noting, she said: Italy looks positive
for RWC, but less so for CHP/autoproduction because much industrial
generating capacity already exists; Spain is positive in all three
categories; and Portugal is attractive for both standard generation and
RWC, largely because the government hopes to use new IPP gas-fired capacity
to reduce the country's dependence on fickle hydropower.

Western Europe: Demand and capacity forecasts
   Continuing Pariente-David's discussion of Western Europe, Andrew Ellis,
an economist with DRI/McGraw-Hill's Global Energy Group, Paris, France,
presented some of DRI's predictions of how much and why the region's
electricity prices, electricity demand, installed capacity, and fuel mix
will change between now and 2020. Ellis began by stating that, in 1994, the
average electricity price in Western Europe was about 5 cents/kWh.
   Under the reference scenario, Ellis continued, average generating costs
would rise slightly, to between 5 and 6 cents/kWh, over the forecast
period. But under the liberalization scenario, with full TPA/SBS,
industrial electricity prices would rise dramatically in certain countries
and fall dramatically in others as patterns of electricity exchange change.
For example, factories in Portugal (-40%), Switzerland (-32%), and Italy
(-28%) would receive much-lower electric bills, but Norwegian and Swedish
factories would pay 12% more for their power. To summarize, Ellis said that
under the liberalization scenario, average industrial prices in Western
Europe would fall an average 12.5% by 2020; under the retrenchment
scenario, however, they would rise an average 14.3% by the same year.
   Ellis then explained how the level of openness of the EU electricity
market might affect the costs and character of new capacity. Using a bar
chart from the DRI study, he showed that, under the reference scenario,
coal would become competitive with gas toward the end of the forecast
period; under the liberalization scenario, however, that would not be the
case. Because coal will be unable to go toe-to-toe with gas for quite a
while, DRI predicts that most of the new capacity to be installed in
Western Europe through 2020 will be gas-fired.

Eastern Europe
   Matthew Sagers, director of energy services for PlanEcon Inc,
Washington, DC, next turned the audience's attention to Eastern Europe and
the former Soviet republics.
   Like the rest of the world, the nations of Eastern Europe have begun to
decentralize, unbundle, and privatize their state-owned utilities with the
goal of introducing free-market competition. The two most important drivers
of power-sector reform in the region are the shift of economies from a
supply to a demand orientation, and the changing structure of electricity
demand. In the past, when heavy industry accounted for 50 to 75% of
consumption, utilities could run base-load nuclear and coal-fired plants
with very high load factors and pay very little attention to peak
requirements. But as residential and commercial consumption rise, Sagers
predicted, more gas-fired capacity will be needed and installed.
   Because of excess capacity and low projected levels of demand, gross
capacity additions in the region will be small, and most of that will
replace aging plants that will be retired by 2015. Most of the additions
and retirements will be in Russia, Poland, and the Ukraine, Sagers said. As
is the case elsewhere, natural gas will be the generation fuel of choice in
the region, mainly at the expense of coal.
   Although many of the region's governments have discussed privatizing
their electric utilities, progress has been very slow, Sagers reported. The
countries furthest along are the Czech Republic and Hungary; both have
unbundled their state-owned power companies and sold minority stakes in
them.

Asia
   Shifting gears, from struggling Eastern Europe to fast-growing Asia,
Andrew Slaughter returned to the podium to address that region's regulatory
and structural issues.
   In the industrializing Asian nations, Slaughter explained, state-owned
electric utilities and their governments have reached the limits of their
financial capacity to satisfy explosive demand growth, and power-supply
systems are cracking under the pressure. To cope with relentless demand,
countries are joining the rest of the world in considering private power
alternatives.
   For analytical purposes, Slaughter said, it makes sense to consider the
countries of Asia as two groups. One group comprises: the older tigers
(Taiwan, South Korea, Singapore, and Hong Kong); the tiger cubs (Thailand,
Indonesia, and Malaysia); Pakistan; the Philippines; and, of course, India
and China--whose sheer size and potential dwarf the others. DRI projects
that new-capacity needs in those nations will collectively grow at an
annual rate of 5.8% between now and 2020. The other group's members are
Japan, Australia, New Zealand, and Turkey; their needs will grow at a
more-mature 1.5% rate, according to DRI. For Asia as a whole, DRI pegs
annual new-capacity growth at 4.5% over the forecast period, Slaughter
said.
   Where will that new capacity come from? Strapped for cash, Asian
governments are being forced by foreign sources of capital such as the
World Bank to restructure their electricity sectors, make their supply
systems more efficient, and/or introduce competition by creating a
favorable climate for IPPs. However, only the Philippines has yet attracted
much inward investment.
   But despite setbacks in China and India, Slaughter predicted that, in
the long term, relentless demand growth and capital shortages will force
the governments of the industrializing Asian countries to make their region
attractive to inward investment. However, although many of those countries
are saying that they expect the private sector to build most of their
needed capacity expansions, Slaughter doesn't think that that's a feasible
objective. He expected that as governments reform their electricity
sectors, they and their state-owned utilities will retain the ability to
build their own powerplants. As a result, DRI projects that IPPs will not
dominate new-capacity additions in Asia.
   Although the total IPP contribution of 250 GW is significant, it is
considerably less than what the Asian nations will need, and what their
governments are saying they want, said Slaughter.

Asian fuel mix
   Christophe Barret, senior associate with DRI/McGraw-Hill, Hong Kong,
followed Slaughter's presentation with DRI's projections for
power-generation fuel mixes in Asia over the forecast period. China, he
said, will be responsible for most of the new oil-fired capacity installed
through 2010, because it is desperate for power now, and lacks the
pipelines needed to support widespread use of gas.
   Barret also predicted that Asia will see much more local development of
gas-fired facilities than individual countries--Philippines and Indonesia,
in particular--are now predicting, and that India, Japan, and Thailand will
lead the pack in overall installed capacity. China, he said, will dominate
in the use of coal for power generation. Barret assumes that China will
install most of its new coal-fired capacity in its coal-rich northern
provinces, and then transport the electricity generated to regions of high
consumption--such as Beijing and the eastern provinces.

Latin America
   Moving on to another fast-developing market, Michael Roach, an associate
with DRI/McGraw-Hill, Lexington, Mass, completed the regional forecasts
with a look at Latin America. Roach listed four developments that are
driving the industrializing countries of South America and Central America
to make the regulatory and institutional changes needed to make their
electric power sectors more market-oriented:
n Nations that rely heavily on hydroelectric power continue to experience
droughts that cause capacity shortages.
   -- Ill-conceived and poorly developed power projects have squandered
investment capital.
   -- Financial constraints and investment bottlenecks have arisen as
countries implement conservative fiscal and monetary policies designed to
control inflation.
   -- The economic integration of the region is forcing the Latin American
countries to compete for foreign capital, motivating them to create more
favorable and predictable investment and business climates.
   Roach expressed confidence that Latin America will continue down the
free-market path. Argentina's and Chile's privatization programs have borne
fruit, proving that liberalization and competition can lower electricity
prices and elevate economic efficiency. Economic liberalization, he added,
would also creates capital markets for IPPs and financial instruments to
facilitate power trade. With stable capital markets, there would be more
local financing, which he called the key to the success of private power in
the region.
   Turning to country specifics, Roach said that Mexico has already
deregulated its natural-gas industry, so it is now possible to plan a
powerplant assuming the availability of competitively priced gas from a
local source or the US. But all privately generated electricity must still
be sold to CFE, the state-owned electric utility, and CFE has been
reluctant to purchase anything except peak power. Proceeds from Bolivia's
capitalization program for its national electric utility are earmarked for
pension funds that could be used to finance further private investment. In
Ecuador, widespread and severe brownouts and blackouts will likely result
in accelerating the government's reform efforts. Even giant Brazil seems
committed to reform.
   Which countries offer the biggest and best opportunities? DRI's capacity
forecast for the eight largest countries of Latin America shows an overall
need for 242 GW of new capacity between now and 2020, with Brazil's 122 GW
accounting for half of the total. However, as in Asia, the levels of IPP
participation in national expansions will be lower than currently expected,
ranging from 8% in Ecuador to 43% in Argentina.

Investment insight
   William Chew, managing director for project finance at Standard &
Poor's, followed the release of DRI's annual regional forecasts with the
first of two S &P discussions on investment in the electric power business.
For the last five years, Chew explained, many of the world's infrastructure
projects have been non-recourse financed--that is, their debt is financed
by their revenues. With power projects, credit-rating agencies look hard at
the potential risks to those revenues.
   The importance of credit ratings rose in 1995, Chew noted but so did
business risk. But despite the Mexican peso crisis and India's troubled
Dabhol project Chew remained optimistic that non-recourse and
limited-recourse financing would continue to fuel infrastructure projects
around the world. What's more, he predicted, the increased use of credit
ratings will help broaden the circle of investors in those projects to
include not just specialist investors, but new sources--such as pension
plans and insurance portfolios.
   Chew described five long-term factors that are making project finance
more revenue-driven, and attractive to a larger pool of investors:
   -- The developing world's thirst for new infrastructure and generating
capacity is inexorable.
   -- Banks are currently in the midst of a cycle of substantial liquidity.
They are looking to make not only higher-yielding investments, but
investments in vehicles--such as project finance--that also offer
opportunities for higher fees.
   -- Managers of annuity-driven portfolios are seeking to optimize their
holdings with risk-adjusted, long-term, high-yield investments--such as
project loans, and several new institutions have entered the field.
   -- The focus of financial institutions has shifted away from traditional
direct lending and toward non-recourse debt financing and serving as a
catalyst for project financing from other sources.
   -- New project-finance structures are evolving. Big developers are now
using balance sheets to secure a holding-company-level debt issue with the
combined equity flows of all their projects.
   Wrapping up his talk, Chew said that project-finance specialists have
learned--occasionally the hard way--that electric power projects must have
a sound economic foundation, and that financial engineering has limits. As
an example, Chew cited the tendency for developers and lenders to allocate
currency risks to foreign power purchasers. But, he said, that practice
exposes investors to the risk that when a currency weakens, so will the
chances of keeping electricity prices low and the purchaser's ability to
pay.
   Curtis Moulton, managing director of corporate finance for Standard &
Poor's, followed Chew's discussion on IPP project finance with a
dissertation on debt ratings of US investor-owned utilities. Compared with
companies in other industries, Moulton began, electric utilities are
relatively highly rated. But utilities' credit excellence is being
imperiled, he said, by the rising business risks that retail competition
will bring.
   Competition, Moulton predicted, will result in lower electricity prices
and lower earnings. How much and how quickly will prices fall? Moulton said
that that will be determined by whether the view of FERC or individual
states on stranded-cost recovery prevails. In its NOPR, FERC proposes that
utilities be allowed to recover the costs they incur when wholesale
customers leave a utility system. Although FERC's philosophy sounds good in
theory, in practice, it is not clear whether departing customers will pay
100% of utilities' stranded costs.
   At the level of the states, one trend is clear: a shift from cost-based
to market-based regulation. Moulton said that one increasingly popular tool
in the latter category is performance-based regulation; using that
approach, a utility's earnings remain regulated, but they are linked to its
ability to achieve certain performance objectives in such areas as customer
service and fuel purchasing. He expected that distribution operations would
eventually come under performance-based regulation.
   Moulton predicted that the popularity of market-based regulation would
eventually overwhelm local sympathies for letting utilities recover all of
their stranded costs. State regulators, he explained, are under a lot of
pressure to cut electricity rates soon--rather than 10 years from now, when
utilities' stranded costs would be recovered under FERC's timetable. As a
result, Moulton expects that state regulators will allow utilities to
recover most of their stranded costs through a surcharge on distribution;
the remainder will be absorbed by utility shareholders. To the extent that
utilities can't offset their losses by cutting their operating costs, their
profits will suffer--potentially substantially.
   Moulton predicted that widespread direct access or its marketplace
equivalent will be in place well before the end of the decade. But the
intervening uncertainty won't be comforting to investors, he added.
Therefore, Moulton says that the credit outlook for US electric utilities
as a group is poor. However, there are reasons for optimism: Interest rates
are low and falling; utilities are continuing to reduce their cost of
capital with refinancings; and managements are reducing their operating
costs and capital expenditures. As a consequence, industry cash flow is
strong, providing opportunities for debt reduction.

Electricity futures: Just around the corner
   Daniel McElduff, an energy analyst in the Research Dept of the New York
Mercantile Exchange (Nymex), provided conference participants with a sneak
preview of a key aspect of the electric power industry of the future. He
explained how Nymex's futures and options contracts for electricity will
soon help utilities, merchant plants, and power marketers manage their risk
by allowing them to assess and lock in the price of the electricity that
they buy and sell.
   With the development of any competitive marketplace, McElduff explained,
participants need new tools to assess the price of the underlying
commodity. One such tool is McGraw-Hill's Power Markets Week newsletter,
which provides price assessments for points throughout the US, and another
will be Nymex's electricity futures and options contracts. The futures
contract facilitates standard transactions that are negotiable only as to
the price and the month in which electricity is to be delivered.
   What advantages are there in being able to assess the price of
electricity? With a forward price assessment, McElduff explained, you can
compare the expected future price to historical data and make more-informed
purchase or sales decisions. That's increasingly important, he added, given
the recent volatility of electricity prices. You could also use forward
price assessment to aid project planning and development.

IBM and the challenge of change
   ``Success goes to those able to accept and develop new ways of doing
business, and to those who can anticipate--and even accelerate change,''
noted featured speaker Kevin Moonan, general manager, IBM's Utility and
Energy Services Industry, at McGraw-Hill's Globalization of Electricity
Markets executive summit. As sponsors of the two-day summit, IBM's
commitment to the global electric power market was highlighted in two
talks--one by Moonan, the other by IBM's general manager, Europe, Ulf
Gundemark--that captured the essence of a market in flux.
   Moonan described the electric power market as one where rivals are
becoming allies, companies are developing new markets and services, and
ultimately, new revenue streams are being derived from unexpected places.
As energy becomes a commodity, added Moonan, service will be the key
differentiator.
   One key to opening the market's potential: Information technology (IT),
asserts Moonan. Just as Hong Kong Hospital issues wallet-size optical cards
that contain full medical records of their patients, and Levi Strauss
offers custom-made clothing you can order via the Internet, and Federal
Express puts the power to track packages in its customer's hands, so will
IT revolutionize the way electric power companies do business, said Moonan.
He then noted four strategic thinking points relevant to his discussion:
n IT is of critical importance in light of all the changes within the
industry.
   -- It is a defining technology--and how it is used can determine
potential winners and losers.
   -- All companies will compete on the basis of information as well as on
products and services.
   -- The fiercest competitors could be the ones that are not in the
industry today because they don't carry the baggage and the mindset of the
old way of doing things.
   Gundemark, in his presentation, likened today's economic transition to
the 19th century shift from farms to factories--the steam engine made
possible mass production then, just as computer-based IT now enables
large-scale acquisition and processing of information and faster
communications.
   Gundemark talked about the continued opening of borders to people,
capital, and communications that is driving utilities to compete in
international markets, and the disintegration of local differences. For
utilities in the developed world, says Gundemark, IT systems will likely be
the only tools which separate the winners from the losers.

Multi-client worldwide study available from DRI/McGraw-Hill
   The Future of the Electric Power Industry Around the World is a
country-by-country analysis of demand, generation profiles, and industry
structure compiled by DRI/McGraw-Hill's Global Energy Group, based in
Paris, France. The comprehensive, multi-client study covers North America,
Western Europe, the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, and
Asia/Pacific in four ambitious volumes that provide in-depth analysis,
economic outlooks, scenario models, market and business implications,
policy debates, and industry forecasts for the global electricity sector.
   DRI/McGraw-Hill is a division of Standard & Poor's, The McGraw-Hill
Companies.
   For more information on the study, please contact, Dr Silvia
Pariente-David, Director, Global Energy, DRI/McGraw-Hill, 8/10 Rue Villedo,
75001 Paris, France. Telephone (33 1) 44 77 83 30 or fax (33 1) 42 60 25
04.


Illustration(s):
Illustration: The Future of the Electric Power Industry around the World
(cover)

Photograph(s):
Photograph: ``Low interest rates are going to be a kind of `treat' in
generation financing for quite a while'' Roger Brinner, Chief Economist,
DRI/McGraw-Hill

Photograph: ``The computers and telecommunications systems that we in the
electric power industry are calling IT are the single most fertile
technology for gaining a competitive advantage today'' Jason Makansi,
Electric Power International

Photograph: Shown left to right, Michael Hehir, president, Information
Services Group, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Harold McGraw Jr, chairman
emeritus, The McGraw-Hill Companies, and Kevin Moonan, general manager,
North America, IBM Utility and Energy Services Industry, gather at the
executive summit to discuss the day's events

Photograph: ``Developers should look at the process of project credit
rating and its role in financing as a good value-added opportunity. So
start early'' Bill Chew, Standard & Poor's

Photograph: DRI's Osten and Pariente-David field questions from the summit
delegates on their study's risk analysis of Western European countries

Photograph: ``Conservative fiscal policies designed to control inflation in
Latin American countries are now creating investment bottlenecks'' 
DRI/McGraw-Hill's Michael Roach

Photograph: Is the European Union moving toward a one-market electricity
sector--Robert Schwieger, group director, Energy Publications & Databases,
The McGraw-HIll Companies, and Ulf Gundemark, general manager, Europe, IBM
Utility and Energy Services Industry, discuss the issue at the summit
break

Photograph: Richard Hilt, president, Bright Line Energy and Liz Hannon,
president, UDI/McGraw-Hill have a friendly debate about the
``Mega-NOPR''--the proposed set of regulations that will change the way the
US electric power industry does business


Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "51"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

DISTRIBUTECH CONFERENCE

By:
Philip I. Dunklin and Warren B. Causey

   Electric, telephone, cable, and wireless services will vie for control
of the customer in the competitive future, and kilowatt-hours will become
nothing but a commodity, says Philip O'Connor, managing director of Palmer
Bellevue, a division of Coopers & Lybrand, Chicago, Ill. He also believes
electric utilities are in the best position to win those battles because
``electric wire is the hardest to replicate'' of the existing conduits into
the home.

`Electricom' is next
   ``The next really big thing we will see is the emergence of a kind of
`electricom' or `telectric' business in which electric utilities will
become major players in the next round of development of the information
superhighway,'' O'Connor says. ``The reason is that a lot of electric
utilities are going to be partnering with personal communications system
[PCS] firms. PCS represents an opportunity to overlay or leapfrog the
existing copper system and to be much more versatile.''
   Telecommunications will give electric utilities an opportunity to
``leverage brand equity where they have it, and build it where they
don't,'' O'Connor adds.
   O'Connor will bring that optimistic assessment of electric utilities'
future to the 1996 DA/DSM DistribuTech Conference in Tampa Bay, Fla, Jan
15-18, as one of two keynote speakers at the conference. The other keynote
address will be by William Tucker, a member of the Wyoming Public Service
Commission and also an advocate for the ``appropriate use of information
technology in energy distribution.''
   While O'Connor's sanguine view of the electric-utility industry move to
dominate the customer telecommunications linkage of the future is not
shared by all experts, such a viewpoint will be pervasive at the 1996
conference. In fact, the advent of the information superhighway has changed
the very nature of the distributed automation/ demand side management
(DA/DSM) meeting, says Stuart Harrison, founder and director of the
conference.
   ``The movement toward this being the leading industry information
technology/ business conference as opposed to focusing on one element,
distributed automation, or load management, is the greatest change this
year,'' Harrison comments. ``The term DA/DSM never really covered what we
do, so this year we've demonstrated that by extending the program to cover
all aspects of utility information technology and its applications for
distribution companies.''

Entry of industry giants
   Another indication of the shift in attention, both of this conference
and of the industry as a whole, is in vendor support, Harrison says.
Several years ago, when the conference started, support came from smaller
specialty vendors who produced DA or DSM products. The 1996 conference is
being sponsored by IBM Corp, AT&T, Digital Equipment Corp, and other big
players, Harrison notes.
   One reason O'Connor is a big promoter of electric utilities getting more
involved in the telecommunications boom is that telecom may represent a way
to offset ``stranded assets,'' which he says is the current major concern
of the industry. He believes utilities eventually will have to settle for
considerably less than full recovery of assets stranded by competition, but
that telecommunications can help ease the pain.
   ``When you compare the potential total revenues in information
communications [infocom] systems with the kind of money needed to cope with
the stranded generation cost issue, even a modest share of infocom could
have a significant effect if a utility can leverage brand equity,''
O'Connor asserts. A Coopers & Lybrand/Palmer Bellevue chart shows that by
2003, telecom is expected to generate an estimated $480-billion in revenue.
In 1993, it generated nearly $250-billion. That compares with an estimated
$130-billion in total stranded costs potential faced by electric utilities,
he says.

The link
   O'Connor says he sees tremendous potential in the ``utility infocom
alliances emerging'' between electric utilities and:
   -- Local telephone exchange companies (regional Bell operating
companies).
   -- Incumbent long distance providers (AT&T, MCI, Sprint).
   -- Cable television firms (TCI, Time-Warner, Cox Communications).
   -- PCS providers.
   -- Software vendors (Microsoft, Novell).
   -- Computer companies (IBM).
   In addition, O'Connor points to several technological developments
driving electric utility/telecom alliances; many of which will be on
display or under discussion in Tampa Bay. These include:
n Utility radio spectrum auctions.
   -- Electric wires carrying signals (power-line carrier or PLC).
   -- The digital revolution: smart metering/energy controls.
   -- Real-time pricing.
   -- T&D reliability and control.
   -- Implementation of cost identification information systems.
   -- On-site distributed generation and energy storage.
   All of these elements bode well for electric utilities becoming
information providers in the future, O'Connor says. Utilities already have
the in-place infrastructure of towers, poles, conduit, buildings, wire, and
fiber optics. More important, utilities have rights-of-way in high-density
urban markets and a competitive rural facilities network.

Brand and fiber
   O'Connor is particularly impressed that electric utilities already have
more than 100,000 miles of fiberoptic cables, and that such utilities as
Baltimore Gas & Electric Co, Houston Lighting & Power Co, Los Angeles Dept
of Water & Power, Scana Corp, and Tampa Electric Co are leasing excess
fiber capacity. In addition, electric utilities have basic skills that can
contribute to infocom alliances, he says, including, expertise in system
engineering, maintenance, outage repair, site installation, union
negotiation, and regulatory permits.
   Electric utilities generally have good reputations for quality and
reliability, as well as ``ubiquitous customer penetration.'' These two
elements constitute considerable ``brand equity,'' O'Connor stresses.
   Infocom capabilities will determine winners and losers in a competitive
environment, notes O'Connor. But he also preaches there is a ``danger of
doing nothing.'' If utilities do not become involved in telecom, they may
find themselves becoming a commodity provider only. Information service
providers will own the value-added equipment, he says. He also warns
utilities not to wait about becoming involved in telecommunications.
Waiting runs the risk of decreased penetration of the market as well as the
problem that recovering lost customers is difficult. It is easier to keep a
customer than to find a new one, he notes.

Experts speak out
   In addition to the telecom emphasis of this year's DA/DSM Conference,
Harrison says the nature of the presentations has changed as well. In the
past, virtually all presentations were based on voluntary submissions.
While there still will be 70 papers presented, there will be 14 sessions in
which speakers or panelists were invited because of their expertise in
certain areas. ``We think that's an unusual amount in a conference program
that historically has focused on adjudicated submissions,'' he says. ``This
year we've been proactive and gone out and sought the movers and shakers.
We put all those folks into what we call expert laboratories.''
   Some of those expert laboratories will include:
   -- Innovative pricing in a restructured utility environment.
   -- The business case underlying the need for change in utility
operations.
   -- Organizing for success in the competitive market.
   -- Owning the customer relationship through information technology.
   -- The leading edge of energy innovation: Implementing advanced energy
services.
   This year's conference will feature 400 exhibitors and is expected to
attract about 3000 participants, Harrison says.

Genesis Services: Where AMR possibilities begin
   In a first-of-its-kind move, Itron Inc, Spokane, Wash--a supplier of
energy information and communications solutions--has formed a new
division--Genesis Services--to provide the electric, gas, and water
utilities industry with automatic meter reading (AMR) services that include
outsourcing, networked communications applications, business partnering,
and financing. More important, through Genesis Services, Itron offers
utilities the financial flexibility to take advantage of capital-intensive
AMR projects, which are considered by some industry experts to be one of
the critical links to customers and consumption patterns.
   Working much like a capital venture firm, Genesis can help utilities
build an AMR program that provides a custom fit for their bottom line. ``We
can bring financial advisors to the table,'' says Dominic Geraghty,
president Genesis Services.
   Itron executives identified a need for AMR project partnering as
competitive pressures forced utilities to rethink strategic goals and plan
for the information revolution. As a result, Genesis Services designed a
graduated partnership program to address the issues its customers face.
``If we develop an AMR outsourcing program for a utility, we enter the
arrangement as a partner, not a vendor, and that includes performance
guarantees,'' notes Geraghty.
   Genesis also installs and implements AMR networks--from installing
radios in the meters to moving that information into the utility billing
system--as well as provides software expertise for such market-driven
applications as real-time pricing, time-of-use, and customer information
systems.


Photograph(s):
Photograph: Expertise in systems engineering, maintenance, outage repair,
and site installation are some of the inherent skills that the
electric-utility work forces brings to an infocom alliance

Photograph: Utilities already have an important competitive edge: an
in-place infrastructure-- such as poles, towers, wire, fiber, and
rights-of-way

About the Author(s):

Philip Dunklin is president and Warren Causey is associate publisher of
Chartwell Inc, an Atlanta (Ga)-based publishing company serving the utility
industry.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "52"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

COMPANY PROFILES

FIELDTECH
Booth # 835
   Company prides itself on being an evolutionary leader in automated meter
reading (AMR), including offering an entire service package that includes
real-time order and data management, AMR installation, meter reading, order
dispatch, and customer utility-billing services anywhere in the US or
Canada. Company personnel have first-hand experience dealing with the
financial, operational, and customer impacts of meter reading. Partnering
will allow utility to break through technological barriers, according to
firm that claims that a decision to automate or outsource using company
will produce immediate results in streamlined operations and productivity
boosts, reduced costs, improved cash flow, and improved customer service.

IBM CORP, UTILITY AND ENERGY SERVICES INDUSTRY
Booth # 538
   Company is a leading technology and solutions provider in the utilities
industry. More than a hardware vendor, company expertise includes its
ability to supply total solutions. The Utility and Energy Services group is
organized based on a ``go to market'' strategy which ensures responsive and
cohesive delivery of firm's capability to its customers. It is focused on
the changing needs of utility clients, as well as their specific business
processes and applications. Wherever a client is located, it has a
worldwide IBM team at its disposal, with utility industry skills and
expertise--including business and information-technology planning
consultants, systems integrators, and product application and networking
specialists--helping to develop strategic approaches to real business
issues and implementing effective, quality solutions on time and within
budget.

MOTOROLA LAND MOBILE PRODUCTS SECTOR
Booth # 618
   Business sector is a leading provider of analog and digital two-way
voice and data radio communications systems. In response to changing needs
within the utility industry, company introduces EnerConnect, a
communications network designed specifically for utility companies.
EnerConnect integrates transmission and distribution automation, mobile
data, and voice communications onto a single network, providing a
streamlined flow of information and significantly reducing response times.

NORAND CORP
Booth # 920
   Company takes pride in its role as a leader in mobile computing for the
past 25 years. Over 150,000 of company's mobile systems are performing in
the real world today. Providing more than a ``box,'' firm supplies complete
systems--hardware, software, networks, and communications--all backed up by
extensive customer support, technical expertise, training, and experienced
field sales, system, and reseller organization. Company's R&D efforts are
substantial, focusing on making the latest technologies practical for
customers' environments and applications.

POWER MEASUREMENT LTD
Booth # 201
   Complete line of advanced, digital instrumentation and economical
PC-based Scada systems for power monitoring and control in industrial,
commercial, and utility applications. Features include real-time data
display, power-quality and fault/swell/sag analyses, automated demand
control, historical trend graphing, and much more. Company's complete line
of full-featured, advanced, digital instrumentation includes: power meters,
demand controllers, and smart transducer interfaces. Also featured will be
economical PC-based Scada systems for industrial, commercial, and utility
substations, including those which provide real-time data display; power
quality and fault or swell/swag analysis; historical trend graphing;
detection, annunciation, display, and logging of alarm conditions; and
automatic retrieval and disk archival of data logs from remote devices.

S&C ELECTRIC CO
Booth # 430
   Company manufactures complete switching systems for automated overhead
and underground distribution. A real-time PC-based demonstration highlights
Scada-Mate switching systems for automated overhead distribution and remote
supervisory pad-mounted gear for automated underground distribution. Both
are available as complete packages, including communications and controls,
or as custom engineered packages designed to incorporate the RTU and
communications device of the user's choice.

UGC CONSULTING
Booth # 329
   Mapping, spatial analysis, and facilities management: automation is the
key to these functions in today's information-driven world. The challenge
is to develop a prudent and successful system implementation plan, from
both a functional and economic perspective. Company says it provides expert
technical and management services for hundreds of projects worldwide,
including project feasibility analyses and funding strategies, strategic
planning, data conversion management, and project management. From single
department solutions to cooperative projects among numerous government,
utility, and private enterprises, UGC offers its services as an active
participant in a project, able to analyze each project's specific needs and
work with clients in a problem-solving partnership to determine exact
system requirements and the most effective way to meet them.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "53"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

METER READING

   From automation to outsourcing firm will partner with a customer to
streamline operations, providing project management and oversight from
design and installation to staffing and customer billing. Company will set
up, assist, or manage individual components of an overall program. Company
works to provide immediate results through reduced costs, improved customer
satisfaction, and increased productivity and profitability.--FieldTech.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "54"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

CONTRACT SERVICES

Company offers customized utility services, including real-time order and
data management, automatic meter reading system installation, contract
meter reading, and order dispatch and customer billing anywhere in North
America. Company offers over 100 years of combined utility and meter
reading experience.--FieldTech.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "55"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

MOBILE TECHNOLOGY

Firm offers clients multiple ways to improve operations through mobility
based on planning methodologies that work with executive teams in
identifying key areas of their business best suited for enhanced capability
with mobile technology. A basic dispatch system that can be integrated with
other systems to provide a wireless dispatch capability is available.
Company also has design artifacts to help clients accelerate the process
for selecting and implementing a wireless communications infrastructure
that is open and exploits the price/performance curve. With broad
capabilities, firm's approach is directed toward helping clients solve
their most critical problems in mobility.--IBM Corp, Utility and Energy
Services Industry.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "56"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

GIS SERVICES

   For the particular needs of the utility industry, company's GIS
Consulting and Services Group offers its traditional Geographic Facilities
Information System (GFIS), or the object path solution set, featuring an
object-based GIS technology platform with supporting applications and
integrated automated data-capture tools. Using the object-orientated
programming tools provided under the object path methodology, customers can
expect to have a functioning utility GIS prototype much more rapidly than
previously thought possible.--IBM Corp, Utility and Energy Services
Industry.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "57"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS

   Business sector is a leading provider of analog and digital two-way
voice and data radio communications systems. In response to changing needs
within the utility industry, company introduces EnerConnect, a
communications network designed specifically for utility companies.
EnerConnect integrates transmission and distribution automation, mobile
data, and voice communications onto a single network, providing a
streamlined flow of information and significantly reducing response
times.--Motorola Land Mobile Products Sector.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "58"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

   EnerConnect provides a complete wireless communications and information
system specifically for utilities, enabling rapid customer response and
cost reduction through efficient operation of electrical distribution
networks.--Motorola Land Mobile Products Sector.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "59"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

HANDHELD COMPUTER

   Company's 22-oz Pen*Key 6100 computer offers a handheld computer for
mobile workers who need to run MS-Windows. Rugged unit combines the best of
the notebook world--a DOS/MS-Windows operating environment--with the best
of the PDA world--reduced size and weight. --Norand Corp.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "60"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

MOBILE COMPUTER

   Company's Pen*Key 6600 computer features an Intel Corp 486DX2, 50-MHz
processor which allows advanced graphics and use of DOS and MS-Windows
operating systems. Yet unit weighs under 4 lb. Sophisticated graphics
capabilities make unit highly useful by utilities, field personnel, and
others.--Norand Corp.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "61"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

SCADA PC-SOFTWARE

   Economical Scada systems for industrial, commercial, and utility power
substations and systems feature real-time display, power quality and
fault/swell/sag analysis, historical trend graphing, alarm annunciation,
extensive data logging capabilities, and more. Unit is compatible with
firm's complete line of advanced digital instrumentation.--Power
Measurement Ltd.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "62"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

POWER METER

   Model 3720 ACM digital meter now offers expanded 36-cycle fault
recording, high-speed historical logging, 1 ms device-to-device event
synchronization, time-of-use registers, predictive demand control, and
K-factor calculations, in addition to hundreds of high-accuracy power,
energy, and harmonics measurements. Extensive setpoint control and I/O
functions are also featured.--Power Measurement Ltd.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "63"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

UNDERGROUND AUTOMATION

   Remote supervisory PMH and PME padmounted gear permits automated
switching of 14.4- and 25-kV underground circuits in response to a signal
from a remote location. The completely self-contained switching and
protection units include: switch operators; battery pack with charger;
voltage sensors for single-phase voltage sending and control power;
power-operated switches with 3-phase current sensing; and on-board
communications and control equipment.--S&C Electric Co.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "64"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

DISTRIBUTION AUTOMATION

   Scada-Mate switching system consists of two major components: an
integer-style, load-interrupting switch and a communications and control
unit that provides an interface between the switch and a master-station
computer. The switching system provides a self-sufficient, automated,
overhead distribution switching installation which includes a modem for
direct connection to a master-station computer via a land-line
communications channel.--S&C Electric Co.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "65"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

WHO CONTROLS THE 'LAST INCH'?

By:
Paul Kemezis

   When the nation's public utility commissioners met in New Orleans, La,
recently, the entire electricity debate came down to an inch of wire. At a
time when the whole idea of utility regulation is being questioned, the
hundreds of professional regulators in attendance at the annual meeting
knew instinctively that every inch would count.
   In this case, the inch under debate was the last bit of the electric
distribution system before it enters Mr John Q. Public's house. The
infamous inch is attracting special attention because it could become the
last bastion of state regulation in the $200-billion/yr electric power
industry.

First shot
   In its March 1995 notice of proposed rulemaking (the so-called Mega
NOPR), the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) asserted that once
power generation, transmission, and distribution services were unbundled in
a restructured electric industry, federal logic held that control of
interstate commerce could give FERC control over the entire US electric
transmission and distribution system.
   State regulators, represented by the National Assn of Regulatory Utility
Commissioners (Naruc), Washington, DC, immediate bristled, seeing an
invasion of their traditional jurisdiction over local electric distribution
systems. More than that, many state commissions believed that complete FERC
control of the wires could force state regulators out of the electric
sector altogether--because without some piece of the distribution network
to regulate, state regulators would have no leverage over the industry--no
peg to hang rules on.
   In New Orleans, at the mid-November Naruc annual convention, all five
FERC commissioners came to meet the gathered state regulators face-to-face,
to discuss the controversial issue in a historic first-of-a-kind meeting.
Although one participant compared the session to the Bosnian peace talks,
the atmosphere was cordial. FERC Chairman Elizabeth Moler made clear it
from the start that the object of the meeting was to cooperate and find
``practical and workable'' solutions to issues posed by changes in the
industry--which neither side had full control over.

Legally defensible
   Moler assured attendees that the states, not FERC, would make key
decisions on electric power industry restructuring and deregulation, and
that the jurisdictional issue would not be ignored. Any final plan for
splitting jurisdiction had to be ``legally defensible,'' she warned, or
else it would invite utility lawsuits that would lead to long,
non-productive court battles.
   But that introduction still left wide open the key question of who
actually will have authority over the electric system if restructuring goes
forward and distribution service is unbundled. The FERC commissioners said
they had no intention of staging a ``power grab'' and taking over the
entire system--even though under some legal interpretations they probably
could. Not all attendees agreed. ``It's impossible to see how the states do
not have authority,'' said Texas Public Utility Commissioner Robert Gee.
``FERC jurisdiction is clearly limited to wholesale transmission and
matters not subject to regulation by the states.''
   The federal commissioners said that they expected to retain a major role
in regulating any wires that carry power considered in ``interstate
commerce.'' Unfortunately, in the new deregulated industry, where retail
customers may buy directly from generation companies across the country,
virtually all power can be considered to be ``in interstate commerce,'' and
therefore FERC could have a claim on virtually all wires.
   FERC General Counsel Susan Tomasky said that the commission had put out
the language in the Mega NOPR to try and provide some sort of a definition
for what the federal law required. But FERC now realizes that it has to
work with the states to ``get the issue right.''

The last inch
   Speaking for Naruc, Vermont Public Service Board Chairman Richard Cowart
asserted that the states should remain in control of any part of the
distribution system that functions to serve retail users--no matter where
the power came from. Under such a plan, a clear line would be drawn around
each utility's retail service area and the states would regulate inside
that boundary, whether the power was coming bundled from the local company
or unbundled from the outside via a retail wheeling arrangement.
   The key, said Cowart, would be that the wires would carry out a ``local
distribution'' function, meeting the test in the Federal Power Act for
state jurisdiction. The FERC commissioners, however, worried that such an
approach would lead to a ``Balkanization'' of the national power market,
especially if different states took radically different approaches to
restructuring electric markets.
   FERC Commissioner Donald Santa noted that the commission was trying to
be non-intrusive. He said FERC wants to give states elbow room to determine
how to restructure their local electric industries and handle key
issues--such as stranded investment recovery. But he added that FERC would
still have to provide the electric power industry with a backstop and
``fill in the gap if the states fail.''
   Finally, FERC Commissioner William Massey asked the state commissioners
to consider a practical approach in which FERC regulated interstate retail
transactions, but guaranteed states control over some piece of the
distribution system. But what piece? ``How much do you need?'' Massey
asked. ``Will the last inch do?''

Worst of both worlds?
   After some head scratching, the state commissioners said that they
wanted the last inch for sure, but giving FERC a major say in regulating
retail transactions still raised major concerns. According to Iowa
Utilities Board Member Emmit George, it could be difficult to load up that
last inch with charges for conservation programs, renewable energy,
low-income programs, and stranded-investment recovery. At the same time,
George commented, ``the real challenge'' is to insure that the last inch
applies to all situations and therefore, the charges would be
non-bypassable and equitably shared by all customers.
   But Wayne Shirley, chairman of the New Mexico Public Utility Commission
(PUC), claimed that the problem goes beyond the ``last inch,'' noting that
if most state regulation is handed over to a federal jurisdiction, then
local interests could get lost in the shuffle. For example, New Mexico
electricity users would face a more expensive process to have their case
heard by less responsive regulators in Washington.
   What's more, Renz Jennings, chairman of the Arizona Corporate
Commission, pointed out FERC's lack of expertise with environmental issues
compared to state commissions' work on plant siting issues, resource
selection, and use of conservation and renewables. By ceding control of the
electric system to federal jurisdiction ``we may wind up with the worst of
both worlds,'' commented Jennings. ``FERC will move in to assert its
authority but at the same time back away from environmental stewardship.''

Leave it to FERC
   The New Orleans debate did not settle anything, but instead, actually
highlighted the intense, though friendly, game of tug-of-war now being
played out between the state and federal regulatory groups over the
nation's electric system. The two sides quickly declared the attempt at
dialogue a smashing success and said they hoped to continue the process as
soon as possible.
   If it did anything, the debate underscored the contradictory and almost
bizarre situation facing state regulators. As political power shifts away
from Washington to the states, state commissions should be exercising the
power they retain under federal law to regulate local utilities with less
federal interference--not more. But the dynamics of electric power industry
restructuring, and the physics of electricity, seem to be working against
this.
   Right now, it simply seems more efficient to do away with state
regulation of retail transmission and declare all electricity part of a
single national market under federal regulation. Besides the technical
arguments about freedom of interstate commerce and electron flows, there is
FERC's practical experience in dealing with wholesale transmission tariffs.
State commissions in the existing system do not see retail transmission
tariffs because they are bundled with power sales costs and have always
been an invisible part of ratemaking.
   The ``leave it to FERC'' concept was supported by a proposal submitted
in July by the Electric Consumers Resource Council (Elcon), a
Washington-based trade association representing large industrial users. One
upshot of the Elcon plan was to effectively kick state regulators out of
the electric arena once and for all. Ironically, if total deregulation of
the electric sector happens, a majority of utility executives say that they
would prefer that FERC have control of the wires because FERC is on record
as favoring recovery of stranded investment costs--and has approved such
arrangements for deals among wholesale buyers and sellers.
   State regulators, on the other hand, who are directly elected by
ratepayers or appointed by governors, are at best lukewarm about shifting
the whole cost of stranded assets to customers.

Regulators or referees?
   As state legislators openly question the need for regulators in an age
of deregulation, many attendees at the New Orleans conference were
understandably nervous about what they will be doing five years from now.
While most believe there still will be a valid need for public utility
commissions after year 2000, they tend to believe their functions will
change greatly. Instead of regulating monopolies, state commissioners
expect to be refereeing markets and acting as ``gatekeepers,'' deciding who
will participate in the local electric power business and on what terms.
   State commissions probably will also spend more time policing
utilities--which will become more bottom-line oriented. Instead of rate
regulation, prudency reviews, and dissecting integrated resource plans, the
key functions of PUC staffs will become consumer protection, determining
access to markets, and antitrust enforcement.
   In a nutshell, said Illinois Commerce Commission chairman Daniel Miller,
regulators will have to ``know how to establish the ground rules for
competition and choice, while still protecting consumers against undue
market power.'' According to Robert Anderson, a member of the Montana
Public Service Commission and outgoing president of Naruc, ``Ten or 15
years ago, state regulators were for the status quo. Now we feel that if
deregulation can be introduced it is better than regulation.''
   While the state commissioners have a general idea of where they are
going, the discussions in New Orleans showed that, at least in the
electricity sector, there are still plenty a questions about how to get
there--and the jurisdictional tussle with FERC is just one issue.
   Kenneth Gordon, former chair of the Massachusetts Dept of Public
Utilities warned that regulators face a difficult change of mindset going
from reliance on political and administrative processes to reliance on
competition and markets. He said state regulators could fall into a
``schizophrenia syndrome'' in which they were split between the conflicting
goals of opening up markets and continuing to pursue social policies. As a
result, they could be tempted into ``fooling with prices'' which would
frustrate the move to free markets.

Transparent to customers
   The ``public utility concept''--which includes support for energy
conservation and renewable energy programs, while allowing new market
forces to exist--is ideal, although only attainable in the long term. In
the short term, some state commissions, which are lobbied by strong
conservation and environmental groups, have been reluctant to simply drop
such programs as a price for electric power industry restructuring.
   Instead, the regulators have begun to look seriously at imposing
universal service charges on all retail customers to provide a source of
funding for the programs that previously were lumped into general utility
rates. This is a key reason why the commissioners want to hold onto their
``last inch'' of wire and retain some option to control revenue flows--even
as traditional utility ratemaking fades out.
   But no one knows whether average consumers will want to pay for social
programs, especially if the up to $10 per month charge suddenly becomes
very easy to find on the monthly electric bills. In the old system, nobody
liked to give utilities rate increases, but the economic justifications for
the hikes were so arcane that the public wound up with little sense of why
things were happening. This actually gave commissions much more leeway to
order programs with high pricetags.
   By unbundling rates, costs become naked and regulators will have to get
used to justifying any decision that affects pocketbooks. In fact, another
major challenge to the state regulators will be to refocus their main
attention on customers after spending years carefully balancing the
interests of regulated utilities and customers--and frequently
overprotecting the utilities.

Add value to regulation
   According to Daniel Fessler, president of the California PUC, the most
critical job of regulators will be to design delivery mechanisms that
ensure the benefits of the competitive market flow to the small users.
Government will not need to protect the interests of the ``large, strong,
and articulate players in the market,'' he told the convention, and it
should not just stand back and assume that benefits of competition will
``trickle down'' to all users. ``If government has any role at all, it is
to guard the interests for those who are too busy, too preoccupied, too
small, or too politically insignificant to achieve what the more fortunate
are able to achieve.''
   Fessler noted that with the ``appetite for government solutions at an
all time low,'' regulators had to find some way to ``add value'' to the
process. Of course, the first and most important test of this new consumer
orientation may be the coming battle over stranded investment where, says
Montana's Anderson, ``the irresistible [forces of the market] meet the
immovable object of utility stranded-investment costs'' now estimated at
about $135-million nationwide.

Stranded stockholders
   The main question already on the table in California, Massachusetts, New
Hampshire, and several other states is how to restructure their electric
industries. The real issue driving that question is whether utility
stockholders will be compensated for former investments, or whether
consumers will pick up the tab and pay high upfront charges for a
transition period before the promised benefits of retail choice emerge. The
issue is further complicated because the obvious ways to collect the funds
are either through a universal service charge on distribution utilities, to
be based on the ``final inch''; or in the near term, utility
retail-wheeling tariffs. In both cases, the state/federal jurisdiction
issue immediately presents itself.
   So far, commissioners have been very cautious about giving utilities a
blank check to receive all stranded costs. In some states, such as Maine
and New Hampshire, commissions have proposed a 50% recovery as a sort of
holding maneuver. But anything short of 100% recovery has usually incurred
the political wrath of local utilities.
   The preferred approach, so far, has been to put off as long as possible
any final decision by state officials on the issue. Or--better yet--let the
parties directly involved negotiate a deal on how much stranded investment
recovery will be allowed.
   At the New Orleans convention, the question revolved more around whether
commissions and state legislatures, which order electric power industry
restructuring, might duck the stranded-investment issue altogether, thereby
insuring ratepayers would get the full benefit of the free market at once.
   In such places as California and New England, where above-market
investment in nuclear plants and independent-power contracts have pushed
rates up far above the national average and alternative market rates for
power are considered ``dirt cheap,'' the temptation for regulators to let
the utilities absorb the losses is great.

Absolute authority will fade
   Another issue to resolve will be how much control state commissions will
retain over the energy supply portfolio available to electric users in
their state. In simpler days, when most utilities built powerplants in
their territory and sold electricity to local users, PUCs wielded
significant power in determining if new capacity was needed, where plants
should be built, and what fuel to use. Then, as integrated resource
planning, federal rules supporting non-utility generation, and
environmental concerns came into play during the last 20 years, the power
was expanded until many PUCs had absolute authority over the shape of the
state electric system.
   However, such powers seriously eroded by the 1990s, as overbuilding of
generating units and the sparse market for new independent power meant
decisions on new capacity were less important. Also, commissions have begun
backing away from resource planning rules as the competitive market now
makes decisions for utility management, and incentive-based conservation
programs have lost their allure.
   In the proposed new market system, the notion of states building up
their local resource portfolios will be all but obsolete, as electricity
will be offered from resources on a nationwide or regional basis. The job
of the state commissions will be more to decide who will be allowed to sell
power in the state, and not make decisions on where power will be
generated. State commissioners will suddenly have to pay more attention to
policies of surrounding states and understand what larger markets and
regional grids their indigenous utilities operate in. This presents major,
new opportunities for cooperation--but also conflict.
   In New England, for example, where there is a tradition of regional
cooperation on electricity issues, strong restructuring drives in
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island are forcing the other states
to consider moving quicker than planned. At the same time, in New
Hampshire, political leaders supporting restructuring declare that they do
not want to tie their actions to a slower regional effort and delay moving
to lower power rates that could help the state compete economically with
its neighbors.

Required reciprocity
   Another emerging problem is whether states will require reciprocity in
regulating electricity sellers based in each other's state--and how states
will ensure that local power isn't replaced by cheaper out-of-state
supplies based on lower environmental standards?
   Also, the basic question seems to be: How will restructuring actions in
each state--splitting up the generation, transmission, and distribution
businesses--be accomplished? Through ``functional'' unbundling that leaves
the large utility structures intact, or through an actual break up of
utilities into smaller companies. And, what types of organizations will do
what jobs? Will exiting utilities continue to own transmission, or will the
grid be run by an independent operator? Will generation be sold directly to
end users or be channeled through a poolco which would protect smaller
users from the uncertainties of direct competition? This last issue has
already generated a furious debate in California and held up progress on
restructuring for over a year.

A new antitrust role
   State regulators say such issues amount to the first major step in
carrying out their new antitrust or ``competition policeman'' role. How
each state sets up its playing field and how much integration each leaves
between the parts of the electric system may have a lot to do with
determining how much time and effort each state will spend in the future as
a policeman.
   Already, states completing retail competition tests are wrestling with
whether to allow a franchised utility to provide energy to its own
customers--or whether this creates an unfair advantage.
   Cheryl L. Parrino, chair of the Wisconsin Public Service Commission and
newly elected president of Naruc, told the group that while the antitrust
approach is less pervasive than the old rate-regulation approach, it comes
with the ``heavy hammer'' of possible criminal penalties. She notes that
many state commissions have already gained antitrust experience controlling
the relationship of their still-regulated electric utilities with
non-regulated affiliates, and that this issue will become increasingly
important as competitive lines of business grow.
   Parrino added that the state commissions should realize that unlike
traditional antitrust enforcement by state and federal legal officials,
which seeks to remove barriers to free competition, utility commissions
took a more positive antitrust role of structuring the industry and markets
to allow free competition. But, she warned that utilities also must realize
that they will no longer be protected by regulation, and will therefore be
much more vulnerable on antitrust issues.

Move to a national market
   At the New Orleans meeting, several officials on both sides reiterated
that a dual state/federal approach to handling transmission issues would
work better than holding endless debates to define a clear boundary between
jurisdictions. State representatives noted that in the past, FERC and the
states had found ways to split responsibilities.
   For example, FERC created a general regime for determining avoided costs
under the 1978 Public Utilities Regulatory Policies Act, and each state
then adopted its own system for setting local avoided costs and authorizing
utility contracts with non-utility generators.
   The New Hampshire PUC--which has little time for debate because it wants
a retail wheeling pilot program in place by May--has floated a plan under
which utilities would voluntarily file retail transmission tariffs to both
the PUC and FERC. Then, each agency would take whatever action on the
proposed tariffs that it believed necessary.
   At the same time, New Hampshire PUC chairman Douglas Patch has suggested
that eventually, mixed boards of federal and state officials could be used
for dealing with the retail transmission issue.


Photograph(s):
Photograph: As political power shifts away from Washington to the states,
state regulators should be exercising the power they retain under federal
law to regulate local utilities with less federal interference--not more

Photograph: Moler made clear that the object of the meeting was to find
``practical and workable'' solutions to issues posed by changes in the
industry--which neither side has full control over

Photograph: Many state commissions believe that complete FERC control of
the wires could force state regulators out of the electric sector
altogether

Photograph: Massey suggested that FERC regulate interstate retail
transactions, while guaranteeing states control over some piece of the
distribution system

Photograph: While the antitrust approach is less pervasive than the old
rate-regulation approach, it comes with the ``heavy hammer'' of possible
criminal penalties, said Parrino

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "66"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

ALLIANCE

   Hadson Gas Services Inc and Peoples Energy Corp reach an agreement on an
innovative strategic alliance that will enhance market opportunities for
both companies. Among the ventures planned are joint management of some
physical facilities and contractual assets and joint development of
business opportunities in the upper Midwest and Chicago areas.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "67"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

BRIEFS

   Framatome Technologies Inc is the new name of B&W Nuclear Technologies,
reflecting Framatome's ownership of the US firm . . . LG&E Power Inc and
Westmoreland Energy Inc complete the conversion of an $87.6-million
non-recourse construction loan to a term debt loan for Roanoke Valley, a
50-MW coal-fired facility.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "68"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

ALLISON ENERGY CO

   Allison Energy Co will develop a new family of turbine engines that form
the basis for an advanced turbine system under an $82.5-million contract
awarded by the Dept of Energy.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "69"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

LEGALITIES

   Patowmack Power Partners is denied approval by the Virginia State
Corporation Commission (SCC) to construct a demonstration plant in Loudoun
County. The SCC determined it could not approve the 185-MW combustion
turbine plant because there is no identified public need for power from the
facility.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "70"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

MERGERS & ACQUISITIONS

   Westmoreland Energy Inc acquires The Corona Group from OESI Power Corp.
Corona provides technical, repair, and maintenance services to the electric
power industry

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "71"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

PROFILE IN BRIEF

   IBM Utility and Energy Services Industry and Northern Indiana Public
Service Co began producing the Integrity/Customer Services System in
November. The system, which is designed to provide quick response to
utility customers on all inquiries, offers the utility company new lines of
business, such as payment insurance and meter reading for other utility
companies. The two companies are jointly marketing the system.
   As a network-intensive application, Integrity/CSS provides customer
service representatives with real-time information, enabling customer
requests to be tracked through the entire service connection process. For
example, a request for service to a new home can be traced from an engineer
entering and updating milestone information for permit requirements through
service installation to installation and servicing of appliances.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "72"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

WEB SURF SITES

   American Public Power Assn launches APPAnet, a new forum on CompuServe
Information Service . . . Power magazine establishes a web page at
http://www.
powermag.com . . . The Southern Company can be reached at
http://www.southernco.com . . . North American Electric Reliability Council
is at http://www.nerc.com. n

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "73"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

B&W RINGS IN THE NEW YEAR WITH BIG CONTRACTS

   With work just starting on approximately $420-million in new powerplant
contracts, Babcock & Wilcox Co (B&W), Power Generation Group, is ringing in
1996 with good cheer and moving full steam ahead. Recent awards from the
Egyptian Electricity Authority and Sumitomo Corp (Tokyo, Japan) account for
the company's renewed optimism. ``While the market has remained fairly
stable for the past 10 years, B&W continues to increase its international
market share,'' explains Walter E. Boomer, president of B&W Power
Generation Group. ``These contracts reflect the steady progression of our
overseas activities.''
   Egyptian Electricity Authority issued the newest contract award for
steam generating equipment for the new Sidi Krir and Ayoun Moussa
powerplants. Scope of supply for B&W is two 320-MW gas/oil-fired boilers
and accessories. Additionally, in conjunction with Nuova Cimimontubi, an
Italian construction firm, B&W will supply the balance-of-plant, erection,
and construction services. B&W's share of the contract is valued at about
$120-million.
   Steam drums will be manufactured in North America; the remainder of the
boiler units will be fabricated at Babcock & Wilcox Egypt, a joint venture.
Contracts set the completion of the Sidi Krir units in September 1998 and
March 1999. The Ayoun Moussa units are scheduled for completion about a
year later.
   Under the terms of the Sumitomo contract, B&W will supply two 660-MW
coal-fired boilers for the Tanjung Jati B powerplant in central Java,
Indonesia. B&W will be responsible for about 33% of the total powerplant
project, valued at about $900-million. Scope of supply for B&W, beyond the
boilers and accessories, includes electrostatic precipitators and a
complete wet flue-gas desulfurization system to meet Indonesian
environmental standards. Work on the Sumitomo contract is split between P.
T. Babcock & Wilcox Indonesia (a local B&W subsidiary) and B&W's North
American facilities. Contract completion is set for 1998.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "74"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

SARGENT & LUNDY

   Sargent & Lundy contracts to conduct an asset utilization study of
Encina Units 1 and 2 for an Electric Power Research Institute tailored
collaboration with San Diego Gas & Electric Co. Study includes life
assessment of components that could be reused if the 100-MW units were
repowered, as well as turbine repowering technology options and a
comparison of repowering and greenfield installations.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "75"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

WESTINGHOUSE ELECTRIC CORP

   Westinghouse Electric Corp announces a contract valued at $30-million to
supply Wisconsin Electric Power Co's Point Beach nuclear station with steam
turbine equipment and services

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "76"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

FRAMATOME TECHNOLOGIES INC

   Framatome Technologies Inc receives a contract from North Atlantic
Energy Service Corp to perform automated inspections on thermal sleeve
guide funnels at Seabrook, an 1150-MW Westinghouse Electric Corp
pressurized-water reactor . . . Primesouth Inc now operates the Savannah
River Site D Area powerhouse under an agreement with South Carolina
Electric & Gas Co, which leases the 70-MW coal-fired powerplant from the
Dept of Energy

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "77"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

FOSTER WHEELER ENERGY CORP

   Foster Wheeler Energy Corp acquires Zack Power & Industrial Co, a
full-service mechanical contractor. The company will be known as Foster
Wheeler Zack Inc.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "78"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

GRAPHIC DATA SYSTEMS CORP

   Graphic Data Systems Corp will provide Winnipeg Hydro with
automated-mapping/facilities-management (AM/FM) and geographic information
system (GIS) software. Pilot phase began in December; the system will be
fully integrated in December 1996

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "79"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

CSW ENERGY INC AND PHILLIPS PETROLEUM CO

   CSW Energy Inc and Phillips Petroleum Co agree to construct a 300-MW
cogeneration plant at Phillips' Old Ocean site, which houses a large
refinery and chemical-plant complex. The new cogeneration plant will
provide steam and electricity to the complex

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "80"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

WESTMORELAND ENERGY INC

   Westmoreland Energy Inc receives initial siting approval from Madison
(Ill) to build a 66-MW independent power project. Permitting is expected to
be complete by late summer, financial closing later this year, and
commercial operation by mid-1998.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "81"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

INSIDE UTILITY MERGERS: TRENDS WITHIN THE TREND

By:
Cate Jones

   If you're an electric-utility executive, you probably understand why the
expression ``May you live in interesting times,'' is a curse--not a
salutation. The present is indeed an interesting time for the industry, as
federal and state authorities prepare to deregulate parts of the business
and replace guaranteed service territories with free-market competition.
   Already, anticipation of deregulation has increased the number of
utility mergers, as companies scramble to improve their competitive
positions. According to Doug Kimmelman, vice president of the Utility Group
of Goldman, Sachs & Co, New York, NY, top managers of virtually every
utility in the US are discussing mergers as a competitive strategy within
their companies, and many have extended the discussions to include
prospective merger partners.
   ``There is sufficient anecdotal evidence to suggest that many utilities
are looking very hard at other companies to calculate the best mesh of
staff exchange, operating practices, management of assets, and so forth,''
says M. Douglas Dunn, partner and chair of the Utilities Practice of
Milbank, Tweed, Hadley & McCloy, New York, NY. Dunn adds that merger
negotiations often result when top executives of two utilities discover
that they have a similar ``strategic vision,'' or long-range plans. Such
was the case with the PSI Resources/Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co (CG&E)
deal, he says. Dunn expects today's frenzied pace to continue for a while.
How frenzied is it now? ``Right now,'' Dunn quips, ``if you call early in
the week, you get a better date on Saturday night.''
   As for the future, many pundits are predicting that more ``mergers of
equals'' will take place. Typically, such marriages combine the assets of
low-cost producers, yielding economies of scale that reduce costs even more
and give the newlyweds a competitive edge in the wholesale power market.
Low-cost producers often seek out partners with lower production costs
and/or better growth prospects. Today, it remains to be seen whether
high-cost power producers will even be able to get a date on New Year's
Eve.

The trigger event
   Mergers--and utility mergers in particular--are extremely complex
business transactions requiring ``hundreds of different moving parts to
mesh,'' notes Kimmelman. Only about 30% of the mergers that Kimmelman's
group works on ever succeed, which proves how tenuous and sensitive mergers
are, just as business deals. What's more, mergers within highly regulated
industries--such as electric power--require the approval of state, federal,
and even local authorities--a process that often takes 18 months or longer
to complete, says Clifford M. Naeve, a partner with Skadden Arps Slate
Meagher & Flom, Washington, DC, and a former Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission (FERC) commissioner.
   Why the recent spate of utility mergers? Lawrence J. Makovich, associate
director of Cambridge (Mass) Energy Research Associates (CERA), contends
that the mergers' watershed event came in April 1994, when California
regulators proposed a retail-wheeling scheme that would allow customers to
bypass their local utilities and buy power directly from market suppliers.
The boldness and scope of the proposal sent shock waves through the
industry, says Makovich, because it sent a message that not only was
competition more likely, but that it was also likely to arrive sooner than
expected. Many utility executives came to the conclusion that, if
deregulation were to be imposed on a fast-track schedule, they couldn't
improve their utility's competitive position fast enough to survive without
the help of a partner.

Illusion or driver?
   On the surface, the motivation for most mergers is the promise of cost
saving and operating synergies that will benefit utilities and
shareholders. Most industry observers agree that potential cost savings are
the primary driver, and are necessary for regulatory approval--particularly
by FERC. But other rationales are used to cement deals between two
utilities (see box, p 60).
   Makovich argues that looking for cost saving is nothing new, and may
even be an illusion. Reducing costs through manpower and operating
synergies, he claims, cannot produce significant results because those
areas represent such a small portion of current operating costs. He
contends that manpower, for example, typically represents 5% of the
operating costs at a utility, so a 10% reduction of 5% of a utility's costs
can make, at best, a tiny impact on its cost structure.
   On the other hand, fuel costs at, say, a coal-fired plant typically
account for the lion's share of that plant's total costs, with capital
costs accounting for the remainder. Makovich postulates that the the real
strategic reasons for mergers are the following factors, each of which
helps determine utility cost structures in a competitive environment:
   -- Diversification of the fuel mix for power generation. Under
regulation, fuel-adjustment clauses are used to transfer fuel-price risks
to customers--but that tool won't be available under competition.
Accordingly, some mergers aim to shift price risks back to producers by
improving fuel diversity--seeking a merger partner who feeds different
fuels to his stable of powerplants.
   -- Undervalued assets, the flip side of stranded assets. Some utilities
have largely depreciated, low-cost generating units that will be worth more
than their current rate-based value in a competitive environment (EW,
November 1995, p 46). Mergers allow acquisition of such assets before an
upward competitive evaluation can take place.
   -- Transmission and distribution (T&D) systems. It is still unclear how
utilities will be compensated for use of their T&D systems for retail
wheeling. However, mergers are a way of stocking up on an unknown but
potentially valuable commodity: grid miles.
   Makovich further contends that if wholesale competition does not play
out as expected, then many predicted merger benefits will not materialize.

Puhca revisited
   One interesting trend in the recent electric-utility mergers (see table)
has been greater use of the registered holding company structure by the
merging parties. As Sheldon Adler, a partner with Skadden Arps, points out,
at one time the structure was in disfavor because it imposed another level
of regulation on the merged entity.
   According to Naeve, Adler's colleague at Skadden Arps, the 1935 Public
Utility Holding Company Act (Puhca) permits three corporate structures
under which utilities can merge. The first and simplest--because it avoids
regulation under Puhca--is an organization without a holding company at the
top. That was the tack that the PacifiCorp/Utah Power & Light Co and
Midwest Energy Inc/Iowa-Illinois Gas & Electric Co mergers took.
   The second structural option that merging utilities have is to create an
exempt holding company, making the merged entity exempt from most Puhca
requirements. However, the guidelines for that option are quite stringent.
For example, if an intrastrate exempt holding company--a so-called 3(a)(1)
company--is set up in a state, all of the utility subsidiaries which
provide more than 5% of the holding company's income must be incorporated
in that state, and derive at least 80% of their income from customers
within the state.
   PSI Energy Inc, before its merger with Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co
(CG&E), was a 3(a)(1) exempt company. Setting up a 3(a)(2) exempt holding
company, on the other hand, requires only that the holding company be
predominantly a utility, and that its utility subsidiaries provide no more
than 20% of its revenues. Before merging with PSI, CG&E was a 3(a)(2)
exempt company.
   The third option is the registered holding company, which is subject to
strict regulation by the Securities & Exchange Commission (SEC)--including
prohibitions on electric-utility ownership of significant natural-gas
properties. Although CG&E had gas properties when it merged with PSI, the
two utilities chose to do so by creating a registered holding
company--CINergy Corp--because they correctly anticipated that the SEC
would relax some of its strict ownership requirements.

Holding on to holding companies
   After the CG&E/PSI merger raised the collective industry opinion of
registered holding companies, more mergers--some of which would not have
occurred otherwise--took a similar approach. While the option is often not
utilities' first choice, because it still incurs burdensome regulations,
establishing a registered holding company does have several advantages.
Most important, it gives the merged companies more flexibility to operate
over state lines. At the same time, the umbrella holding company also
provides a vehicle for the merging utilities to maintain their identities
and brand recognition among customers and concerned shareholders. Finally,
the holding-company structure is proving to be one of the best ways for
number-crunchers to pin down assets and costs, points out Dunn. The
Northern States Power Co/Wisconsin Electric Power Co, Public Service Co of
Colorado/Southwestern Public Service Co, and the Wisconsin Power & Light
Co/IES Industries Inc/ Interstate Power Co mergers all involved the
establishment of a registered holding company.
   ``The CG&E/PSI deal created the template for all future mergers of
equals,'' says Adler, whose Skadden Arps represented PSI, while Milbank,
Tweed acted on behalf of CG&E. The lawyers and utility executives produced
an evenhanded merger document that contemplates everything from the
companies' representation on the board of directors to succession issues.
Inability to establish succession plans has caused more than one merger to
fail, according to Kimmelman. Edward Tirello, senior vice president for
equities research at Natwest Market Securities, New York, NY, believes that
the succession issue is even more key: He claims that the US electric power
industry is ``being held hostage by 300 people. It is the only industry
where the corporate officers don't hold stock.''
   Establishing a succession plan was only one reason why the CG&E/PSI
merger succeeded, says Dunn. Here are some others:
   -- The managements of the two utilities shared the same strategic
vision, and each was convinced that the other was the most-logical
partner.
   -- The merger allowed both companies to minimize their risks, as well
as explore emerging technologies, such as fuel cells.
   -- The characteristics of the two utilities' service territories were
complementary--excess generating capacity, but promise of growth in PSI's,
and restricted growth in CG&E's backyard.

Balancing capacity and demand
   Balancing demand growth and generating capacity is a common strategy in
mergers. According to Adler and Naeve, little saving on the generation side
is possible if both utilities are already in the same energy pool--although
substantial savings can still be realized. But if one company has most of
its demand peaks in the winter peak demands and the other in the summer
peak, generating profiles would dovetail nicely. That approach has a big
fan in Kimmelman, who says it makes sense for utilities in the North, where
there typically is excess capacity but low demand growth, to seek partners
in the South, where there is less capacity but higher growth. Of course,
the southern utility could also make the first move.
   The three-way merger between Wisconsin Power & Light, IES Industries,
and Interstate Power Co exemplifies the balancing approach: Because the
merged utilities will have a service territory that surrounds, on the north
and west, that of high-cost Unicom, the merger will let the new partners
take better advantage of wholesale power markets. As Dunn, who represented
Interstate Power in the negotiations, points out, mergers have changed the
role of utility executives from its traditional custodial nature to one
that demands dynamic management of assets.

Controlling the channels
   If the history of other deregulated industries tells us anything about
the potential effect of competition on the electricity sector, it is that
bigger will be better. Whenever companies have been forced to compete,
``larger companies have historically fared better, because they are able to
survive the discounting that inevitably results in the battle for
customers,'' says Kimmelman. And since distribution is the business that is
closest to customers, he adds, acquiring more distribution channels will
become increasingly important, and the objective of future mergers.
   Certainly, expansion of distribution was in mind during negotiation of
the Southwestern Public Service Co (SPS)/Public Service Co of Colorado
(PSCo) merger--the first between utilities with non-contiguous service
territories. After a high-voltage interconnecting transmission line is
built when the ink is dry on the merger documents, the as-yet unnamed
holding company will have one of the largest service territories in the
US.

Expanding business opportunities
   With many utilities experiencing anemic domestic earnings, mergers may
also provide an opportunity to expand business opportunities. Here again,
bigger is better because you need a large balance sheet in order to
diversify. Merger partners may be considered for their successful
unregulated earnings growth, or for their ventures outside of the core
business. The rationale for the SPS/PSCo merger included some of those
elements. In addition to having a faster-growing service economy, PSCo had
natural-gas operations, and innovative information-technology and
energy-services programs. SPS was not only strong in power generation,
engineering, and fuels diversity, but it also had a subsidiary, Quixx Corp,
which is involved in a several successful non-utility power generation
(NUG) projects, both in the US and overseas.

The shape of things to come
   Mergers are definitely reshaping the utility landscape. While the
industry consensus is that FERC will require utilities to unbundle
themselves into separate generation, transmission, and distribution
companies, no one can yet say when that will happen.
   But some are already guessing what the structure of the new industry
will look like. NatWest's Tirello, who lightly refers to himself as a
visionary, foresees extreme consolidation that will produce, once the dust
settles, only nine regional energy holding companies in the US.
   According to Tirello, each ``superutility'' will have: three to five
generating subsidiaries; separate transmission and distribution entities;
and companies that will offer a wide range of communications
services--cable TV, voice and data links, security hookups, etc--to
consumers. The way he sees it, electricity will be a low-margin commodity,
distribution will remain regulated by states, generation will be lightly
regulated--if at all--and independent power producers will sell power to
the big energy companies, signaling the beginning of the end for merchant
plants. But Kimmelman disagrees, saying that although the industry will
continue to consolidate, Tirello's vision is too extreme. One reason it
won't happen, Kimmelman explains, is the difficulty of closing a merger
deal--something he has learned first-hand, in the trenches.

Top 10 rationales for successful mergers
   According to Doug Kimmelman of Goldman, Sachs, New York, NY--which
consulted on four of the six mergers announced during 1995--there are 10
rationales underlying current and future mergers. The first five are
critical; they are common to all utility mergers to date, and will likely
be common to all future mergers. All or some of the next five rationales,
although not critical, have been and will be part of past, present, and
future mergers.

The five critical rationales:
   1. Cost reductions and improving competitive position. Federal and state
approvals are required before a merger can be finalized, and the merger
must demonstrate it is good for ratepayers and competition.
   2. Earnings enhancements through synergies. Being able to reduce
internal costs through synergies is a plus to shareholders.
   3. Diversification of business, to minimize risk. Included here are
efforts to expand the utilities retail and industrial customer base, spread
the business risks resulting from regulation over several states, and widen
the mix of generation fuels.
   4. Enhancing size. Bigger will be better under competition, and bigger
numbers on the bottom of balance sheets will support more-diverse
investment strategies.
   5. Solving succession issues. All successful mergers to date have had a
well-defined management-succession plan.

The five less critical rationales for mergers:
   1. To reduce vulnerability to an unwanted takeover.
   2. To lower a utility's dividend profile.
   3. To offset exposure to stranded-investment risk, by blending and
averaging the risk of stranded assets.
   4. To achieve premium valuations. Because many electric-utility stocks
are overvalued, mergers can achieve a premium valuation for shareholders at
the cost of a slight loss of control.
   5. To assess higher growth, unregulated ventures. Given today's weak
outlook for domestic earnings growth in regulated businesses, it makes
sense for utilities to try to enter unregulated energy businesses or make
equity investments overseas, where growth--and, unfortunately, risk--are
potentially higher.


Recent mergers among investor-owned electric utilities:

Company 1                Company 2                              Status

WPL Holdings Inc        IES Industries Inc/Interstate Power Co  Pending    
    Baltimore Gas &

Electric Co             Potomac Electric Power Co               Pending

Northern States
Power Co                Wisconsin Electric & Power Co           Pending

Public Service Co
of Colorado             Southwestern Public Service Co          Pending

Union Electric Co       Cipsco Inc                              Pending

Washington Water
Power Co                Sierra Pacific Resources                Pending

Midwest Resources       Iowa-Illinois Gas & Electric Co         Completed

Cincinnati Gas &
Electric Co             PSI Resources                           Completed

New England Electric
System                  Nantucket Electric Co                   Completed

Texas Utilities Co      Southwestern Electric Service Co        Completed

Entergy Corp            Gulf States Utilities Co                Completed

Indiana Michigan
Power Co                Michigan Power Co                       Completed

Kansas Power &
Light Co Kansas         Gas & Electric Co                       Completed

Unitil Corp             Fitchburg Gas & Electric Co             Completed

Northeast Utilities     Public Service Co of New Hampshire      Completed

Northeast Utilities     Fletcher Electric Light                 Completed

IE Industries Inc       Iowa Southern                           Completed

Utilicorp United Inc    Centel Corp                             Completed

Eastern Utilities
Associates              Newport Electric                        Completed

Midwest Energy Inc      Iowa Resources                          Completed


Company 1             Company 2             Date completed   New company
WPL Holdings Inc      IES Industries Inc/
                      Interstate Power Co                   Interstate
Energy
Baltimore Gas
& Electric Co         Potomac Electric Power Co             Constellation
Energy

Northern States
Power Co              Wisconsin Electric &
                      Power Co                              Primergy

Public Service Co
of Colorado           Southwestern Public
                      Service Co

Union Electric Co      Cipsco Inc                           Ameren Corp

Washington Water
Power Co              Sierra Pacific Resources              Altus Corp

Midwest Resources     Iowa-Illinois Gas &
                      Electric Co                 Jul 1995  MidAmerican
Energy
Cincinnati Gas
& Electric Co         PSI Resources               Oct 1994  CINergy Corp

New England
Electric System       Nantucket Electric Co       Oct 1994

Texas Utilities Co    Southwestern Electric
                      Service Co                  Jan 1993

Entergy Corp          Gulf States Utilities Co    Dec 1993

Indiana Michigan
Power Co              Michigan Power Co           Feb 1992

Kansas Power
& Light Co            Kansas Gas & Electric Co    Mar 1992    Western
Resources

Unitil Corp           Fitchburg Gas & Electric Co Apr 1992

Northeast Utilities   Public Service Co of
                      New Hampshire               Jun 1992

Northeast Utilities   Fletcher Electric
                      Light                       Sep 1992

IE Industries Inc     Iowa Southern               Jul 1991    IES
Industries

Utilicorp United Inc  Centel Corp                 Sep 1991

Eastern Utilities
Associates            Newport Electric            Mar 1990

Midwest Energy Inc    Iowa Resources              Nov 1990     Midwest
Resources

Photograph(s):
Photograph: ``The foreward-thinking executives are moving away from a
merely custodial role to one actually managing assets'' M. Douglas Dunn,
Tweed, Hadley & McCloy

Photograph: ``PSC brings a faster-growing service-area economy to the
merger, while SPS brings strong generation and engineering'' Bill Helton,
who will be appointed chairman of the SPS/PSC merged company

Photograph: ``The contiguous territories and similar customer-focused
strategies make the combination a natural''Clifford L. Greenwalt,
President/CEO, Cipsco


Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "82"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

WHY UTILITY BOARD MEMBERSHIP IS CHANGING

By:
Marie Leone

   How do electric-utility boards compare to the boards of the nation's
largest corporations? To start, electric utility boards are younger, less
highly compensated, and have a greater outside representation than other
large US companies. In addition, utility board members have a shorter
tenure, and fewer utility companies offer stock options than their
corporate counterparts in the private sector. This information comes from
Spencer Stuart's (Houston, Tex) first survey of electric--utility boards.
   Spencer Stuart, an executive search firm, has created its annual Spencer
Stuart Board Index (SSBI) by surveying the boards of 100 leading publicly
traded US companies--including firms such as AT&T Corp, Exxon Corp, and IBM
Corp. Now, the firm has created a utility board index (UI)--the first
industry-specific survey that Spencer Stuart has conducted. Jonathan A.
Crystal, a partner with the firm, expects the UI to become an annual
offering and predicts that many utility boards will change significantly in
the coming years as the economic climate for utilities grows more
competitive.

Turnover expected
   For example, Crystal says that, over the next five years, board-member
turnover will be higher at electric utilities than in other types of
companies. Why? Utilities are moving away from their local business focus,
he says. By ``local,'' Crystal refers to utilities' traditional
``semi-public'' obligation, which is usually manifest from the
representation on the board of local corporations, businesses,
not-for-profit organizations, universities and hospitals. That's different
from companies in the SSBI group, whose goal is to serve stockholders, not
the community. Essentially, Crystal explains, the monopoly structure of the
electric-utility industry made the utility business local in nature.
   However, as deregulation forces utilities beyond their local roots,
board makeups will likewise move beyond local representation. In fact,
Crystal believes that more international, marketing, and financial experts
will become part of utility boards as US utilities look to increase
earnings growth in domestic and international markets.

Changing times, changing data
   According to Spencer Stuart's inaugural UI report, the average tenure of
board members is 8.1 years, and ranges from 13.3 to one year. Ten boards
(20%) averaged over 10 years of service, and 10 averaged less than six
years of service.
   Other survey data say that the average age of a UI director is 59, vs 61
for an SSBI director. The latter average has been constant at 61 for the
past six years. But Crystal says that the 2-yr age spread does not reflect
the whole story, because the age group dispersion of UI and SSBI directors
is further apart than the average would indicate. For example, only 42% of
utility-board directors have an average age over 60, as compared to 78% of
the SSBI boards.
   In 1994, UI boards had a 5:2 ratio of directors that came from outside
the utility company to directors that worked for the utility. This compares
favorably to SSBI boards, which had four outside directors for each inside
director. Thirteen UI boards (26%) included the CEO as the only insider, as
compared to 14% of the SSBI boards. UI boards averaged two inside directors
vs three for SSBI boards.
   In addition, 25 of the 50 UI boards offered stock options and/or grants
to outside directors in 1994. That number increased to 27 by 1995. Those
figures compare to 56 SSBI boards in 1994, and 61 in 1995. Crystal
comments that there is a movement afoot in corporate America to require
directors to buy stocks when joining a company's board, so that their
economic interests are more closely aligned with those of stockholders.

Compensation considered
   In the area of compensation, the average total cash compensation for UI
directors is also markedly less than the compensation of the directors
included in the SSBI survey. The results say that 74% of the UI boards pay
less $40,000 per year, compared to 10% of the broader survey of major US
companies. UI board compensation ranges from a low of $18,785 at Hawaiian
Electric Industries Inc to a high of $58,622 at Public Service Gas &
Electric Co (PSE&G). The only other utility paying less than $20,000 in
total director compensation annually is Illinova Corp, paying $18,800.
Three utilities other than PSE&G pay more than $50,000 to board members:
The Southern Company ($52,500); Consolidated Edison Co of New York Inc
($51,500); and CMS Energy Corp ($51,444).
   Crystal says that the comparison between board compensation for the UI
group and SSBI group is simple economics. In general, utilities are smaller
companies, and therefore pay less. He notes that the UI index comprises the
50 largest US utilities in terms of revenue, which puts Pacific Gas &
Electric Co in the top spot with over $10.4-billion in revenue. This is a
far cry from some of the SSBI companies that take in more than $100-billion
in revenues each year.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "83"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

THE 1995 JAMES H. MCGRAW AWARDS
`Industry is always ready for leadership' James H. McGraw, founder, The
McGraw-Hill Companies

   On November 29, Electrical World's 1995 James H. McGraw Awards were
presented to four electric-power companies to honor their pacesetting
industry achievements and significant contributions to the advancement of
the electric-power industry. Conferred upon the winners at a special
luncheon ceremony during McGraw-Hill's ``Globalization of Electricity
Markets'' executive summit, the awards were presented by Harold W. McGraw
Jr, chairman emeritus, The McGraw-Hill Companies, and grandson of the
company's founder.
   The winners--Duke Power Co (Charlotte, NC), Glasgow Electric Plant Board
(Glasgow, Ky), Nigen Ltd (Belfast, Ireland), and Sithe Energies Inc (New
York, NY)--were recognized for a diverse range of accomplishments and
innovations which included: the integration of strategic non-regulated
businesses with the utility operation; telecommunication service
innovation; creative financing; and competitive business practices.
   Significant about this year's winners is that they and their
achievements represent a departure from the domestic-based, utility-only
winners of the past. This year, two independent power companies were
honored--one based overseas. Also, each company was cited for achievements
that clearly extend beyond the traditional role of electric-power
companies. Thus, in keeping with its creator's philosophy, the 1995 McGraw
Awards, and Electrical World, continue to reflect the dynamic and evolving
electric-power industry and the issues important to the people that run its
businesses. Congratulations on a job well done.

Duke Power Co
   In recongnition of strategic and groundbreaking efforts to align utility
and non-utility activities with the competitive market.
   Duke Power's Associated Enterprises Group (AEG), formed in August 1994,
brings together eight of the corporation's non-utility business units,
thereby underscoring Duke's increased emphasis on its diversified segments
in a time of rapid change in the electric-power market.
   Through AEG, Duke Power is active in the: independent power business
(Duke Energy); the power marketing business (Duke/Louis Dreyfus); the
telecommunications sector (DukeNet Communications Inc); and worldwide
design, engineering, and construction (Duke Engineering & Services Inc and
Duke/Fluor Daniel.)
   In addition, the company ranks high in customer satisfaction, brand
loyalty, and operational excellence. Duke Power also is part of the team
now managing DOE's Civilian Radioactive Waste Management Systems program
and has assumed a principal role in the management and operation of DOE's
Idaho National Engineering Laboratory.

Nigen Ltd
   In recognition of financial innovation in a competitive market as
demonstrated by the Kilroot Electric Bond Offering.
   Presented with the challenge of a newly deregulated market and the
obstacle of raising funds needed to compete without sinking deep into
long-term bank debt, Nigen Ltd issued the $320-million Kilroot Electric
Bond Offering that completely replaced bank loans that the company took out
during its privatization.
   The bond issue--underwritten by Salomon Brothers and Barclays de Zoete
Wedd--was devised by the same group of in-house engineers who have run the
private power company since its inception, at the dissolution of the
state-owned Northern Ireland Electricity. The bond offering, a
first-of-its-kind in Europe, will not only free directors from the often
onerous day-to-day constraints of bank supervision, but will also speed the
day when employees at all levels can share in the company's success.
   Nigen, one of Northern Ireland's two main electric generating companies,
operates two plants in the region which produce close to half of the
province's electricity.

Sithe Energies Inc
   In recognition of the company's pioneering efforts in fostering
electric-power competition as demonstrated by the Independence project.
   From a business perspective, some industry experts claim that Sithe's
Independence project ushered in a new age of competition by initiating the
first retail-wheeling transaction using the yet untested 1992 Energy Policy
Act (EPAct). Others called it the last ``sweet'' deal for cogenerators.
But, the one thing all industry participants agreed on was that the
Independence project, located in Scriba, NY, near Lake Ontario, did, and
continues to, test the legal and regulatory framework of the new
competitive electric-power market in the US.
   By offering low-cost power from the Independence project, Sithe lured
away the local utility's largest customer--Alcan Rolled Products. Then, by
using the EPAct's open-access provision, Sithe obliged the utility to
provide transmission access from the Independence project to Alcan's
facility to complete the private-power transaction. Thus, Sithe forced
state and federal regulators to take a practical and realistic look at the
new law, and make decisions that will set precedents in the markeplace.

Glasgow Electric Plant Board
   In recognition of successful development and innovative commercial use
of a coaxial-based broadband network.
   The Glasgow Electric Plant Board already has its 13,000 customers better
linked to the world than most of the ``industry-leading'' organizations
still conducting small-scale pilots. Through its 120-total-mile, coax-based
communications network--that has drops to every location where the company
has a meter--GEPB has created a variety of cyber services that
strategically complement its electricity business.
   GEPB competes in the local cable television market and has, to date,
captured 55% of the area's customers; offers a second local telephone
utility service; connects customers to a city-wide computer data network
that links virtually every computer in Glasgow, including home, school,
city and county office, library, business, and medical facilities; offers
interactive television in local schools; owns and operates a fully
digitized geographic information system landbase of the county;
synchronizes all of the 22 traffic signals in the city; and can bundle all
available services on the coax network in one bill.


Photograph(s):
Photograph: Harold McGraw Jr (left) congratulates Robert A. Lessenberry,
chairman, Glasgow Electric Plant Board, on the success of the company's
telecommunications ventures. GEPB General Manager William Ray displays the
McGraw Award

Photograph: William A. Coley, president, Duke Power Co's Associated
Enterprises, addresses the audience after accepting the award for his
company's achievements in meshing regulated and unregulated businesses to
meet new market demands

Photograph: Ralph Grutsch, senior vice president of operations, Sithe
Energies Inc, talks about his company's competitive strategies and the
Independence power facility--the project that was honored by a 1995 McGraw
Award

Photograph: John Greer, Nigen plant manager accepts the 1995 McGraw Award
from Harold McGraw Jr, in recognition of the Belfast-based company's
innovative bond offering--a first-of-its-kind in Europe

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "84"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

THE HISTORY

   An Electrical World tradition since 1925, the annual James H. McGraw
Awards, named for the founder of The McGraw-Hill Companies, are presented
to corporations and project owners and operators that have made a
significant contribution to the advancement of the electric power industry
through innovative and constructive business practices.
   In an excerpt from one of James McGraw's letters, he writes about the
award: ``I hope that it is well understood that the giving of this award is
purely symbolic. It would be manifestly impossible to attempt to make the
intrinsic worth of such an award indicate any measure of the importance or
the value of the service for which it is presented in commemoration. The
intent is rather to give public recognition and to express industry
appreciation of a contribution to the advancement of the electrical
industry which oftentimes may indicate and offer possibilities for good
beyond appraisal. The award is but a symbol of the honor that would come to
companies and their employees, who unselfishhly give of their time, their
thought, their energy, and their spirit to promote the interest of all the
electrical industry. Such companies and people the industry should indeed
delight to honor.''

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "85"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

HYDRO PACTS REVAMP OPERATIONS AND MARKET STRATEGIES

By:
Ray Pospisil

   As competition accelerates in the electricity sector, electric power
companies are looking to reap competitive benefits from their existing
hydroelectric powerplants--which provide low-cost power and reduce outlays
for air-pollution control equipment and strategies. However, most hydro
plants owned by investor-owned utilities are scheduled for relicensing over
the next two decades by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC)--a
process that can take five to seven years, requires extensive studies, and
often involves contentious litigation--an ordeal that can dampen a hydro
project's market advantage.
20 But, with competitive forces nipping at their heels, hydro utilities
are working hard to avoid the delay and expense of the relicensing process.
And in some cases, to expedite the renewal process, utilities are reaching
settlements with environmental advocates, recreational groups, and public
agencies that change the way they operate powerplants.
20 ``When these projects were built in the early part of the century,
they were seen as engineering marvels. Now they're seen by some as
ecological disasters,'' says Cleve Kapala, director of relicensing for New
England Electric System (NEES). ``But we prefer to deal with constituencies
rather than depositions.''
   What are the realities of changes in operations? For one thing, such
changes often reduce generating output--if water is diverted away from
turbines to accommodate fish, for instance. In addition, greater flows may
be requested during off-peak periods, diminishing the value of these plants
as peakers and forcing utilities to generate power when market prices are
low. Lastly, the changes all cost money, and utilities are reluctant to
incur more costs at a time when they are trying to streamline to meet
competitive demands.
   And even though some utilities are willing to negotiate to keep their
plants out of the relicensing abyss, there remains at least one reported
case where a utility--Pacific Gas & Electric Co (PG&E)--decided to sell
some projects rather than absorb the extra costs associated with renewal of
the licenses.

A river view
   The most active conservation group in terms of hydroelectric issues is
American Rivers, based in Washington, DC, which has already worked out
settlements with Niagara Mohawk Power Corp (NiMo), NEES, and Central Maine
Power Co. American Rivers and other conservation groups are currently
working on settlements with other electric power companies in the US.
20 Margaret Bowman, director of hydropower programs, says the
organization usually fights for several key changes: increased flows,
rerouting of water to the bypass reaches (away from turbines), construction
of fish passage for migration, installing screens and other protective
devices to keep fish from getting sucked into turbines, and protection of
land around reservoirs.
20 ``Utilities are recognizing that the conditions we seek are required
by law, and are necessary for managing multiple uses of rivers,'' she says.
``By working with us, they can come to agreements that are win/win, rather
than going through a contentious process.'' Bowman says American Rivers and
other intervenors are making a greater effort to get involved early, rather
than waiting to formally intervene at FERC. ``If we have input into the
selection of the consultants that utilities use, we are less likely to
challenge their results and request more studies,'' she says. ``We don't
want utility money going into studies--we'd rather they spend it on
mitigation.''
   Early involvement by stakeholders and agencies is one of the key demands
that the National Hydropower Assn (NHA), Washington, DC, made in a petition
to FERC. NHA, which includes utilities, independent power producers, and
industrial hydro operators as members, notes that most of the relicensing
applications submitted to FERC in 1991 have still not been approved, and
that tens of thousands of megawatts of hydro power must be relicensed over
the next two decades.

A new pact
   Conservation groups, including American Rivers, recently signed onto a
settlement covering six NiMo dams on the Black River in New York, after
completing negotiations that involved the New York Dept of Conservation,
the US Fish & Wildlife Service, the National Park Service, New York Rivers
United, and others. Negotiations did not just resolve differences between
NiMo and intervenors, but settled other disagreements--often wildlife
interests do not always agree with boaters, who do not always want the same
flows as fishermen, who disagree among themselves about the merits of
rushing water vs standing pools. However, by the end, a settlement was
hammered out that will allow NiMo to submit its final application to FERC
without facing challenges by any of the interest groups or agencies.
   As part of the settlement, NiMo will contribute $105,000 to a Black
River restoration fund that includes over $1-million from this and earlier
settlements involving NiMo and the Watertown (NY) municipal powerplant.
NiMo has not yet calculated the cost of the alterations, but it has
estimated that generation will be reduced by 6%, according to a spokesman.
Some releases will also force the utility to operate turbines when it would
prefer to hold water back for later peaks.
20 Nevertheless, the changes could boost tourism and create economic
development benefits for the service territory, NiMo spokesmen note.
Altogether, the company is relicensing 30 plants under nine licenses,
accounting for about 700 MW, or 10% of its generation. NiMo has 20 staff
members working on relicensing and expects to spend $113-million on the
effort through the 1990s.
20 NEES will lose about 12% of the energy output of its Deerfield project
because of environmental and recreational changes, says Kapala. Over the
40-yr license that NEES is seeking, this could cause a revenue loss of
$21-million (net present value) from the series of eight dams that produce
85 MW. Part of that loss results from releasing water on weekends--when the
power is less valuable--in order to accommodate whitewater sports. In
addition, the company will spend $6- to $7-million on fish passage and
other improvements.
20 ``We have to anticipate the changing market, where all generation will
compete,'' he says. ``You don't want to strand environmental costs that
cannot be recovered.'' NEES decided to go ahead with these changes after
negotiating formally for two years and informally for two or three years
before that.
20 The value of the project as a peaker, and as a zero-emissions resource
were ``part of the overall calculus,'' Kapala says. He adds, however,
``There were some things we were asked to do that were just not
economically feasible.'' For instance, some environmental groups complained
that fluctuations in water storage affect wildlife habitats around the
reservoirs.
   But, a big advantage of the hydro dams is the utility's ability to
dispatch them for peaking power, and NEES refused to give up that benefit.
He adds that those reservoirs were built by NEES, and were never natural
formations.

West Coast water
   PacifiCorp is also trying to balance the costs of relicensing against
the benefits of its 1100-MW hydro system, says Terry Flores, hydro policy
administrator. ``The irony is that the costs to operate and relicense hydro
are increasing at the same time that the market is providing lower-cost
alternatives,'' she says. ``We are taking a hard look at the economics of
each project, but the process is not conducive to keeping costs down.
Licenses can be loaded up with so many conditions.'' She says government
agencies often see the licensing process as an opportunity to make
improvements for which they lack capital.
20 Flores also criticizes the process itself, saying too much money is
spent on studies, instead of going to protect or improve resources.
PacifiCorp has already spent $14-million to relicense a 185-MW project in
Oregon, yet most major issues remain unresolved, she notes. The company
also spent five years trying to relicense a 1-MW plant, but was recently
informed that FERC has no jurisdiction since the river is not navigable.
20 The cost of some environmental upgrades may be considered prohibitive.
PG&E recently agreed to sell two hydro plants that produce about 5 MW to
the Calaveras County Water District, citing the $6-million cost for
recreation upgrades required by the US Forest Service a major reason for
the sale. The company may seek to sell others, says a spokesman, adding,
``In the deregulated market, we won't be able to pass these costs along to
ratepayers.''
   That is also a concern for Southern California Edison Co (SCE), which
has 1156 MW of hydroelectric capacity. In the new market, hydro would be
the cheapest resource, but mitigation expenses could threaten that
advantage, notes SCE Biologist Geoffrey Rabone. The utility, which operates
in one of the most polluted air basins in the country, also relies heavily
on its hydro resources to hold down emissions, adds Ron Schroeder, manager
of relicensing and compliance. Therefore, the 10% reduction in power output
that he expects from settlements could affect the company's compliance
efforts.
20 Schroeder says that SCE's dams are ``high-head, low-flow'' units, for
which the drop is much greater--over 1000 ft in most cases, and up to 2400
ft--compared to eastern dams that are typically less than 50 ft high, but
with greater flow. Thus, flow changes have a bigger impact on the units.
20 In one settlement, SCE has reached an agreement with state and federal
agencies to spend $2.5-million on hatchery projects and other improvements
to ease relicensing of a 36-MW, run-of-the-river plant. However, a group
called the Kern River Valley Community Consensus Council wants the utility
to completely decommission the plant, saying the proposed improvements
cannot alleviate the impact to habitats and recreation.
Hydro's competitive edge
   Aside from zero fuel costs and zero emissions, hydroelectric power is
being touted in the competitive market for its storage ability.
Hydro-Quebec (H-Q) stresses storage in its power marketing efforts through
HQ Energy Services, Montreal, Que, Canada, comparing its 30,000-MW hydro
system to ``a big battery.'' This could allow utilities to keep plants
running at their most efficient, peak capacities and bank the excess for
later use. Utilities could also take advantage of swings in the market by
drawing down power and selling it when prices rise.
20 Further, H-Q sees a gradual merging of deregulated energy markets, so
that utilities or end users might shift between gas and purchased power
depending on prices. With that approach, power producers might generate
power when natural gas is cheap and bank it, then draw it down later.
   Along with HQ Energy Services, H-Q is involved in Energy Alliance
Partnership (EAP), a power marketing joint venture that includes
Consolidated Natural Gas (CNG), Pittsburgh, Pa, and Quebec-based gas
distributor Noverco.
20 A 10-second response
Mt Hope Hydro, Rockaway, NJ, is also offering the quick-dispatch
advantage--which will be possible when its proposed 2000-MW pumped-storage
project in New Jersey is completed. By quick dispatch, the project
developers mean within 10 seconds.
20 In addition to its dispatch capabilities, the project will also offer
power companies in the Northeast the chance to increase the amount of
inexpensive electricity they can import from Canada, say company sources.
That is because the quick availability would prevent inrushes of power if
generating plants are lost on the receiving end--therefore, utilities can
load their transmission lines closer to capacity. Mt Hope is a joint
venture of Kvaerner Inc of Norway, ABB Generation Inc, Littleton, Colo, and
other partners.


Photograph(s):
Photograph: Funding for river restoration and changes in powerplant
operations are two of the negotiated items included in a recent
utility/conservation group settlement that promises to speed up hydro
relicensing procedures

Photograph: NEES will lose about 12% of the energy output of its Deerfield
project because of environmental and recreational changes. However, utility
executives believe the changes are worth the trade-off of keeping the hydro
plant operational

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "86"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

THE NAME GAME: A LEXICON FOR DISTRIBUTION

By:
L. Patrick Briody

   Here's a question for all the power company executives who are about to
enter the information technology age. What is the difference between
automatic meter reading (AMR) and automated meter reading? The answer is
not very obvious. One well-regarded utility industry researcher considers
the latter a subset of the former. In Chinese, automatic and automated are
the same word, Zi-Dong (self-move). Another researcher that publishes
in-depth reports at $875 a copy on the subject of AMR, defines it as
automatic meter reading. Has our focus on technology caused us to lose
focus on communications at a time when communicating with partners, power
brokers, industry colleagues has become paramount to surveying in a
competitive environment? If that is the case, here is an executive guide to
the next phase of distribution management--the technology that provides the
final, and vital, link between an electric power company and its customer.

What's the buzz?
   Since computers were first used in electric utilities, communication
between technical professionals and end users has been hampered by
imprecise terminology. Such miscommunication has largely been caused by the
different business perspectives of the two groups, the jargon of their
respective disciplines, and the over- and underlap of different
applications of information technology. Moreover, at times vendors have
clouded the issues to serve their own marketing purposes--a tactic referred
to as the ``muddy-the-waters marketing strategy.'' In addition,
interutility communications, which lacks the common organizational and
geographic context of an individual utility, are even more difficult.
Lastly, as the industry ``globalizes,'' translating already vaguely defined
terms seems destined to create a modern Tower of Babel.

A decoder ring
   According to Input, a research firm located in Mountain View, Calif,
the utility software and services market is growing at a 14% rate, second
only to telecommunications. Within utilities, the fastest growing
applications are clustered in the distribution operations side of the
house. They can be called collectively the ``distribution management
system.'' Because of the current focus on this area, defining these terms
precisely is more important than ever.
20 In an attempt to develop some measure of consistency in this area,
five leading utilities were examined to understand how they perceive
technology achieving their operational goals in distribution operations.
Their approaches to application integration were also probed. This
information was synthesized and a set of application definitions reflecting
a model of application relationships was developed.
20 The contributing utilities are Consolidated Edison Co of New York Inc
(Con Edison), Los Angeles Dept of Water & Power, Nevada Power Co (NPC),
Northern Indiana Public Service Co (Nipsco), and Southern California Edison
Co (SCE). They provided a cross-section of thought, from size, geographic,
and ownership viewpoints. All contributed unique perspectives. Con Edison
in particular is moving judiciously toward an automatic crew dispatch
application. SCE has implemented an innovative outage management system.

Keeping the lights on
   The phrase, distribution management system, is one of the more
misunderstood terms in the increasingly confused utility vocabulary. First,
its acronym, DMS, is so readily confused with the fading DSM (demand-side
management) as to degenerate many potentially constructive discussions into
bouts of arm waving as participants talk not over, not under, but around
one another's heads. Indeed, the two terms are intertwined in that both
imply some measure of control over the distribution network. However, DSM
implies influencing demand in order to balance it with supply, while DMS
simply implies assuring that the lights stay on. The term, DMS, taken
literally, clearly describes the overall responsibility of the distribution
operations organization. As a result, it is logically the umbrella-term for
distribution operations applications. The outage management line separating
power control and crew control also separates these application sets into
two different levels of capital intensity. Power control requires capital
investment in control facilities, while outage management, crew dispatch
and work management are basically software implementations.

Definitions
   The definitions in the box above represent a synthesis of the five
utilities participating in the technology definition effort. Despite their
many differences in organization and geography, it appears that all five
could talk to one another more precisely with this mini-lexicon. It divides
the distribution management system into its two aspects, power and service
(work). The power control center, which may co-reside with the service
control center, is distinct from a process standpoint. Its management of
the distribution network is through remote, real-time sensing and control.
In contrast, the service control center manages crews in the field.
20 The service side, or control center, uses a work management system for
both planned and unplanned (emergency) work. However, in emergencies, the
outage management system may provide many functions normally viewed as
``work management,'' for example: requesting work through isolating a
fault, designing by providing switching plans, or scheduling through direct
access to crew information within a crew dispatch function. The outage
management system is depicted as straddling the line between power and
service control centers, because its role is to bridge the real-time world
of power control to the slower world of work crews. Where outage management
feeds data on unplanned work into the work management system varies greatly
by each utility and its view of mopping up operations.

Whither GIS?
   Some will note the absence of AM/FM (automated mapping/facilities
management) and GIS (geographic information systems) from these
applications. This is quite deliberate. These terms, AM/FM/
GIS, have evolved from extensive efforts among utilities spanning a quarter
of a century to improve their capabilities to manage their distribution
facilities, the premise being that a single, geographically oriented data
base that includes connectivity of the electrical devices would be the
ultimate enabler of all distribution planning and operations.
20 As a data base, AM/FM/GIS is not an application per se. For this
reason, it is not included above. Generally, distribution operations folk
downgrade the importance of geographical accuracy in favor of electrical
connectivity. It is connectivity data that are fundamental to all
distribution operations applications. In the words of an NPC engineer: ``I
don't need to know where it is; they'll call me and tell me. I need to know
what it's connected to.'' Techniques for gleaning the necessary
connectivity data have improved markedly with Nipsco deriving connectivity
from scanned paper maps and generating one-line diagrams from those data.
SCE has derived connectivity from AutoCad (computer-aided distribution)
maps. The power applications group does not require a land data base. In
fact, their real-time performance requirements cannot be met by the typical
relational database management systems (RDMS)-based AM/FM/GIS data base. As
crew dispatch moves towards automatic, it uses geographic attributes in
locating and routing crews. Work management uses them in design and
scheduling. The good news is that after years of searching for the
AM/FM/GIS Holy Grail--conversion techniques--as well as graphics technology
have matured. At the same time, utility goals have become more realistic by
emphasizing electric accuracy instead of geography.
   Those utilities that lagged in AM/FM/GIS development were fortunate to
have avoided the dollar-tipped arrows of the pioneers. But the pioneering
days are over.
20 There are no blockbuster revelations hidden in lexicon. Old habits die
hard, particularly in the utility industry. But perhaps the definitions
presented here will stimulate discussion and a better understanding of the
distribution operations community--what it does, and what to call what it
does. If that happens, this most important aspect of a utility will be
better understood.

What's in a name: Defining critical distribution functions
   -- Distribution management system (DMS). The entire range of
applications necessary to carry out distribution operations. It consists of
power- and work-related activities, controlled by the appropriately named
control, power, and crew centers. There was a time when it was necessary
for control centers to reside in the specific service areas they handled,
and both the power and crew dispatch functions had to co-reside in the
interest of effective coordination. This is no longer the case, as is
exemplified by Southern California Edison Co's outage management system,
which capitalizes on modern communications and distributed database
technologies.
   -- Outage management. The processing and analysis of trouble incidents
on the network and support of the appropriate remedial actions, including
automatic switching plans, to enhance network availability and customer
service while minimizing restoration operation and maintenance expense.
   -- Crew dispatch. The communication and direction of work crew
activities in the field from a service control center to optimize
fleet/crew resources. (Crews may consist of only one person.) May encompass
vehicle tracking and/or routing functionality. Sometimes referred to as
field order dispatch, mobile dispatch, or mobility. Computer-aided dispatch
will inevitably be confused with computer-aided design because of the
common acronym--CAD--but the term is already set in place and cannot be
dislodged. Automatic dispatch differs from CAD in that it assumes no
dispatcher intervention in the process.
   -- Scada. Substation control and data acquisition. There is a move to
change supervisory to substation in the acronym because Scada provides
remote monitoring and real-time control of distribution substations through
the use of remote terminal units (RTUs), or occasionally, programmable
logic controllers (PLCs).
   -- Substation automation. Self-contained data acquisition and control
within one (or multiple) substation(s).
   -- Distribution automation. Remote monitoring and real-time control of
feeders, including sectionalizing devices, auto-transformers, reclosers,
capacitors, regulators and switches located in the distribution circuit.
The distribution circuit starts with the distribution feeder outside the
substation fence and extends into the ``smart building.'' Automatic meter
reading, load control, and smart building are subsets.
   -- Meter reading. The recording of power consumed by the customer to
enable billing, and, at times, measurement of load for engineering
purposes. Today there are two types of meter reading--both confusingly
referred to as AMR--augmented and automatic. Augmented uses meter readers
with hand-held computers; automatic is accomplished without meter readers
through a variety of communications technologies. AMR should be used only
to signify automatic. Hand-held methods are referred to as hand-held, not
AMR.
   -- Load control. Direct control of load at the customer's premise,
usually to shut down power-intensive appliances, machinery, and equipment.
Load control is a subset of the broader term, load management, a category
of demand-side management actions that can be accomplished with a variety
of computer and non-computer-related methods, for example, rate incentives.
Load control restricts its meaning to the computer-related subset only.
   -- Smart building. The activation of electrical devices within the
customer's premise to enable services beyond the simple distribution of
power, for example, alarming. The term ``smart home'' means strictly
residential customers, while smart building encompasses all customers.
   -- Work management. The process of 1) requesting work, 2) design, 3)
scheduling, 4) reporting, and 5) closing requests for work on the
distribution network. Initiators may be requests for construction
(customer-driven), requests for systems maintenance/improvements (customer,
field, or engineering-driven), or an unplanned incident--for example, an
outage. The first two, both planned, include all five elements of the
process. The latter--unplanned-- includes only reporting and closing.


Photograph(s):
Photograph: Mission critical control: Southern California Edison control
center exploits modern communications and distrtibution database
technologies

Photograph: Time bridge: The outage management system bridges the real-time
world of power control to the world of work crews

About the Author(s):

Patrick Briody is a principal with Briody Associates, a utility information
systems consulting firm based in Newtown, Conn.


Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "87"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

CAN RETAILING WORK?

By:
Karl Stahlkopf

   With all the recent coverage the trade and consumer press have given the
electric power deregulation debate, one critical question remains: Is
retail wheeling feasible?
   As deregulation sweeps the US electric power industry, individual power
providers are coming to grips with the challenges of increased competition
at both the wholesale and retail levels. And electric power executives are
realizing that evaluation of these market sectors cannot be conducted in
isolation from each other. In fact, the question of whether retail wheeling
is feasible depends on changes in technologies and markets for bulk power
and vice versa.
20 The reasons are straightforward, and to some extent, resemble the
chicken and egg dilemma: Which should come first, regulatory reform of the
wholesale market to stimulate a retail electricity price drop, or reform of
the retail market to stimulate a drop in wholesale electricity prices. The
goal of retail wheeling--to provide customers with better service at lower
prices--cannot be fulfilled without comparable market reform to make
low-cost wholesale electricity more widely available through bulk-power
transactions. Conversely, retail wheeling--or some alternative approach to
retail deregulation, such as regional Power Pools--will be needed to
translate cost savings in the bulk power market into lower prices for
customers.

A complex machine
   But the feasibility question goes beyond just politics and regulation.
From a technological point of view, the two market segments are even more
intimately related, since they represent activity in different portions of
a single, huge physical network for electricity. So tightly connected is
this network--sometimes called the most complex physical machine ever
created--that power generators separated by thousands of miles must rotate
at exactly the same speed and at a carefully specified angle of separation.
Without this exquisite synchronism, power could not be transferred from one
part of the country to another in hopes of reducing overall costs.
   The question of whether retail wheeling is feasible must, therefore, be
answered in terms of what opportunities are available for improving power
delivery and market mechanisms all the way from the powerplant to the home
or workplace. In fact, an unprecedented number of such opportunities are
emerging from a technological revolution now taking place in power
delivery, as power electronics devices are being used to exert more precise
control over utility transmission and distribution systems. In addition,
recent research on the issues of cost desegregation and market management
has revealed new ways to increase the economic efficiency of the electric
power industry (see box, below).

The once, and future, grid
   One of the most important competitive challenges now facing utilities is
how to comply with the latest notice of proposed rulemaking (NOPR) from the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), commonly known as the
Mega-NOPR. Although the terms of the proposed rule have not yet been
finalized, it essentially mandates open access to transmission networks and
sets out minimum conditions of service that utilities must offer.
20 Open access is expected to increase both the number and complexity of
bulk power transactions on the nation's transmission grid. Already, some
40% of the electricity generated in the US is sold by the producing utility
on the wholesale power market, and some bottlenecks have begun to appear
along some transmission corridors. Construction of new transmission lines
to ease these bottlenecks, however, has become more difficult. Therefore, a
major priority for utilities is to exert better control over their bulk
power systems, using advanced technology to maximize the use of limited
transmission assets.
20 Distribution's future
Moving to the distribution side of power delivery, customers are
increasingly concerned about the vulnerability of their sensitive
electronic equipment to power disturbances. The total cost to customers of
such disturbances in increasingly significant--amounting to about $3- to
$5-billion per year in the US alone. Many customers now install their own
uninterruptible power supplies to provide ride-through capability, but
these battery-dependent devices are expensive, energy-inefficient, and
often require maintenance beyond an owner's immediate resources. Since
about 90% of outages affecting customers originate on the distribution
system, there is a pressing need to provide utilities with new ways to
offer premium quality power to customers with sensitive loads.

A question of cost
   A major concern of FERC in creating open access is how to set tariffs
for transmission services under open access. But before the industry can
set prices, it must first understand costs. One solution is the development
of a common technical basis that facilitates open discussion on costs and
tariffs. To that end, the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), Palo
Alto, Calif, has published a Transmission Services Costing Framework, a
tool that utilities can use to better understand their own transmission
costs.
20 Another requirement of the Mega-NOPR is that tariffs for transmission
services apply equally to the owner of a transmission system and to third
parties seeking access to the system. The level of such tariffs are still
being aggressively debated by utilities that want to recover stranded
investment costs and third-party users that want to provide low-cost power.
According to the Mega-NOPR, these tariffs and the supporting information
are to be posted electronically so that all players have access to them in
real time.

The real-time challenge
   To make retail wheeling work, the industry needs to devise retail rate
structures that more realistically match retail price to the cost of
supplying power--while still giving customers greater choice and providing
load relief during critical demand periods.
   Studies at Niagara Mohawk Power Corp, for example, found that load
curtailments could be achieved much more cost-effectively through a
real-time pricing (RTP) mechanism than they could be through an
interruptible service program. The cost to customers for a load voluntarily
foregone in response to appropriate price signals was only 10% of the cost
of an interrupted load, because customers had more flexibility in
configuring their own electricity usage.
20 The largest controlled RTP experiment to date is being conducted at
Georgia Power Co. So far, this demonstration program has shown not only an
ability to affect the load patterns of existing customers, but also an
ability to attract new customers. During the first 15 months of the
experiment, the new service option brought approximately $500-million of
new investment into Georgia--including the Sara Lee Knit Products plant.
Customers using the RTP program have seen their average electricity cost
per kilowatt-hour decrease by about 5%, while their kilowatt-hour usage
increased by more than 10%.

In a nutshell: Yes, it's feasible
   So, to answer one of the most frequently asked questions: If advanced
technologies are used to improve both the physical control of electrical
transmission and distribution systems--and the management of both wholesale
and retail markets--retail wheeling is indeed feasible. Now the remaining
question is: Feasible for whom? Answer: Most likely, the proactive power
providers that are taking advantage of the revolutionary technologies that
are transforming the industry.

EPRI's competitive push
   If technology advances are pushing the industry closer to retail
wheeling, then the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), Palo Alto,
Calif, is pushing technology. Witness some of the organization's technology
responses to the competitive market:
   -- Facts (flexible ac transmission system). A pioneering concept of a
high-tech system that uses power electronics to control power flow on bulk
power networks. Specifically, this transmission system will enable
utilities to direct more power along specific corridors, enhancing overall
system stability by reacting almost instantaneously to transient
disturbances, and allowing transmission lines to be loaded closer to
thermal limits.
   Facts has a rich history. The first generation of Facts devices--such as
the thyristor-controlled series capacitor (TCSC)--could increase power flow
on specific lines, but only by switching a large capacitor bank. This year,
the second generation Facts device debuts--the static condenser (Statcon),
which can provide voltage support without the need for large external
circuit elements. The third generation, such as the unified power flow
controller (UPFC), expected to enter utility service by 1997, will be able
to control all three critical variables of power flow simultaneously:
reducing impedance, shifting power angle, and increasing voltage support.
   -- Custom power research. This program refers to the use of power
electronics controllers on utility distribution systems to prevent power
interruptions and other disturbances that affect customers directly. This
solution is often a more cost-effective, energy-efficient way to protect
sensitive loads than having a customer install an uninterruptible power
system. The inherent advantage of these controllers is their ability to
respond almost instantaneously to developing problems--compared, for
example, to the six cycles often required by mechanical reclosers.
20 Several demonstrations of custom power controllers are now under way.
One currently in use is the solid-state transfer switch, which provides
uninterrupted power to a customer by switching a load from a faulted feeder
to an independent, unfaulted feeder within a quarter cycle. Another
controller being demonstrated is the dynamic voltage restorer (DVR), a
solid-state controller that protects a critical load from power-line
disturbances--reacting to momentary voltage sags and swells by exchanging
reactive power with a distribution line.
20 A third controller system being demonstrated involves the distribution
static condenser (D-Statcon), which protects the distribution system from
the effects of a ``polluting'' electrical load by continuously adjusting
the level of line compensation for varying load conditions.
   -- Transmission services costing framework. The framework was actually
developed before the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) announced
its proposed rule making on transmission access, and was intended to be a
broadly applicable tool that utilities could use to better understand their
own transmission costs. Applying the framework involves a straightforward,
three-step process: definition of transmission services in terms of their
attributes; identification of service components and associated costs; and
actual calculation of costs. By following these steps in detail, a utility
can not only develop a rational basis for submitting tariff proposals to
FERC, but also determine how best to control transmission costs on a
particular system.
   -- Transmission services information network (TSIN). On Oct 13, 1995,
EPRI submitted a report to FERC recommending how a nationwide TSIN can be
implemented to facilitate such an information exchange. This report was
prepared in close coordination with the North American Electric Reliability
Council, Princeton, NJ, which helped determine what data should be made
available on TSIN. The first phase of the implementation of TSIN is
expected by June 1996 and will involve use of the public Internet. A second
phase, involving access through private networks, will provide a higher
level of functionality.


Illustration(s):
Illustration: Three easy pieces: The transmission services costing
framework provides a three-step process for utilities to understand
transmission costs on their particular system


Photograph(s):
Photograph: ``The short answer--yes, retail wheeling is feasible'' Karl
Stahlkopf

Photograph: TCSC at Bonneville Power's Slatt substation represents the
first generation of Facts--a device that can control power flow on an
individual transmission line

About the Author(s):

Karl Stahlkopf is vice president, Power Delivery Group, EPRI.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "88"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

NOPR PRICING DEFINED

By:
The editors

   A new study--authored by Richard H. Hilt, a partner in Bright Line
Energy Inc, Palo Alto, Calif, and published by UDI/McGraw-Hill, Washington,
DC--can help utility executives see the future more clearly. Titled,
``Winning in the Competitive Wholesale Power Markets: How the Top Electric
Utilities Fare Under New FERC Rules,'' the study analyzes the possible
impact of Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) final rules at the
national and regional levels, as well as on individual investor-owned
utilities.
20 Analysis is based on data from the utilities' 1994 Form 1 filings to
FERC, which fix the size of today's utility wholesale market at $16-billion
annually--or 25% of the investor-owned utility total. Other estimates place
the future size of the wholesale market--after retail wheeling becomes a
reality--at about $200-billion a year.
20 The study also analyzes the effect of the final rules on open-access
tariff calculations for the nation as a whole, and for specific utilities.
For any utility, the tariff can be calculated if one knows the value of its
existing transmission system, the peak demand on that system, and the
generic cost of capital. For 1994, the study calculates that the national
average tariff for transmission service between designated points was about
$21/MW/yr.
   ``Winning in the Competitive Wholesale Power Markets: How the Top
Electric Utilities Fare Under New FERC Rules'' is available from
UDI/McGraw-Hill for $395, or with utility data base for $695. For more
information, call 1-800-486-3660 or fax 202-942-8789.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "89"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

CONGRESS TO DOE: TAKE THE WASTE
Profiles of current matters of regulatory interest and note as reported in
McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week,
Inside NRC, and Inside FERC newsletters

   Lost in the current budget debate is legislation (HR 1020) which
reaffirms the federal government's obligation to receive and store spent
fuel from nuclear powerplants. Specifically, the bill would require the
Dept of Energy (DOE) to take the following steps:
   -- Construct and operate a central interim storage facility for spent
nuclear fuel by 1998. The two-phase facility would operate for 20 years
beginning in 1998 with a capacity of 10,000 metric tons of uranium. Phase
II would increase the facility's capacity to 40,000 metric tons under a
100-yr license.
   -- Construct and operate a permanent repository. DOE must apply to the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) by 2001 for authorization to build a
repository which must begin operating by 2010. If site characterization
proves the Yucca Mountain site cannot meet NRC criteria, the program will
be terminated.
   -- Develop a transportation system to move the spent fuel from nuclear
powerplants to the interim and permanent storage facilities beginning in
1998. Included in this are fuel acceptance schedules and transportation
routes and emergency planning assistance to affected states, localities,
and Indian tribes.
   -- Begin moving spent nuclear fuel by Jan 31, 1998, as required by the
Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982.
   The House Rules Committee began reviewing the legislation after
Thanksgiving. It has already been approved by the House Commerce
Committee.
   HR 1020 would replace the current nuclear-waste funding system with a
user fee to ensure that consumers pay only what DOE spends on the civilian
waste-management system. In a letter to House Speaker Newt Gingrich,
members sponsoring the bill explain that the new user fee takes responsible
steps to ensure that the ratepayers are protected from federal
misappropriation of their contributions.
   To enable DOE to meet its 1998 obligation, the legislation outlines
responsibilities under the National Environmental Policy Act for each major
activity to develop the integrated system. For example, instead of DOE and
NRC preparing separate environmental impact statements (EIS) for the
interim facility, only the NRC would file an EIS but with DOE input. DOE
would be responsible for preparing an EIS on the construction and
transportation facilities from existing rail lines to an interim storage
facility and in conjunction with a license application for a repository.
   A hearing on a similar bill developed in the Senate (S 1271), which also
calls for DOE to build and operate an interim storage facility for spent
nuclear fuel, has yet to be scheduled for review by the Senate Energy
Committee.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "90"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

PARK SERVICE HUNTS FOR POWER SAVINGS
Profiles of current matters of regulatory interest and note as reported in
McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week,
Inside NRC, and Inside FERC newsletters

   The National Park Service is looking to electric utilities for ideas on
managing its energy use. While most people think of the Park Service as
land managers, it operates 368 facilities in 49 states, plus territories
and commonwealths. The facilities provide services for 300-million visitors
annually and range from visitors' centers at remote national parks and
battlefields to urban memorials like the St. Louis (Mo) arch, to historic
sites , such as Ford's Theatre in Washington, DC.
   Some facilities, such as the Independence Center in Philadelphia, Pa,
consume more power than others. According to Mike Eisenberg, an engineer in
the agency's Denver (Colo) Service Center, the Park Service plans to spend
$100-million over the next 10 years renovating and installing efficient
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) equipment. One project
already under way is the new HVAC system at the White House.
   Eisenberg says the Park Service is a perfect match for electric
utilities wishing to ``try out new ideas,'' because it offers a diversity
of facilities and a desire to explore new technologies.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "91"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

GAS INDUSTRY SEES OPPORTUNITY IN ELECTRIC'S REVAMP
Profiles of current matters of regulatory interest and note as reported in
McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week,
Inside NRC, and Inside FERC newsletters

   The natural gas industry faces many structural, financial, and
regulatory issues because of the impending electric power industry
restructuring, but will also benefit from new opportunities for growth,
according to a study released recently by the American Gas Assn (AGA). The
report, ``Electric Industry Restructuring and its Implications for the
Natural Gas Industry,'' points to power generation, new technologies in the
commercial and industrial sectors, natural-gas vehicles, and gas cooling as
markets with growth potential.
   The electric power industry is unlikely to adversely affect natural-gas
markets in the near future, because, explains AGA President Michael Baly,
``of the renewed strength of gas in those markets, the large existing
investment in natural-gas equipment and appliances, and the limits on
electricity price decreases imposed by transition costs.''
The report suggests that gas demand for power generation will grow
substantially between now and 2010, but for the next several years will
remain fairly flat at about 3-trillion ft3/yr.
   As federal and state regulatory commissions proceed with restructuring,
it will in the long term cause fundamental changes for some gas companies.
   But the opportunities created by a more competitive marketplace can
provide the gas industry with a growing and healthy future, Baly says.
   Partnerships and strategic alliances between energy companies of all
types provide natural gas utilities with another avenue to satisfy customer
needs. Combination electric and gas utilities have provided retail service
and will no doubt continue to do so, just as some companies will specialize
in either gas or electric service. But, Baly concludes, ``there is no
question that companies that market both natural gas and electricity as
commodities to energy customers nationwide could play an important role in
a new era of energy buying and selling.''

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "92"></A>Copyright
ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet
January 1996   Vol. 210, No. 

CARE TO COMMENT ON HYDRO RELICENSING?
Profiles of current matters of regulatory interest and note as reported in
McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week,
Inside NRC, and Inside FERC newsletters

By:
Elizabeth A. Bretz

   The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) issued a notice of
filing in response to a National Hydropower Assn (NHA) petition proposing
hydropower relicensing reform. This officially opens the comment period on
the proposed reforms.
   NHA's proposal addresses specific areas in the current process that it
sees as impeding the overall effectiveness of project relicensing. For
example, in 1991, over 160 license applications were submitted to FERC for
approval. However, as a result of the regulatory quagmire within the
existing relicensing process, the majority of those licenses have yet to be
renewed. As a result, licensees, state and federal resource agencies, and
conservation groups have found common ground--equal frustration with the
system.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B34-14</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B002-301</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey86.html 205.156.212.5 19970114230809 text/html 17168
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:06:14 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:24 GMT
Content-length: 16981
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ey86.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD LIT. REPORTER via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>GEORGIA APP. CT. REVERSES&nbsp;DEFENSE VERDICT FOR&nbsp;GEORGIA POWER, OGLETHORP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(596 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>VIRGINIA SUP. CT. RULING&nbsp;AWAITED IN EMF PROPERTY&nbsp;DEVALUATION LAWSUIT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(397 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>TORT REFORM AND UTILITIES&nbsp;GROUPS SUBMIT AMICUS&nbsp;BRIEFS FOR SDG&E</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(834 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>9TH CIR. AFFIRMS NOAA'S&nbsp;CHOICE OF DOPPLER RADAR&nbsp;TOWER SITE IN CALIFORNIA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(575 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD LIT. REPORTER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

GEORGIA APP. CT. REVERSES
DEFENSE VERDICT FOR
GEORGIA POWER, OGLETHORP

     Holding that the trial court impermissibly allowed defense
witnesses to enter hearsay testimony regarding the opinions of
unidentified, non-testifying witnesses, the Georgia Court of
Appeals on Nov. 30 unanimously reversed a defense verdict in an
EMF personal injury suit against Georgia Power Co. and Oglethorp
Power Co.  Jordan v. Georgia Power Co. et al., No. A95A1585
(GA Ct. App.).

     The appeals court, however, affirmed the grant of summary
judgment to the defendants on plaintiff Larry and Nancy Jordan's
trespass claim, and sustained Douglas County Superior Court Judge
David T. Emerson's directed verdict on the Jordans' nuisance and
property damage claims.

     Although the Jordans offered expert testimony from an
electrical engineer who said EMF radiation is tangible because it
obeys physical laws and can be measured, the appeals court said
it must affirm the trial court because of a lack of evidence that
EMFs can constitute a physical trespass.  "Although the Jordans'
trespass action could present a jury question, we conclude that
for policy reasons the trial court's grant of summary judgment
was proper," the panel said.  "The scientific evidence regarding
whether EMFs cause harm of any kind is inconclusive; the invasive
quality of these electric fields cannot presently constitute a
trespass."

     The appeals court cautioned that its ruling was not intended
to "close the door on the possibility that science may advance to
a point at which damage from EMFs is legally cognizable and a
trespass action may lie."

     The grounds for reversing the verdict, the appeals court
said, was the testimony by defense experts Drs. Richard Bland and
Saul Rosenberg that the scientific-medical community did not
consider magnetic fields from power lines a cause of lymphomas in
general, or of non-Hodgkins lymphoma (as suffered by Nancy
Jordan), in particular.  The panel said such testimony should
have been confined to each doctor's personal belief that Mrs.
Jordan's disease was not caused by magnetic fields from power
lines.

     "Though it was proper for the court to allow the doctors'
testimony regarding their own opinions of the cause of Mrs.
Jordan's illness, the court committed reversible error in
admitting this 'consensus' testimony," the panel said in an
opinion by Presiding Judge Marion T. Pope.  "Neither Dr. Bland
nor Dr. Rosenberg clearly identified the 'community' of experts
for which he was speaking, nor did either doctor precisely
explain the method by which he ascertained the 'consensus.'"

     Citing the Georgia Court of Appeals' 1994 ruling in In the
Interest of A.S.M., the opinion said "an expert may give an
opinion upon the facts testified to by other witnesses, but not
upon their opinions.  A witness' opinion must be his own and he
cannot act as a mere conduit for the opinions of others."

     The appeals court also considered the Jordans' claim that 27
of the 36 persons in their jury pool should have been
disqualified because they belong to Greystone Power Co.
cooperative, which receives all of its power from Oglethorp.  The
trial court should disqualify Greystone members, the appeals
court said, if the Jordans submit evidence that Greystone bylaws
vest in its members the right to share surplus revenues.

     The plaintiffs are represented by Robert E. Shields of
Doffermyre, Shields, Canfield & Knowles in Atlanta; Bruce
DeBoskey and Steven Kelly of Silver & DeBoskey in Denver; and
Gerald P. Word of Word & Flinn in Carrollton, GA.

     Robert L. Pennington and Scott A. Farrow of Troutman Sanders
represent Georgia Power.  James A. Orr and Elizabeth Boswell of
Sutherland, Asbill & Brennan represent Oglethorp Power.  All are
located in Atlanta.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD LIT. REPORTER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

VIRGINIA SUP. CT. RULING
AWAITED IN EMF PROPERTY
DEVALUATION LAWSUIT

     The Virginia Supreme Court is expected to decide this month
whether a trial judge erred in allowing jury commissioners in a
condemnation case to consider testimony about the effect of
electromagnetic fields on the value of property.  Virginia
Electric and Power Co. v. Dolzer, No. 950622 (VA Sup. Ct.).

     During oral arguments in November, Virginia Electric and
Power Company (VEPCO) contended that Louisa County, VA, Circuit
Court Judge F. Ward Harkrader, Jr. committed numerous errors in
the handling of the utility's right-of-way suit against defendant
property owners John F. and Janet E. Dolzer.

     VEPCO's expert placed the total damage from a 230,000-volt
transmission line in a 150-foot wide easement across the Dolzers'
140-acre farm in Louisa County at $14,530, including the 7.06-
acre easement and the effect of the line on the rest of the
property.  The Dolzers' experts placed the damage at more than
$900,000, and the jury commissioners awarded them $966,915.

     On appeal, VEPCO contended that the trial court erred in
allowing the commissioners to speculate about "the fear of the
unknown" from EMFs.  The utility argued that the court erred in
refusing to allow it to amend its condemnation petition to make
it clear that a railroad spur would be permitted across the
easement and to reduce its right of access to the easement.
VEPCO also contended that the court erred in admitting testimony
about a $1.85 million offer for the tract before VEPCO sought the
easement.

     The property owners responded that the testimony about EMFs
came in the context of their effect on the value of other pieces
of property that the experts used as comparable sales in
determining the reduction of the value of the property by the
easement.  With that foundation, no speculation was involved, the
owners contended.

     They also argued that VEPCO failed to appreciate the unique
nature of the property, which had a knoll that separated an
industrial site from a residential estate that dated to 1785.
The easement barred a railroad spur to the property, and the
visibility of the power lines from the residential portion of the
property ruined it for use as a country estate, the Dolzers said.

     VEPCO is represented by John E. Holleran of Hunton &
Williams in Richmond, VA.  Charles F. Purcell and Craig B. Davis
of Purcell & Purcell in Louisa, VA, represent the Dolzers.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD LIT. REPORTER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

TORT REFORM AND UTILITIES
GROUPS SUBMIT AMICUS
BRIEFS FOR SDG&E

     In separate amicus briefs submitted Oct. 2, the Association
for California Tort Reform (ACTR) and the California Municipal
Utilities Association (CMUA) weighed in on the side of San Diego
Gas & Electric Co. in the utility's quest to have the California
Supreme Court affirm the California Public Utility Commission's
full authority over all electromagnetic field-related issues.
San Diego Gas & Electric Co. v. Superior Court of the State of
California for the County of Orange, Covalt et al., real parties
in interest, No. S045854 (CA Sup. Ct.); see Electromagnetic Field
LR, December, 1995.

     In their briefs, ACTR suggested that EMF fear cases be
judged under the "more likely than not" damage test outlined in
Potter v. Firestone (see Electromagnetic Field LR, February,
1994), and CMUA insisted the PUC must maintain full jurisdiction
over EMF issues for the sake of having a uniform set of
regulations free from court-to-court interpretation.

     "It is against common sense and sound public policy to
permit property owners to recover compensation for unreasonable
public fears about EMFs while requiring those who believe they
have been injured by EMFs to show their fear is reasonable," ACTR
said in suggesting the "more likely than not" test as a means of
sorting reasonable and unreasonable fears.

     "When...two kinds of interests are allegedly injured by the
wrongful acts of another " in this case a public utility that
modified its power lines to increase service to its consumers and
with it, also increase EMFs " we are told individuals must meet a
more stringent test to obtain compensation to their persons than
to their property," ACTR said.  "This proposition stands the law
on its head; it distinguishes property rights and personal rights
contrary to the steady progression of the law since the founding
of the Republic and this state.  If individuals  who believe they
have been harmed by exposure to EMFs must prove that it is 'more
likely than not' that they will suffer the feared health
consequences of that exposure in the near future " and plaintiffs
and their amici do not disagree with that evidentiary threshold "
how can one possibly justify a lesser standard for injury to
one's property?"

     ACTR said "one can do no better" in deciding what is a
rational or legitimate fear deserving of recognition in the
assessment of compensable property diminution than Potter's
requirement that such fear "stems from a knowledge, corroborated
by reliable medical and scientific opinion, that it is more
likely than not that the feared cancer will develop in the future
due to toxic exposure."

     CMUA's brief refutes the Covalt's assertion that the PUC had
made no effort to regulate EMFs prior to SDG&E's upgrade of the
power line in question, holding that, as of 1989, the PUC had a
"definite policy with respect to EMF," of conducting research and
not undertaking mitigation measures for fear that such actions
could worsen the matter (PUC Health Effects Report, Executive
Summary, B-4, 3 Exh. p. 613).  "[G]iven the PUC's position, there
was no reasonable likelihood that mitigation costs would have
been recoverable in utility rates," CMUA noted.  "[T]he
contention that the PUC had not taken a position on EMF
mitigation as of the upgrade at issue is simply not credible.
Penalizing a utility for failing to take mitigation measures " as
would be the case were the lawsuit at issue here permitted to
proceed " would clearly and directly interfere with the stated
position of the PUC."

     The Covalt's have failed to sustain a claim for inverse
condemnation, CMUA added, because they have not shown they were
"singled out" or have suffered a "special and peculiar" impact as
a result of the placement of the SDG&E line's placement or
upgrade.  "Transmission lines, like highways or railroads,
traverse the state and are beneficial," according to the
consortium of 29 publicly-owned utilities.  "The law is clear
that ordinary detriments suffered by all landowners as a result
of proximity to railroads or highways is not sufficient to
sustain a claim in inverse condemnation.  There is no reason to
adopt a different rule for power lines."

     The CMUA concluded, "if this court, as CMUA urges, affirms
Covalt, all utilities would recognize that a failure to follow
the PUC standards would subject them to endless and costly
litigation.  For all these reasons, it is obvious that the EMF
standards promulgated by the PUC are being and will be followed
by all utilities in California, whether they be investor-owned or
consumer-owned."

     ACTR is represented by Fred Hiestand in Sacramento, CA.  The
CMUA is represented by Daniel Davidson and Scott Strauss of
Spiegel & McDiarmid in Washington, DC and David S. Kaplan of
DeCuir & Somach in Sacramento.

     SDG&E is represented by Frank Rothrock and Gary Weisberg of
Palmieri, Tyler, Wiener, Wilhelm & Waldron in Irvine, CA; Duncan
Barr and Joel Lamp of O'Connor, Cohn, Dillon & Barr in San
Francisco; and William Young of Smith Helms Mulliss & Moore in
Greensboro, NC.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD LIT. REPORTER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

9TH CIR. AFFIRMS NOAA'S
CHOICE OF DOPPLER RADAR
TOWER SITE IN CALIFORNIA

     The Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on Dec. 29 said the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) did not
act "arbitrarily and capriciously" in deciding to locate a
California doppler radar weather station without first preparing
a site-specific environmental impact statement (EIS) on the
facility or a study of its potential radio frequency radiation
(RFR) emissions.  Environmental Coalition of Ojai et al. v. Brown
et al., No. 94-56164 (9th Cir.)

     The ruling affirmed a U.S. District Court's refusal to issue
a temporary restraining order requested in a suit by the
Environmental Coalition of Ojai claiming that the government
failed to comply with the National Environmental Policy Act of
1969 (NEPA) when it decided to go ahead with the Sulphur Mountain
station project in 1993 based on several 1980s government
studies.

     The Ninth Circuit affirmed the earlier ruling by Judge Terry
J. Hatter of the U.S. District Court for the Central District of
California, holding that NOAA complied with the NEPA.  In
addition, the district court said residents received appropriate
notice of the project, by virtue of a 1984 programmatic
environmental impact statement, a 1986 preliminary site survey, a
1987 in-depth site survey, and a 1989 finding of no significant
impact (FONSI).  The government review process, it noted, also
included two site specific environmental assessments (EAs), and a
Draft Supplemental Environmental Assessment (SEA) issued by the
U.S. government's Joint System Program Office.

     The Ojai, California facility, part of NOAA's Next
Generation Weather Radar Program (NEXRAD), is one of 55 such
stations across the nation and was completed and placed in
operation during the appeal process.  NEXRAD is part of the
agency's overall effort to update weather forecasting abilities
under the Weather Service Modernization Act.

     Actor Larry Hagman, who lives near the station, joined the
Coalition in its argument that the EIS was a prerequisite for the
station's construction.  The coalition said such a study would
have included review of multiple source RFR levels in the area,
including those from an neighboring FM radio tower.

     "The government did consider the question of 'additive RFR'
from NEXRAD and other possible sources in its SEA," the Ninth
Circuit ruled, in an opinion by Third Circuit Judge Ruggero J.
Aldisert, sitting by designation.  "The SEA concluded that
cumulative RFR levels were extremely unlikely to exceed
'ultraconservative' health standards.  The Government explained
that 'the emissions from the WSR-88D radar will not materially
add to the emissions present in those areas from other sources'."

     The appeals court said, "the Government's decision, based on
its site-specific [EAs], not to prepare a site-specific EIS was
not arbitrary and capricious.  NEPA does not require an agency to
prepare site-specific environmental impact studies for each
individual location....  The purpose of the environmental
assessment is to provide sufficient evidence and analysis for
determining whether to prepare an environmental impact statement
of a finding of no significant impact."

     Concluding, the panel said, "in its 1986 and 1987 site-
specific EAs, the Government considered the environmental impact
of the NEXRAD installation on Sulphur Mountain.  Having
determined that the Sulphur Mountain NEXRAD installation would
have no significant local impact, the government reasonably
issued a FONSI in 1989 instead of preparing a site-specific EIS."

     Lead defendant Secretary of the Department of Commerce,
Ronald H. Brown is represented by Assistant U.S. Attorneys
Patrick J. Walsh and Donna J. Everett of Los Angeles.  The
Coalition is represented by Oxnard, CA attorney Dale G. Givner.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B34-15</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B003-23</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey59.html 205.156.212.5 19970114230932 text/html 70636
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:07:07 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:07 GMT
Content-length: 70449
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ey59.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>OUTLOOK</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>Energy Conservation&nbsp;on the Internet</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(684 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>1995 Is Warmest&nbsp;Year on Record</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(552 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>Analyzing Repeal&nbsp;of Speed Limit</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(247 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>GOVERNMENT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>Free Marketing for&nbsp;Efficient Equipment</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(258 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>Panel Urges More&nbsp;Vehicle Efficiency</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(339 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>STATE INITIATIVES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>University to Slash&nbsp;Energy Consumption</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(190 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>Portland Saves&nbsp;When Wind Blows</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(239 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INTERNATIONAL</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>Why Russian Buildings&nbsp;Use More Energy</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(222 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>Honeywell Upgrades&nbsp;District Heating</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(550 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>NedWind to Sell 110&nbsp;Wind Machines</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(251 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ENERGY MANAGEMENT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>Onsite Announces $5&nbsp;Million Contract</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(257 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>Energy Services&nbsp;Company Formed</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(145 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INDUSTRIAL CONSERVATION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>Sensors Used in&nbsp;BOF Steelmaking</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(600 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>Kaiser Saves with&nbsp;Fuel from Tires</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(385 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>COMMERCIAL CONSERVATION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><LI>CFC Substitute Forane&nbsp;408A Superior to R-502</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(211 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RESIDENTIAL CONSERVATION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>Improving Insulation&nbsp;of Water Heaters</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(121 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><LI>Japanese Condos&nbsp;Cut Energy Bills</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(157 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><LI>U.S., Canada Report&nbsp;Data from 1993</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(662 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ALTERNATIVE ENERGY</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#19"><A HREF = "#19"><LI>Geothermal Well&nbsp;Comes in Hot</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(142 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><A HREF = "#20"><LI>Sanyo Expects Solar&nbsp;Business to Grow</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(91 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><A HREF = "#21"><LI>Ford's Concept Car&nbsp;Pushes Limits</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(261 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><A HREF = "#22"><LI>California May&nbsp;Scuttle EV Quotas</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(403 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>UTILITIES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#23"><A HREF = "#23"><LI>TVA's IRP Stresses&nbsp;Energy Conservation</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(145 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><A HREF = "#24"><LI>Forecasting Cuts&nbsp;Costs by 5%</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(276 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEW TECHNOLOGY</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#25"><A HREF = "#25"><LI>Inverter Improves&nbsp;Motor Efficiency</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(620 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><A HREF = "#26"><LI>Desulfurization Process&nbsp;Could Boost Oil Supply</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(312 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><A HREF = "#27"><LI>More Orders for&nbsp;New Compressor</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(241 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INDUSTRY NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#28"><A HREF = "#28"><LI>Big Investment in&nbsp;Halogen Bulb Plant</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(177 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RESOURCES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#29"><A HREF = "#29"><LI>Stay Up-to-date with&nbsp;Free Energy Catalogue</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(123 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><A HREF = "#30"><LI>German Windpower&nbsp;Report Available</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(317 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>CALENDAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(50 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Energy Conservation
on the Internet

If you aren't a netsurfer yet, it may be time to try out the
Information Superhighway. According to Jon Schupp, co-author of the
just-published Energy Guide to the Internet (UDI/McGraw-Hill), a
growing number of energy companies, trade associations,
professional societies, research centers, academic institutions,
and regulatory agencies have gone "online" in hopes of capitalizing
on the Internet's tremendous potential.

Through their own Internet "home pages" on the World Wide Web,
these forward-thinking companies and organizations are giving
potential customers easy access to information about their products
and services.  Companies use the Web to educate current and
prospective investors by providing copies of annual reports, press
releases and financial data on their corporate home pages.

Other organizations are using the Web to provide fast and
inexpensive access to databases, technical papers, trade journals,
policy directives, program descriptions, and more to network users.


Here is a sampling, from Mr. Schupp's "Guide," of currently
available online energy information resources:

Corporate Home Pages. Utilities like PECO, Illinois Power, ConEd,
Northern States, and others use their new electronic "storefronts"
to attract and educate customers with detailed descriptions of
their products and services.  These storefronts almost always
showcase energy conservation programs, making them a terrific place
to learn about a utility's residential, industrial and commercial
DSM strategies.  Southern California Edison's "HomeLink" Web page
is a good example.

Dozens of manufacturers ranging from GE Power Systems and Honeywell
Industrial Automation and Control to Thermomax USA have also gotten
into the act on the Internet.  Visitors to these companies' home
pages will discover a wealth of product specification and
performance information available online.  Looking for an energy
efficiency consultant?  You can save time assembling a short-list
of candidates by starting your search on the Web, where you'll find
background information on Proctor Engineering Group, EnerAction
Inc., and TGK Consulting, to name just a few.

Professional Organizations. Energy industry professional
organizations typically include membership information, electronic
newsletters, directories, and publications catalogs as well as
announcements of upcoming industry trade shows, conferences and
training seminars on their World Wide Web home pages.  The
Association of Energy Service Professionals, the International
District Energy Assn., the Air-Conditioning & Refrigeration
Institute, and the Combined Heat and Power Assn. are just a few
examples of professional organizations that are using the Internet
in this manner.

The Internet also facilitates interactive discussions among
individual energy industry professionals located around the world.
For example, the misc.industry.utilities.electric USENET newsgroup
serves as an electronic meeting place where participants can
exchange news, information and opinions on a wide range of business
and technical issues of interest to the electric power industry.

Internet mailing lists such as Plant-Engineer-Forum, ENCON-L (an
energy conservation mailing list), and EV (the electric vehicle
discussion group) afford participants the means of keeping up with
the latest technical advances in these and other specialized areas
of interest, as well as giving them a chance to "network."

Research Centers. The Energy & Environmental Research Center at the
University of North Dakota Web site and the home pages of the
University of Florida's Energy Analysis and Diagnostic Center and
the Thermal Storage Applications Research Center at University of
Wisconsin, among others, offer visitors access to a wealth of
information pertaining to ongoing research and related activities.
Not-for-profit research organizations such as the Institute of Gas
Technology and EPRI also make a great deal of information available
on the Internet, although access to at least some of the material
on their home pages is often limited to registered members.

Government. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Dept.
of Energy (DOE) each operate large Web sites. The DOE site has
links to dozens of home pages maintained by individual DOE Offices,
agency programs like the Biofuels Information Network, and  the
National Labs. More than a dozen state public utility commissions
now make hearing agendas and minutes, rulings, press releases, and
policy papers available on their Internet home pages.

For further information about the Energy Guide to the Internet,
contact: Jon Schupp, Industry Analyst, TASC, Inc., Tel: 703/834-
5000.






<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

1995 Is Warmest
Year on Record

According to preliminary data from the Climate Research Unit of the
University of East Anglia, the average surface temperature of the
Earth rose to a record high of 58.72(F in 1995. This development,
along with the recently released Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) reports on global warming, is likely to generate new
interest in "energy efficiency" initiatives.

Jim Woolf, writing in The Salt Lake Tribune, quotes Stephen R.
Connors, director of the Electric Utility Program at Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, as saying, "There's a high possibility
that CO2 emissions will be regulated sometime around the year 2000.
We have no idea what those regulations will look like. They may be
negligible and they may be serious, but managers are beginning to
ask how they can prepare for them."

Those preparations will undoubtedly include more energy-efficiency
measures. For example, in IPCC's report, Second Assessment Report,
Summary for Policymakers: Impacts, Adaptations and Mitigation
Options, they recommend energy efficiency as one measure to reduce
global CO2 emissions. "Numerous studies indicate that 10-30% energy
efficiency gains above present levels are feasible at little or no
net cost in many parts of the world through technical conservation
measures and improved management practices over the next 2 to 3
decades."

Even greater efficiency gains of 50-60% are technically feasible.
In the transportation sector, the report says greater technical
efficiencies and other measures could cut global annual CO2
emissions from transportation by roughly 40% by 2025. The IPCC says
such higher energy efficiencies are crucial if CO2 emissions are to
be sharply reduced and if the overall costs of new energy systems
are to be kept relatively low.

According to a review of the IPCC report by the Center for Global
Change (1347 Massachusetts Ave. SE, Washington, DC 20003-1540; Tel:
202/547-0850), large CO2 reductions can be achieved at relatively
low costs by implementing appropriate policies, deploying better
technologies and shifting towards a less carbon-intensive mix of
fuels (away from coal and toward natural gas, nuclear or renewable
energy).

The report emphasizes that exploiting the opportunities to limit
emissions at relatively low costs will require "initiatives to
counter lack of information and overcome cultural, institutional,
legal, financial and economic barriers which can hinder diffusion
of technology or behavioral changes." Furthermore, the costs of the
needed technologies could not be reduced and their performance
could not be improved sufficiently without "intensified research
and development by governments and the private-sector."

This call for a greater investment in research, development and
demonstration of energy efficiency and renewable energy
technologies comes at a time when the Congress is planning major
funding cuts, and private sector investment is unlikely to fill the
breach. At a Washington, DC, press conference where the IPCC report
was released, Working Group II chairman Robert Watson said that the
Congress was "moving in the wrong direction" with its budget
proposals. Watson, who also is associate director for the
environment at the White House Office of Science and Technology
Policy, said that at the Congressionally proposed spending levels
it would be "difficult if not impossible" to achieve large US
emissions reductions at the rates and relatively low costs
suggested by the IPCC report.

Contact: IPCC Working Group II Technical Support Unit, 300 D St.
SW, Suite 840, Washington, DC 20024; Tel: 202/651-8260.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Analyzing Repeal
of Speed Limit

The recent repeal of the federal speed limit is projected to
significantly increase average speed on the nation's highways and,
therefore, motor vehicle fuel consumption. According to Mark Fulmer
of the Tellus Institute (11 Arlington St., Boston, MA 02116-3411;
Tel: 617/266-5400; email: mfulmer@tellus.com), at highway speeds,
aerodynamic drag is the dominant loss factor.

Since drag increases with the square of the velocity, even a 5 mph
increase in speed leads to significant increases in fuel
consumption. For example, increasing speed from 60 to 70 mph--what
one might expect with the less stringent speed limits--increases in
fuel use by about 15%. Increasing speed from the 1973 level of 55
mph to 70 mph may increase fuel use by as much as 25%." Fulmer also
noted that, "these highway speed increases will significantly
increase carbon dioxide emissions."

According to Fulmer, "Considering that over 400 billion vehicle
miles are traveled each year on rural interstates and other major
rural highways, the energy impacts become very substantial.
Increasing average speeds on these rural freeways by 10 mph (60-70
mpg) increases highway energy use by over 100 million barrels of
oil a year, an increase of 4.5% in our oil imports.  This is enough
gasoline to run over 7 million average American cars for one year
(500 gallons per car per year)."

Tellus used data from primary sources including Highway Statistics
(Federal Highway Administration) and the Transportation Energy Data
Book:  Edition 15 (Oak Ridge National Lab) in their analysis.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Free Marketing for
Efficient Equipment

Producers of energy-efficient equipment may benefit from
registering with the Environmental Technology Network for Asia
(ETNA). This free, government-sponsored service helps link
businesses with export opportunities in Asia.

Here's how it works: US-AEP representatives based in ten Asian
cities - Bangkok, Bombay, Colombo, Hong Kong, Jakarta, Kuala
Lumpur, Manila, Seoul, Singapore, and Taipei - gather leads about
specific opportunities for environmental technologies both for
pollution prevention and amelioration, and energy efficiency. ETNA
electronically matches these leads to appropriate U.S.
environmental companies registered within its database.

Companies whose services match a requirement in Asia are alerted by
fax - within 48 hrs. of the entry of the lead - to facilitate a
quick response. ETNA recently expanded its coverage to Latin
America. Through an agreement with the U.N., ETNA now collects  and
disseminates trade leads from eleven Latin American countries:
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico,
Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela.

To register with ETNA, point your Web browser to:
http://www.conet.com/etna/. The online registration form is split
into several pages. The first page asks for all the necessary
contact information so that the trade leads are correctly sent. The
next few pages cover the 484 technology codes split into two media-
specific sections (Pollution Control, Treatment and Disposal, and
Clean Technologies) and one non-media specific section
(Environmental Management). You are allowed to register for a
maximum of 18 technology codes.

For more information, contact the ETNA office at: US-AEP ETNA, CTIS
SA-2, Room 100, 515 22nd St. NW, Washington, DC 20523-0229; Tel:
800/818-9911.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Panel Urges More
Vehicle Efficiency

A little over a year ago, President Clinton assembled a
presidential advisory committee and charged them with the task of
developing policies to cost-effectively return greenhouse gas
emissions from cars and light trucks to their 1990 level by the
year 2005. Committee members included state and local government
officials, corporate executives, and public interest group
representatives.

The committee's report (Majority Report to the President by the
Policy Dialogue Advisory Committee to Recommend Options for
Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Personal Motor Vehicles),
has just been released. It recommends policies that would meet the
president's goal in 2005 and overachieve in 2015 and 2025.

The package for returning U.S. car and light truck CO2 emissions to
their 1990 level includes policies in three areas:

    fuel economy (including feebates for low rolling resistance
tires and mandatory efficiency standards);
    reduction of vehicle miles traveled through increased taxes;
    and use of alternative fuels.

The most important policy for reducing emissions to the 1990 level
is a 6% annual increase in fuel economy standards over 10 years,
starting in 1998. Other key recommended policies include an
equitable shift of state and local road subsidies to cost-of-
driving fees, land use changes away from auto dependency, workplace
parking subsidy reform, and incentives for liquid biofuels and
electric and natural gas vehicles.

The near-term outlook for improvements in transportation sector
efficiency has dimmed due to the repeal of the Federal speed limit.
Congress has also included in the Dept. of Transportation
Appropriations for 1996 a "rider" authored by Rep. Tom DeLay (R-TX)
prohibiting the DOT from engaging in a rulemaking to increase fuel
economy standards.

That provision freezes for a year the DOT's already-underway
process to raise gas mileage standards for light trucks, as well as
prevents any increase in car standards that the Administration
might consider. Finally, Rep. Fred Upton (R-MI) has introduced a
bill, H.R.2200, that would take away the executive branch's
authority to raise car gas mileage standards administratively; that
bill currently has over 100 cosponsors.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

University to Slash
Energy Consumption

A performance contracting project spearheaded by the State of
Hawaii Dept. of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism's
Energy Div. will allow the University of Hawaii at Hilo to cut its
annual energy bill by $500,000 and trim its annual energy
consumption by 1.4 million kWh, saving taxpayers approximately $5
million over the next ten years.

Johnson Controls (5757 N. Green Bay Ave., Milwaukee, WI 53209-4408;
Tel: 414/228-1200) was selected through an open competition which
sought qualified proposals. Under this contract, Johnson Controls
will finance, design, install, and maintain a turnkey energy-
efficiency project that includes campus-wide lighting retrofits,
air conditioning modifications, an energy management system, and
cogeneration for the main campus.

The future savings from the retrofit will be used to pay for the
project. The project allows businesses and government agencies to
implement various energy-saving measures with no up-front capital
costs. Energy devices and technologies can be installed at a time
convenient to the facility with little disruption to day-to-day
operations. The contractor bears the risk for equipment performance
and there is a strong incentive for ongoing preventive maintenance.


Contact: Elizabeth Raman, Tel: 808/587-3806.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Portland Saves
When Wind Blows

A creative power purchase contract between the City of Portland and
Portland General Electric (PGE, 121 S.W. Salmon St., Portland, OR
97204-2977; Tel: 503/464-8000) will save the city about $175,000 in
the first year and as much as $850,000 over the next five years.
PGE has agreed to purchase or generate approximately 11 million kWh
of wind generated electricity during the term of the five-year
agreement. Enough wind power is generated to run City Hall ,
Multnomah Arts Center and ten fire stations.

This innovative arrangement, which is the first of its kind in the
nation, was suggested to the city by PGE as a way to accomplish two
city energy goals: reduce city government energy bills and promote
renewable energy resources. Under a new experimental pricing
schedule, annual power purchases of about $2 million will be tied
to the wholesale cost of electricity. The savings will appear on
the bills of industrial-type facilities such as wastewater
treatment plants at Columbia Boulevard and Tryon Creek, water pump
stations at Washington Park, and the city's flagship office
facility, the Portland Building.

PGE also agreed that it will purchase or generate wind power in an
amount equal to 5% of the energy purchased under the new tariff.
The city's renewable wind purchase will be over 2 million kWh of
electricity each year, an amount equal the output of about 2.5 wind
turbines.

Contact: Mike Lindberg, Tel:  503/823-4145.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Why Russian Buildings
Use More Energy

According to work performed by Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (77 Massachusetts Ave., Cambridge, MA 02139; Tel:
617/253-1000) researchers, on a climate-adjusted basis, the
Russians use about twice as much energy to heat their buildings as
the Swedish, and a third more than Americans.  To find out why, MIT
faculty, led by professor Leslie Norford, have worked with Russian
energy experts for six years to better quantify energy use in
Russian residential buildings and pinpoint the sources of wasted
energy.

They compared annual heating-energy consumption as predicted from
building-construction data and as measured. Data were collected for
both a single, carefully studied multifamily building in Moscow
and, with less detail, for the aggregate housing stock in Moscow.

In both cases, it was found that buildings are using about 60% more
energy than would be expected from engineering estimates. For the
multifamily building, the source of about two-thirds of the wasted
energy was overheating in spring and fall, caused by inadequate
control of the district-heating system.

The next phase of the work is to collaborate with the Russians to
draft new-building energy codes that will establish requirements
for building design and operation, based on technological potential
for conservation and the institutional mechanisms needed to achieve
savings. This work is being funded by the NSF, the Toda Corp., and
the EPA.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Honeywell Upgrades
District Heating

Honeywell (Honeywell Plaza, Minneapolis, MN 55408; Tel: 612/951-
1000) announced in December that it has received its first district
heating contract in China, a project that builds on Honeywell's
extensive district heating work in Europe and the Commonwealth of
Independent States. (To-date, Honeywell has contracts with 136
heating districts in 15 countries in Europe, Eastern Europe and the
CIS; that's up 36% from the number of contracts two years ago.)

The contract, valued at $2.4 million and extending over two years,
is with the Beijing District Heating Co., a state-owned supplier of
heat that serves more than 20% of all residences and commercial
buildings in the city of Beijing. Under the agreement, Honeywell
will provide monitoring and control systems to help the district
improve productivity, save energy, reduce air pollution and provide
better temperature control for its residents.

The agreement, which comes after three years of discussions, opens
a new Asia-Pacific market segment with vast potential as cities
seek to improve their infrastructures with more modern controls.
The World Bank is funding the project as one means to help improve
the living environment and conserve energy around the world.

While most urban residents in China get their heat from coal-
burning furnaces in individual homes and apartments, the trend in
cities is to convert to centrally operated district heating, which
distributes heat to homes and buildings via a network of pipes. In
fact, the government has mandated that buildings be district heated
in cities in which the average daily temperature falls below 41(F
for more than 90 days a year. Nearly 100 million Chinese live in
cities with these temperature conditions. Many of these cities face
the need to build new or upgrade existing plants to comply with the
mandate and to reduce pollution and lower energy costs.

While district heating may represent an improvement over the
inefficiencies and environmental impact of millions of small coal-
burning furnaces, it, too, is wasteful without proper controls. And
many district systems do lack controls--at the point of generation,
distribution or heat consumption--resulting in overheating in some
areas and insufficient heating in others. Unoccupied buildings may
be heated needlessly at night. District heating customers may
have no controls with which to regulate heat in their homes,
apartments, factories or offices.

Under the contract, Honeywell will install a SCAN 3000 system to
provide supervisory control and data acquisition at the heating
district's central operations. This microprocessor-based system
will provide single-point, central monitoring and supervision of
the overall heating network, including substations. Additional
Honeywell products will be installed to create an integrated system
that permits operators to automatically manage and monitor heat
production. The Honeywell system also will enable heating company
managers to forecast heat demand accurately and take appropriate
actions to improve burner efficiency and energy management and to
reduce operational costs.

Honeywell expects to begin installing the systems in early 1996,
with completion slated for October 1997. The resulting energy
savings could be significant. District heating systems in Eastern
Europe and the CIS, some of which consume 2.5 times or more energy
than comparable systems in Western Europe, have typically realized
savings from 20-30% when Honeywell controls were installed. Because
European heating districts typically burn coal, improving the
efficiency of such systems reduces pollution as well.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

NedWind to Sell 110
Wind Machines

According to Tom Gray of the American Wind Energy Assn. (122 C St.
NW, Fourth Floor, Washington, DC 20001; Tel: 202/383-2500), Dutch
wind turbine manufacturer NedWind Rhenen BV has signed contracts to
supply more than 110 machines for use in power projects in China
and India.

The company has established a joint venture with Weizmann, Ltd., in
India called Windia Power Limited which will build a 33-MW windfarm
in the southern part of India near Kayathar, in the state of Tamil
Nadu.  Sixty NedWind 500-kW turbines will be used in the project,
which is planned in two phases.  The first 25 units were to have
been installed by September 30, 1995 and the remaining 35 machines
will be in the ground by March 31, 1996.  Windia will also begin
wind resource monitoring at four sites near Rameshwaram.

In China, NedWind will provide 53 500-kW turbines for use in a
windfarm being developed in Xinjiang Province.  The machines will
be owned by Xinjiang Wind Power and will be part of the
Xinjiang Wind Power General Plant in Urumqi.  The contract for the
project is supported by a grant from the Dutch Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and is to be in place within 15 months of the
grant's final approval.

The Dutch grant program provides partial payment of investment
projects with positive environmental impacts in selected developing
countries.  The grants are available to
projects initiated by Dutch companies, which are evaluated based on
environmental impact and economic development potential.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Onsite Announces $5
Million Contract

Onsite Energy Corp. (701 Palomar Airport Rd., Suite 200, Carlsbad,
CA 92009; Tel: 619/931-2400) announced that it has received
purchase orders from a major aerospace manufacturing company in the
Southern California Edison (SCE, 2244 Walnut Grove Ave., Rosemead,
CA 91770; Tel: 818/302-1212) service territory to provide energy-
efficiency equipment and services including audits, lighting
equipment installation, (ballasts, reflectors and lamps) and
construction/project management.

Onsite will also provide post-installation measurement and
verification and operation and maintenance services over a three-
year period following the anticipated completion of the project in
mid-1996.  Gross revenues to Onsite under this contract will be
approximately $5 million.

The project for the manufacturing company will incorporate a
substantial payment to Onsite from SCE over the three years
following completion of the project, pursuant to the DSM Agreements
between Onsite and SCE.  The project for the manufacturing company
is expected to provide up to 30 million kWh in energy savings
during the first year of operation.  Payments from SCE are based on
actual project performance and delivery of actual energy savings.

According to Richard T. Sperberg, president of Onsite, "The
contract with this major manufacturing company will make a
significant contribution toward fulfilling our commitment to SCE
pursuant to the SCE Agreements."  The SCE Agreements are a result
of competitive bids submitted in 1993 and subsequent approval by
the California Public Utility Commission for Onsite to provide up
to approximately 60 million kWh in energy savings through
installation of energy-efficiency services projects in host
customer facilities within SCE's service territory.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Energy Services
Company Formed

Eastern Utilities Associates (1 Liberty Square, Boston, MA 02109-
4827; Tel: 617/357-9590) and Duke/Louis Dreyfus LLC (10 Westport
Rd., Wilton, CT 06897; Tel: 203/761-8000) have signed an agreement
to form a company to market energy-related services in New England.
The new entity--Duke/Louis Dreyfus Energy Services (New England)
LLC--will engage in electric power and fuels marketing and
associated market hedges; own or lease generating facilities; and
participate in other energy-related activities such as energy-
efficiency services and management of energy assets.

Each partner would share in ownership, operating costs, revenues
and profits of the new company.  EUA's participation in the
alliance is through a new wholly-owned subsidiary, EUA Energy
Services, Inc. Finalization of the agreement to form the joint
energy services company requires approval of the SEC for EUA Energy
Services, Inc.  Also, the new company requires FERC approval to
engage in power marketing.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Sensors Used in
BOF Steelmaking

Sensor technologies originally developed to monitor coal combustion
and welding in the laboratory are being applied to improve the
efficiency of steelmaking. The technology employs a laser-based
sensor that can track the conversion of iron and carbon into steel.


Underway since 1993, this is part of a four-year project managed by
the American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI, 1101 17th St. NW,
Washington, DC 20036-4700; Tel: 202/452-7100) under the
Congressionally-mandated Steel and Aluminum Energy Conservation and
Technology Competitiveness Act of 1988, the so-called "Metals
Initiative."

Fifteen AISI members fund 30% of the $3.5 million project. The
remainder is funded by the Dept. of Energy's (DOE) Office of
Industrial Technology. Bethlehem Steel Corp. (1170 8th Ave.,
Bethlehem, PA 18016-7600; Tel: 215/694-2424) is the sponsoring
steel company and hosts plant trials. Insitec Measurement Systems
(2110 Omega Rd., Suite D, San Ramon, CA 94583; Tel: 510/837-1330)
and Berry Metal Co. (2408 Evans City Rd., Berry Bldg., Harmony, PA
16037-9110; Tel: 412/452-8040) are the other partners, responsible
for commercialization of the Sandia-developed sensors.

The research focuses on improving the energy and process efficiency
of the basic oxygen furnace (BOF), which is used to make 60% of the
country's steel. Upstream of the BOF, iron is produced by reducing
iron ore with limestone and coke in a blast furnace. The molten
iron is converted to steel in the BOF by burning off carbon.

By implementing fast, real-time sensors in the BOF process, both
the time for each 'heat' and oxygen consumption can be reduced
while improving the efficiency and reliability of the process from
heat to heat. The Sandia team is testing several infrared laser
methods to measure the temperature, water content, ratio of carbon
dioxide to carbon monoxide, and the presence of particles above the
melt. The carbon dioxide-to-carbon monoxide ratio is useful in
determining how much carbon remains; this content is normally
analyzed before final metallurgy adjustments.

Beth Fuchs and three other Sandians have worked with Insitec, Berry
Metal Co. (the principal manufacturer of oxygen lances for the
steel industry), and Bethlehem Steel to design and package the
sensor. Timken Steel's (1835 Dueber Ave. SW, Canton, OH 44706-2728;
Tel: 216/438-3000) Faircrest Plant hosted field trials. The sensor
package has two miniature video cameras, filters for controlling
both the wavelength and the intensity of the light reaching the
cameras, laser diodes, coherent fiber optics for guiding images,
single fiber optics for guiding laser light, and circuitry for
controlling the filters. These components are inserted into a
compact package near the tip of the lance.

The sensors monitor temperature at the combustion zone, the bath
surface where a blast of oxygen pushes aside thick, foamy slag. The
first direct images of this "hot spot" were taken during field
trials in May. Temperature at this spot can indicate final carbon
content. At the end of an oxygen blow, the device also detects
radiance from the bath, indicating melt temperature. The lance
instrument package also collects real-time information on the bath
height. After the melt is poured, the instruments may also reveal
any wear and tear or slag build-up on the ceramic lining.

The steel industry's vision for the mill of the future is to move
from steelmaking to near-net-shape casting to finishing in one
fast, continuous process. To do this requires development,
validation and commercialization of fast sensor systems throughout
the process. Success of the Sandia project will lead to the
availability of validated prototype sensors that can then be
quickly commercialized and implemented throughout the U.S. steel
industry.

Contact: Sandia Combustion Research Facility, Tel: 510/294-2321.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Kaiser Saves with
Fuel from Tires

Commencing November 29, 1995, Kaiser Cement (3000 Busch Rd.,
Pleasanton, CA 94566-8403; Tel: 510/846-8800) began a 90-day test
of a tire-derived fuel which has saved energy and reduced pollution
emissions at cement plants around the country. The test is being
overseen by the Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD)
at the cement plant near Cupertino, CA.  Kaiser Cement embarked on
the test after studying successful results using tire-derived fuel
at 4 other California cement plants and 23 across the nation.

"Using tire chips for fuel appears to be a win-win situation,"
explained Earl Bouse, VP of manufacturing services. "If our test
confirms the results seen elsewhere, we will show air-quality
improvements and be able to save energy."

During the test, the tire chips would replace up to 15% of the
current fuel, primarily coal, used in the cement plant's kiln. No
black smoke or odors associated with open-air tire fires occur when
tire chips are used at cement plants because the enclosed kiln
operates at such intense heat (2,800( F) that the fuel is totally
consumed.

A major attraction of using tire chips is energy savings. Though
Kaiser Cement has energy-efficient plants, fuel is still their
single largest operating expense. According to Bouse, "as tire
chips contain more heat value than coal, the cost to us--including
transportation--is much less." In other locations, tire-derived
fuel has been shown to successfully reduce emissions from cement
kilns. Kaiser Cement already has achieved a low level of NOx
emission for cement production.

While additional reductions are expected by using tire chip fuel,
the extent must be confirmed through the test. The test also will
establish if any other contaminants are affected by using TDF.
Kaiser Cement currently is below the risk level that requires
public notification under the California air toxics program
administered by the BAAQMD. The company will not use TDF if the
test shows an increase in health effects.

Regulators, including the federal EPA, California Integrated Waste
Management Board and other agencies consider burning TDF in cement
plants to be an ideal solution to tire disposal problems. In
addition to air improvements, there is no waste product as the
cement process consumes all parts of the tire--even the steel belts
become part of the product.

Contact: Earl Bouse, Tel: 510/426-4084.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

CFC Substitute Forane
408A Superior to R-502

According to Elf Atochem (2000 Market St., Philadelphia, PA 19103-
3231; Tel: 215/419-7027), the findings of a recent refrigerant
performance test show that their CFC substitute Forane 408A is
superior to R-502 in energy-efficiency for medium and low
temperature refrigeration systems. In a laboratory test performed
by VACOM Technologies and ASW Engineering for Energy Services Inc.,
Forane 408A was found to be, on average, 5-8% more energy-efficient
than R-502 in a simulated supermarket environment containing a
typical freezer display case fixture.

Forane 408A is intended as a drop-in replacement for retrofitting
existing equipment currently using R-502, such as food display and
storage cases, cold storage rooms, ice machines, transportation and
process refrigeration.  It has been available for the past 18
months and has found a broad market acceptance in its retrofit
applications. One of the largest expenses for the supermarket
industry is cost of electricity to run the refrigeration systems.

According to an Atochem spokesperson, "the results of these tests
are  very positive news for the supermarket industry, as well as
any industry that utilizes R-502 in medium to low temperature
refrigeration systems.  By retrofitting their equipment now with
Forane 408A, they will potentially realize a cost savings through
energy efficiencies, while becoming CFC-free at the same time."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Improving Insulation
of Water Heaters

The New York State Energy Research and Development Authority and
Stor-Ex New York, Inc. (1710 Flushing Ave., Queens, New York 11385;
Tel: 718/417-9700) are beginning work on a $429,000 project to
develop and demonstrate a high-efficiency indirect water heater in
response to increasing regulations requiring heating-equipment
manufacturers to improve the energy and environmental performance
of their products.

The water heater will be designed for residential and small
commercial buildings and will reduce standby heat loss through
additional jacket insulation. During the project, Stor-Ex will
construct and perform laboratory tests on prototype units with
various storage capacities in the range of 40-115 gals.  Later, six
production models will be installed and tested at demonstration
sites throughout New York.






<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Japanese Condos
Cut Energy Bills

According to wire reports from the Kyodo News Service, condominiums
equipped with energy efficiency and rainwater collection systems
are selling well in Japan. Housing complexes utilizing clean energy
sources are currently on sale at three locations across the nation,
two in the Tokyo area and another in Kitakyushu on Japan's main
southern island of Kyushu. In all cases, each building has solar
equipment on its roof to help residents save on gas and electricity
bills and is equipped with an underground tank to store rainwater
to supply water to greenery and vegetable gardens.

These condominiums have been contracted for sale even though they
are more expensive due to higher construction costs. Construction
Ministry officials said construction of ''environmentally
friendly'' condominiums is now under way or planned at 86 places
across the nation. The officials said the ministry offers subsidies
for construction of such energy-efficient housing while the
governmental Housing Loan Corp. provides preferential loans for
builders.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

U.S., Canada Report
Data from 1993

The Energy Dept. recently released the results of its 1993
Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS).  That's right--1993.
But some of the data is interesting.

It is the ninth such survey performed since 1978. According to data
presented in volume II (Household Energy Consumption and
Expenditures, 1993), new homes (built between 1988 and 1993 were
intentionally oversampled to learn more about their energy
efficiency) use, on average, only 82% of the energy used by homes
built before 1980. Most of this gain comes from improvements in
space heating equipment and thermal integrity.

According to the survey, more than half of the electricity used in
homes operates appliances - lighting, TV, clothes dryers, freezers,
ranges, ovens, and others. For the first time, the RECS survey
provides separate estimates for the average annual per household
kWh consumption for lighting (940 kWh), cooking (458 kWh), clothes
drying (875 kWh), and dishwashing (299 kWh).

The report notes that, despite efficiency gains (particularly for
refrigerators), the consumption of electricity for appliances is
increasing, likely as the result of absolute growth in the numbers
of appliances. For example, in 1980 only 14% of households used
microwave ovens, but in 1993 84% of households used one. Personal
computers have also become more common; in 1990, 16% of households
had personal computers, a percentage that grew to 23% in 1993.

To obtain a copy of the RECS survey report, contact the National
Energy Information Center, Tel: 202/586-8800.

Meanwhile, in Canada, NRCan is also playing catch up. It released
the 1993 Survey of Household Energy Use, which is the first
comprehensive national survey of energy use in Canadian housing.
The report provides extensive data on thermal envelopes, heating
and hot water systems, appliances, lighting, and air conditioning
by house type and age. The survey was undertaken as part of the
development of a National Energy Use Database, which NRCan hopes to
update every four years.

Survey results highlight some potential retrofit opportunities.
Perhaps most striking is that in this current age of "super
windows," one third of all windows are either single-glazed or
single-glazed with a storm. Also, in spite of the many conservation
programs in the past, the majority of homes have not had their
insulation upgraded.

A large number of heating systems and appliances are old and will
need replacement soon. Air-leakage problems at windows and doors
are reported by one-third and one-half of households, respectively.
Window airtightness has not been improved in 59% of homes and door
airtightness has not been improved in 48%. Thirty-two percent of
windows are single-glazed (with or without a storm); 64% of homes
have not had any windows replaced.

Thirty-two percent of basement walls remain uninsulated; 62% of
households have not upgraded their attic insulation. Furnaces and
boilers are more than 15 years old in 60% of oil-heated homes and
33% of gas-heated homes. With regard to appliances, 44% of ranges,
38% of dryers, 37% of refrigerators, 32% of clothes washers and 25%
of dishwashers are more than 10 years old. In the area of lighting,
incandescent bulbs still outnumber fluorescent ones by 10:1.

The survey did find, though, that some energy-efficient
technologies have succeeded in substantially penetrating the
market. Ten percent of Canadian homes are reported to have air
exchangers, and more than half of these are used all year-round.

Water-saving showerheads are found in 40% of homes with hot water
heaters. Programmable thermostats are found in 18%. Surprisingly,
almost 10% reported having basement floors which are fully or
partially insulated.

From the perspective of possible moisture problems, some
questionable practices and deficiencies were also uncovered. More
than a third of households do not heat all or part of their
basement, and more than half do not have any bathroom exhaust fans.


Contact: Andr Bourbeau, NRCan, Tel: 613/995-7307. To obtain copies
of the report (Cat. No. M92-85-1994E), contact: Energy Publications
c/o Canada Communication Group, Ottawa, Ontario K1A-0S9; Fax:
819/994-1498.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Geothermal Well
Comes in Hot

Pacific GeoPower, the joint venture formed between Canadian Crew
Energy Corp. and Guy F. Atkinson Holdings Ltd. to develop the South
Meager Geothermal Project, has now completed the drilling and
initial testing of a deep well into the geothermal resource north
of Pemberton, B.C. Well temperatures exceeded 250(C, and geo-
chemical analyses of the fluids sampled support the existence of a
deep, higher temperature reservoir, in addition to the known
shallower reservoir.

While this particular well did not penetrate a fluid conduit that
would provide commercial production, additional drilling will be
required to locate permeability within the resource to fully
determine the capability of the reservoir. Interpretation of the
resource data provided from the drilling program has encouraged the
joint venture partners to proceed with further exploration of the
South Meager geothermal resource.

Contact: John M. Darch, Tel: 800/444-9284.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Sanyo Expects Solar
Business to Grow

Sanyo Electric Co. Ltd. (666 5th Ave., New York, NY 10103; Tel:
212/315-3232) established a wholly owned subsidiary in Osaka on
December 1 to handle Sanyo's solar energy-related business. The new
company, Sanyo Solar Industries Co Ltd, will be capitalized at 450
million yen and have 180 employees.

Its operations will include the engineering, manufacturing and
marketing of solar products as well as the design, sales and
installation of solar cell applications. Sanyo expects that the
solar cell business will continue to expand, amid growing demand
for clean energy.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Ford's Concept Car
Pushes Limits

A new Ford (American Rd., Dearborn, MI 48121; Tel: 313/322-3000)
hybrid electric vehicle concept car, Synergy 2010, built on an all-
aluminum unibody and incorporating highly advanced technologies
could theoretically triple the fuel efficiency of a typical family
sedan. Ford unveiled the car at the company's year-end news
conference and it will be on display at the North American
International Auto Show in Detroit from Jan. 6-15.

According to the company, a key purpose of this concept car is to
explore how highly fuel efficient technologies could be packaged in
a well styled car of the future. Loaded with advanced technology
features such as voice-activated controls, an advanced navigation
system, heads-up displays and solar-powered cooling, the car is
one-third lighter and 40% more aerodynamic than today's sleekest
Ford, yet still roomy enough for a family of six.

In the Synergy 2010, a small, 1.0-liter direct-injection,
compression-ignited engine mounted in the rear would power a
generator that produces electricity for motors located in each
wheel.  Up front, a flywheel would collect excess engine and
braking energy, which in turn would be released to augment the
engine when, for example, the car needed to accelerate quickly or
climb hills.

In a direct-injection, compression-ignited engine, high pressure or
heat is used instead of spark plugs to ignite the fuel, resulting
in higher efficiency.  Theoretically, the Synergy 2010's
performance with this smaller engine would be comparable to today's
typical mid-sized family sedan because of its decreased weight,
improved aerodynamics and lower rolling resistance.

Contact: Pam Kueber of Ford, Tel: 313/337-2456.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

California May
Scuttle EV Quotas

Several important EV developments were announced during December.
First, the California Air Resources Board staff presented a
proposal to scuttle the 1998 2% Zero Emission Vehicle (ZEV)
requirement. The year 2003 requirement for 10% would stand. This
proposal, presented in outline form and subject to revision until
March of 1996, calls for a demonstration project in Sacramento and
Los Angeles. This would require only 3,750 ZEVs available between
1998 and 2000 versus 60,000 under the original proposal.

In another EV development, Green Car Media, an independent
alternative fuel research organization, released a study which
concludes that if automakers treated electric vehicles the same way
they do their conventional cars and trucks, then electric vehicles
could be priced competitively with their gasoline-powered
counterparts. "Current EV cost and price estimates from the major
automakers are arbitrarily high," said Ron Cogan, one of the
report's authors.  He added that EVs could be treated like other
industry programs, for example, Chrysler's Viper, where substantial
development costs were both absorbed under corporate programs and
shared with outside suppliers.

The study, Pricing For Success: Using Auto Industry Models to
Review Electric Vehicle Costing and Pricing, reviewed historic
vehicle costing and pricing practices long used by the auto
industry both for vehicles and individual components such as
airbags, catalytic converters and emissions control equipment.

The study found that market and marketing considerations have led
auto companies in the past to absorb high vehicle research and
development costs, while keeping vehicle retail prices competitive.
Examples cited were the development of General Motors' Saturn,
Chrysler's Viper, and Ford's just-introduced 1996 Taurus/Sable. In
each case, the true development costs were not amortized in the
vehicle's initial price.  Other less tangible considerations, such
as corporate image and positioning, also were shown to be a factor
in the automakers' pricing decisions.

Finally, according to a survey of participants at the World
Electric Vehicle Assn.'s November conference, 62% of those
responding to the survey believe that Europe is ahead of the U.S.
in promoting the use of electric vehicles (EVs), but 48% percent
expect the U.S. to catch up. Forty-two percent of the respondents
also said the U.S. market has the most growth potential. In
addition, 78% indicated that fleets were the best way to bring EVs
into widespread usage. Respondents said EV development in Europe is
a result of higher gasoline costs and the urgency of pollution in
European cities.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

TVA's IRP Stresses
Energy Conservation

In response to public comment, TVA (400 W. Summit Hill Dr.,
Knoxville, TN 37902; Tel: 615/632-2101) has revised its Integrated
Resource Plan (IRP) to include more energy-efficiency programs and
renewable energy technologies in the next five years. The final
plan, Energy Vision 2020, was released in December by the TVA
Board, which made the revisions after reviewing public comments.

Among the changes are plans to investigate the potential for wind
power and biomass generating projects in the TVA service area. The
plan also calls for the implementation of 650 MW of DSM by 2002 and
up to 2,200 MW by 2010 and further work to develop renewable energy
options including studies on using a flexible wind project, a
biomass refinery, a combined garbage and biomass facility, landfill
methane, coalbed methane, and photovoltaics for power generation.

Contact: Barbara Martocci, Tennessee Valley Authority; Tel:
423/632-8632.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Forecasting Cuts
Costs by 5%

A method of load forecasting based on a recursive maximum
likelihood estimation adaptive forecasting technique has
demonstrated savings of 5% in production costs for electric
generating and district heating plants in Europe.  Already proved
in use at plants throughout Scandinavia, the "Power Load
Forecasting Service," sold by Vitec AB (Box 1465, S-90124, Umea,
Sweden; Tel: 46(0)90-15-49-00) has been shown to provide plant
operators with significant cost savings through increased operating
efficiency.

For example, while in use at the combined electricity generation
and district heating plant at Umea in northern Sweden over the last
three years, the Vitec service reduced the plant's production costs
by no less than 5%, providing a financial savings of $500,000 to
$700,000 per year. By achieving these cost savings at Umea and
elsewhere, the service has been frequently proved to repay its
annual subscription costs in just its first day of operation - even
in its first hour.

Once installed at a plant, the Vitec system is accessed via an IBM-
compatible PC which is connected to the plant's existing process
control computers via a serial link or LAN. It also connects via
modem to Vitec's control center, for example, allowing the center
to upload process data and download forecasting data for the
specific plant location.

Because it is adaptive, the forecasting technique constantly
adjusts its current forecasts to take into account the accuracy
achieved by previous forecasts. This self-correcting capability is
reinforced by constant quality assurance, with the Vitec control
center verifying accurate operation daily and taking additional
corrective measures if the forecast load differs from the actual
load by more than 2% in any 24-hour period.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Inverter Improves
Motor Efficiency

Electric vehicles, adjustable-speed motors, heat pumps, fans and
compressors may benefit from a new electric power inverter
developed by researchers at the Dept. of Energy's (DOE) Oak Ridge
National Lab (ORNL). The Resonant Snubber Inverter (RSI), invented
by engineers in the Digital and Power Electronics Group, improves
efficiency and reliability, is smaller, lighter, greatly reduces
electromagnetic interference (EMI) and potentially lowers the cost
of electric power inverters. Inverters, used with many electric
devices and motors, convert available power to the type needed--
such as direct current to alternating current.

The RSI is about 80%t efficient at low speeds and 98% efficient at
high speeds. Conventional inverters are about 60-70% efficient at
low speeds and 94%t efficient at high speeds. Inverter efficiency
gains of that magnitude--especially at the lower speeds typical of
its use in a car--could help electric vehicles become a viable
option, researchers say.

To perform their function, inverters employ a series of switches
and electronic components. A conventional electric power inverter
consists of six power semiconductor switches that turn on or off
about 20,000 times per second in different combinations to provide
the desired output.

The inverter switch turns on and off at full voltage and current,
generating a huge, wasteful power spike. This type of "hard
switching" is an effective way of obtaining a specific current;
however, this circuit design causes many problems. In addition to
EMI caused by hard switching, conventional inverters put
considerable stress on silicon devices and other parts within the
inverter, causing reliability problems.

While the conventional inverter uses six switches to achieve a
desired output, the RSI adds three small auxiliary switches that
temporarily--and very briefly--divert current, then route it back
to one of the six main switches. This diversion, which lasts only
a couple of microseconds, produces a zero voltage across the switch
and helps reduce damaging power spikes. It also enables the RSI's
soft switching to increase efficiency from 4-15 percentage points
compared to a conventional inverter.

The efficiency gain is dependent on the speed of the motor
connected to the inverter. Greatest efficiency gains occur when the
motor is run at less than full speed, typical of an inverter's
function in an electric vehicle. While gains in efficiency are
important, ORNL also claims that the RSI virtually eliminates EMI.

Tests using an oscilloscope show EMI is greatly reduced compared to
conventional hard switching inverters and previously developed soft
switching inverters. EMI can interfere with functions of
appliances, telephones, electronic instruments, television
reception and other electronic equipment, such as computer
controlled ignition in automobiles.

Another benefit of the RSI is that it reduces voltage and current
stress to inverter components. This improves the reliability and
allows lower-cost power devices to be used. Because the RSI
smoothly changes the voltage and current during device switching,
it can also help reduce the possibility of motor failure caused by
insulation breakdown and bearing overheating. Soft switching also
reduces the inverter's operating temperature, reducing the need for
large, heavy heat sinks, which are devices to dissipate heat.
Instead, the RSI can use smaller, lighter, less expensive heat
sinks. Excessive heat degrades electronic equipment and causes
failures.

In a related project, the RSI is being incorporated into an
advanced air conditioner to be installed on electric buses,
including one in Chattanooga in 1997. The unit is the product of
ORNL's work in advanced electric motor technology and a cooperative
research and development agreement partner's new air conditioner
technology. Installation of the unit is expected to eliminate the
need for an auxiliary power unit required for the bus's air
conditioner. These auxiliary units are currently powered by
propane, which results in emissions, noise, added weight and cost.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Desulfurization Process
Could Boost Oil Supply

Energy BioSystems Corp. (4200 Research Forest Dr., The Woodlands,
TX 77381-4257; Tel: 713/364-6132) is commercializing biotechnology-
based processes for the petroleum refining and production
industries.  The company's focus to-date has been on developing
biocatalytic desulfurization (BDS), a proprietary process involving
the use of bacteria to remove sulfur from petroleum.

This process is expected to help refiners worldwide meet
environmental regulations in a more cost-effective manner and has
the potential to greatly improve the value of high-sulfur crude oil
reserves. In December, the company announced a major advance in the
performance of the biocatalyst which drives the BDS system.

Application of recent discoveries has led to a six- to eightfold
increase in the specific activity of intermediate reactions
critical to BDS economics.  "In the last few months we have applied
the discoveries reported in September," said Dr. Daniel J.
Monticello, VP of R&D at Energy BioSystems. "The resulting
improvement exceeds our expectation of a three- to fivefold
increase.  We are now significantly closer to the performance level
needed for commercialization of BDS, but additional development is
required on a final reaction to produce the prototype biocatalyst
necessary for pilot plant demonstration runs," he continued.

Further improvements are expected in early 1996 which should lead
to the biocatalyst performance required for commercial
demonstration of BDS technology.

In December, Energy BioSystems also announced that the U.S. Patent
and Trademark Office has issued two new process patents to the
company. The first patent (U.S. 5,472,875) claims a new reactor
design involving the introduction of air or oxygen-enriched gas
into the oil prior to treatment with the biocatalyst.  The second
patent (U.S. 5,468,626) claims a method by which a biosorption
agent preferentially adsorbs sulfur-containing compounds from
petroleum.  Such a process design could reduce the size of the
bioreactor by concentrating on those compounds requiring
desulfurization, thus reducing capital equipment costs.






<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

More Orders for
New Compressor

DynEco Corp. (564 International Pl., Rockledge, FL 32955; Tel:
407/639-0333) has received a new order for eight demonstration
Orbital Vane mobile air conditioning compressors from Trans/Air
Manufacturing Corp. (P.O. Box 70, Dallastown, PA 17313; Tel:
717/246-2627).  Trans/Air is a leading supplier of custom-designed
air conditioning systems for fossil-fueled and electric-powered
commercial and mass-transit vehicles. This is the second order that
DynEco has received recently from leaders in the private and
commercial vehicle A/C markets.

The patented Orbital Vane compressor represents an engineering
breakthrough due to its unique anti-friction (non-contact) design.
In an independent test report prepared by the Dept. of Energy
(DOE), it was reported that, "this new compressor is compact,
lightweight, and more efficient than conventional automobile air
conditioning compressors."  It operates with a wide range of gases,
including ozone-safe refrigerant HFC-134a.  DynEco Corp. expects
its array of innovative compressors to be highly price-competitive
due to their simplicity and ease of manufacture.

Previously, 30 demonstration compressors were ordered by
SCS/Frigette (1200 West Risinger Rd., Fort Worth, TX 76134; Tel:
817/293-5313). SCS/Frigette is a producer of aftermarket and
replacement automotive air conditioning systems and other
automotive accessories.

Trans/Air will conduct extensive testing of DynEco's Orbital Vane
compressors in anticipation of integrating them into their high-
efficiency mass transit air conditioning systems.  The company
believes that this purchase could lead to a significant market for
hundreds of compressors, which would further accelerate growth of
the Rockledge, FL-based company.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Big Investment in
Halogen Bulb Plant

In December, GE Lighting (3135 Easton Turnpike, Fairfield, CT
06432-1041; Tel: 203/373-2211) announced that it will invest more
than $100 million over four years in new production lines to expand
capacity at a GE plant in Mattoon, IL. A major part of the
investment will be used to expand manufacturing capacity for GE's
exclusive Halogen-IR light bulbs--which are the most energy-
efficient halogen light bulbs available in the world.

This GE high-technology involves a special infrared coating and
unique application process applied to the inner filament tube which
captures wasted infrared energy and turns it into more visible,
useful light.  In addition to providing significant energy savings,
Halogen-IR--a global product--produces crisp white light and
excellent color rendering.

The inner tubes will be manufactured and coated at Mattoon Lamp
Plant, then shipped to other GE plants for final assembly.  Typical
applications are retail display lighting and residential and
commercial floodlighting.  Other types of high efficiency halogen
light bulb production will also be added at the plant.

Contact: Jay Pomeroy of GE Lighting, Tel: 216/266-3762.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Stay Up-to-date with
Free Energy Catalogue

Information on the latest energy research is available from the
National Renewable Energy Lab's (NREL) recently released NREL
Information Resources Catalogue: A Collection of Renewable Energy
and Energy Efficiency Information Resources 1995.  The catalogue
describes recent publications produced by NREL for the Dept. of
Energy, and lists services available on energy efficiency and
renewable energy programs and technologies.

Documents in the catalogue were published during fiscal year 1995
and include general interest publications, technical reports,
conference papers, journal articles, book chapters, and patents.
New this year is a title index by subject.

Copies of the catalogue are available through NREL's Document
Distribution Service; by Tel: 303/275-4363, Fax 303/275-5043,
email: evanss@tcplink.nrel.gov, or U.S. mail: 1617 Cole Blvd.,
15/1, Golden, CO 80401-3393.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

German Windpower
Report Available

According to Paul Gipe (Paul Gipe & Assoc., 208 S. Green St., No.
5; Tehachapi, CA 93561; Tel: 805/822-9150), one of Germany's major
solar energy research institutes recently issued a detailed report
on German wind development. According to Mr. Gipe, "this report is
one of the most detailed documents yet on the makeup of the German
wind program. Germany is in a frenzy of wind development not seen
since the great California 'wind rush' of the mid 1980s."

By the end of 1995, Germany will have installed a total of 1,000 MW
of wind-generating capacity." At the current rate, Germany's
installed capacity will exceed that in California sometime in mid-
1997 and will exceed that in all of North America by the end of
1997. Wind turbines currently generate 4% of the electricity in the
northern German state of Schleswig-Holstein and are expected to
deliver nearly 10% by the year 2000.

Two organizations follow German wind development, the German Wind
Energy Institut (Deutsches Windenergie Institut) at Wilhelmshaven
and the Institut fur Solare Energieversorgungstehnik or ISET in
Kassel. Both are excellent sources of information on the technical
side of wind development in Germany. ISET is specifically charged
with tracking the performance of Germany's "250 MW" incentive
program. Under the 250 MW program, Germany pays 6 pfennigs
($0.035)/kWh of generation from selected wind turbines. Between
1989 and 1991 this program spurred development of the Germany wind
industry. In 1991, Germany implemented the Electricity Feed Law
that has further spurred rapid development of wind energy in the
country.

The report, "WMEP 250 MW Wind Jahresauswertung 1994" (1994 Annual
Report of the 250 MW Wind Program) is in German with English
summaries.

The report can be purchased from ISET for DM 30 (about $20) plus
shipping and handling. Contact: ISET, Koenigstor 59 D34119 Kassel,
Germany; Tel: 49/561 72 940; Fax: 49/561 72 94 00, email:
mdurst@ws-01.iset-ks.de.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

CALENDAR

March 4-8, 1996, Successful Energy Project Analysis and Selection,
Madison, WI. Contact: Keith Kempski, Tel: 608/262-0468.

March 31-April 3, 1996, ElectroTEC '96, St. Louis, MO. Contact:
Susan Mitchell, Tel: 202/508-5901.

April 3-4, 1996, GLOBALCON: Nat'l Forum for Energy Efficiency,
Denver, CO. Contact: Ruth Bennett, Tel: 770/447-5083, ext. 210.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B34-16</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B003-71</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey57.html 205.156.212.5 19970114231022 text/html 62877
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:08:31 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:05 GMT
Content-length: 62690
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ey57.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet <BR>
January 2, 1990<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>HAPPY NEW YEAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(36 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>WHAT ARE THE WILD WINDS SAYING?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(270 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>MARVIN RUNYON</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(531 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>RICHARD LAWSON</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(557 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>RICHARD BALZHISER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(271 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>EDWARD BURKE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(272 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>DANIEL DREYFUS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(734 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>KEN HOLLISTER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(873 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>GUS SPETH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(98 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>JAMES MILLER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(363 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>MARK LUFTIG</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(373 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>LARRY HOBART</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(148 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>EDWARD TIRELLO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(210 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>WILLIAM DERRICKSON</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(203 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>JERALD HALVORSEN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(367 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>GEORGE LAWRENCE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(452 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>KENNETH CARR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(363 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>DAVID BARDIN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(217 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>MARC GOLDSMITH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(258 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>PAUL PARSHLEY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(350 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>JOHN SILLIN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(308 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>WILLIAM McCOLLAM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(305 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>DENNY ELLERMAN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(81 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>DAVID MOSKOVITZ</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(407 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>JOHN ANDERSON</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(487 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>THE LAST WORD...JAMES WATKINS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(588 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

HAPPY NEW YEAR

Every man naturally persuades himself that he can keep his
resolutions, nor is he convinced of his imbecility but by length
of time and frequency of experiment....

Samuel Johnson, English lexicographer and philosopher (1709-1784)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

WHAT ARE THE WILD WINDS SAYING?

"What are the wild winds saying...?" Charles Dickens had a
plaintive child enquire in  Dombey and Son.  The question was
never really answered and a few chapters later Dickens dispatches
the child in one of the tearful deathbed scenes that endeared him
to Victorians.

As the energy industry enters the 1990s, the wild winds are as
incoherent as ever but the willingness of many industry leaders
to have a pop at deciphering their sound is intact. In this
forecast issue (a long-standing New Year tradition at The Energy
Daily) some 23 experts predict, exhort and reflect--and a few
happily seize the opportunity to poke some light-hearted fun at
the institutions and personalities of energy.

In January 1980, the first issues of the decade dwelt on topics
that get less coverage nowadays: indoor air pollution, South
Korea's nuclear construction program, wavepower research in
Britain and DOE's synthetic fuels program. But there were
perennial topics too: the NRC was struggling with deadlines for
reactor safety changes, coal producers were predicting a record
year and (with impressive prescience) a study commissioned by the
Climate Research Board of the National Research Council concluded
that "global warming caused by carbon dioxide build-up from the
burning of fossil fuels represents a real problem for the
future."

But if the 1980s was a hard decade to forecast, the 1990s are
likely to be even more tumultuous and competitive. Short-term
forecasting is a notoriously dangerous game. However, it has its
own seductive allure and so  The Energy Daily is delighted to
present on the following pages the predictions of its
distinguished panel of experts.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

MARVIN RUNYON

The electric utility industry is becoming more competitive each
year and consumer choice is the driving force behind this
competition. "Choice" is an American value reflected throughout
our nation's experience in everything from the way we select
political candidates to the growing variety of consumer products
being made for American consumption.

Regulated utilities are among the last areas in which our
citizens have been limited in their ability to make such choices.
But that economic environment is changing and increasing
competition implies that utilities will take action to make their
"products" and services less costly and more attractive to
consumers.

If we respond to this challenge in a responsible way--without
compromising safety, reliability and the environment--consumers
and competitive utilities will both be winners.

While the issue of sufficient generating capacity is not new--or
news--in the electric utility industry, in 1990 we are likely to
see this issue gain increasing recognition among opinion leaders,
government officials and consumers generally.

The costs of new generating capacity have made many utilities
hesitant to build, but electric utilities can't compromise their
obligation to provide a reliable and ample electric supply to
their consumers.

Whether future load projections are met through energy
conservation, load-management, independent power production or
new generating capacity, one thing is certain. Each utility will
have to search for the most cost-effective way to keep its costs
down and its reliability up. Responses will vary from region to
region and utility to utility.

Clean air issues also are familiar to the electric utility
industry--and with congressional action pending, those issues
will remain in the 1990 headlines. We are glad that President
Bush introduced his proposal for cleaner air. We believe that it
is possible to have cleaner air and competitive rates.

Utilities ought to be among the leaders in advocating reasonable
and effective clean air legislation. If the public perceives us
as obstructionists who approach each new proposal from a worst-
case perspective, we risk being isolated on the wrong side of
this issue. And if that happens, there's a much higher
probability that utilities will face punitive legislation.

To meet the challenges of competition and choice, capacity and
clean air, we must work to shape change rather than resist it. My
favorite formula for change states that 1 percent actually
initiate change, 9 percent watch it happen and 90 percent ask,
"what happened?"

To bring about the bright future we all want, utilities are going
to have to be among that 1 percent making the right kind of
change happen in the 1990s.

To meet the future, we're changing at TVA. We've held rates
constant for two years and believe we're in good shape to reach
the third year of our three-year goal of no rate increases.

We initiated a growth credit program that provides rate
incentives for businesses adding new capacity to our system and
new jobs to our region. We're getting in shape for the future and
we believe that means offering competitive rates, providing an
ample and reliable supply of power and being a good environmental
citizen.

Marvin Runyon is chairman of the Tennessee Valley Authority.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

RICHARD LAWSON

The year 1990 marks the beginning of a new decade leading us to
the turn of the century and hopefully continued economic
prosperity, growth and world peace. Some things, no doubt, will
be different than they were in the 80s; other things won't change
at all. Here are but a few of the events we can prognosticate
that should, could or might just happen during the coming year.

 *  The U.S. coal industry will achieve its fourth consecutive
record-year, with production and consumption reaching nearly 1
billion tons;

 *  The U.S. Congress will quickly commence debate on Clean Air
Act amendments, including costly acid rain controls that could
add as much as $7 billion a year to consumer electricity costs;

 *  The National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program (NAPAP)
will complete its 10-year $500 million analysis of acid rain and
conclude that acid rain is not an ecological emergency;

 *  One half of the nation's atmospheric scientists will call for
CO2 reductions as the means of abating the imminent global
warming threat to mankind;

 *  Coal will continue to dominate U.S. electric power generation
with nearly 60 percent of the market;

 *  American coal exports will reach 100 million tons, reducing
the nation's trade deficit by nearly $4 billion;

 *  The other half of the nation's global warming scientists will
argue against a consensus on the issue and warn instead of a
global cooling trend;

 *  Under the leadership of the Department of Energy, the country
will develop its national energy security plan that places an
emphasis on the development and utilization of all domestic
resources;

 *  Technological advances and management practices by coal
producers will lead to another 6 percent increase in
productivity, as has been done annually since 1978;

 *  Confounding mathematicians, a third, as yet undiscovered,
group of global warming scientists will say there is really a
consensus that nobody knows what's going on with future climate
trends, let alone tomorrow's weather forecast;

 *  One or more of DOE's clean coal technology projects will be
operational, the first step in bringing new technologies to the
marketplace, reducing emissions, increasing combustion
efficiencies and saving consumers billion of dollars;

 *  All of the global warming scientists will ask Congress for
funds for additional research;

 *  Key members of Congress and the administration will actually
read the final NAPAP report, realize there's no environmental
emergency associated with acid rain, and develop a more rational
legislative package;

 *  The coal industry will continue its steady progress in
restoring surface mine lands to productive use, benefitting
agriculture, recreational uses and wildlife;

 *  Global warming conferences will be in vogue, with at least a
seminar per week through the year, providing the finest minds in
the scientific community the opportunity to travel to some of the
nicest hotels America has to offer;

 *  As U.S. policymakers become more aware of projected growth in
population and energy demand in Third World nations, they will
begin to realize America's leadership role in the global warming
issue lies in technology exports, not unilateral reductions; and

 *  The Redskins will win the 1991 Super Bowl; the Air Force
Academy will win the national championship in college football.

Richard Lawson is president of the National Coal Association.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

RICHARD BALZHISER

Environmental concerns will continue to shape energy decisions in
1990.

Society has demonstrated its commitment to environmental well-
being and this commitment now speeds the introduction of new
technologies that use energy efficiently and cleanly. We expect
that the substitution of electricity for the direct use of fossil
fuel will play an increasingly important role in meeting the
world demand for energy while reducing environmental concerns.
One such example is the electric vehicle, which goes from
prototype to commercial production this year.

At the same time, environmental issues such as acid rain and
toxic wastes are bringing together the needed players to
capitalize on innovative clean coal technology. Solutions for
such issues benefit from collaborative research because of the
high costs and the need to bring diverse expertise together.
Judicious selection of strategies can address economic
productivity and national security as well as environmental well-
being. We must take care, however, that the preoccupation with
political expediency and risk aversion does not constrain our
ability to achieve the anticipated strategic advantages.

Issues surrounding the preservation of our global environment
point toward another key trend that shows no sign of
diminishing...that is, the widening international perspective on
science and technology. Just as science and technology are no
longer confined by national borders, environmental issues are
also global. To be sure, the need for international cooperation
can only grow as we move into the final decade of this century,
both in understanding the environmental sciences and in
developing new technologies to ensure an economic and reliable
energy supply.

Richard Balzhiser is president of the Electric Power Research
Institute.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

EDWARD BURKE

1990 will be the year in which the Department of Energy attempts
to develop a national energy strategy. The development of an
extensive dialogue on the subject is very important.

I am particularly pleased by the recent comments of Henson Moore
which stress the importance of renewable energy and conservation
in a national energy strategy. I am a strong exponent of the use
of diversified energy sources in a balanced package. Nuclear
power, petroleum, natural gas and coal (used with maximum
environmental safeguards)--all will play a significant role in
America's energy future.

Strong emphasis should be given to renewable technologies. Canada
now provides substantial amounts of renewable hydro-power for
export to the United States. I believe that there is room for a
substantial increase in this source of power, together with the
development of power both in new Canadian nuclear and high-
technology coal-fired, fluidized bed generators. Our nation must,
however, greatly improve the U.S.-Canadian transmission
interconnections if the Canadian option is to be fully utilized.
Improvement of transmission siting procedures must be in the
forecast of our national energy strategy.

I predict that the Department of Energy will produce the outline
of a national energy strategy in 1990. It is my expectation that
state and local energy conservation initiatives will multiply. It
is my hope that progress will be made in addressing the need for
improved U.S.-Canadian transmission ties.

I am positive that whenever "energy experts" become too stuffy
and pompous in their comments, The Energy Daily will be ready
with a wry pinprick.

Edward Burke is president of Providence, Rhode Island-based
Canadian Connection, Ltd.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

DANIEL DREYFUS

There were few unexpected developments in energy in 1989. Oil
prices firmed in March and have remained in the $18 range (but I
predicted that). Energy demand, including gas demand, continues
to grow slowly but steadily. This offers another year of evidence
that zero energy demand is now an artifact of history. After a
long sabbatical, government is again involving itself overtly in
energy policy. Except for a distinct environmental tone, the
directions of the involvement, thus far, remain formative and
vague.

In terms of specific energy predictions, 1990 looks like more of
the same. Demand for energy of all kinds will grow moderately in
nearly all uses. Electric utilities will increase their
consumption of oil greatly. They increased it by about 35 percent
in 1989, but no one took any particular notice!

In 1990, gas demand will increase by about 300 Bcf, or a little
more if the economy continues to defy the economists. The DOE
data series on gas have become so confused, however, that I don't
know with any precision what amount of 1989 consumption that
increase should be added to.

The most important development is 1989, certainly, has been the
disintegration of the Soviet Bloc. In time, this development will
have profound consequences for the global energy situation. With
the population of Eastern Europe, and even the Soviet Union,
aspiring to Western standards of lifestyles, and with the trade
barriers imposed by the Iron Curtain crumbling, a sea change in
world trade is in prospect. It will rival or exceed the impact of
the emergence in the 1970s of Japan as a global economic force.
Having learned that the yen is mightier than the sword, we are
now discovering that most people would rather be fed than red.

The former, self-imposed isolation of the Soviet bloc permitted
energy analysts largely to ignore the internal energy supply and
demand dynamics of communist countries. In any case, energy data
from behind the Iron Curtain was scarce. From time to time, the
CIA would leak reports that Soviet oil wells were suffering from
extreme neglect. But the reports were only of interest to obscure
Congressional subcommittees and they proved to be wrong anyway.

So we treated the centrally-planned economists as a relatively
inconsequential new export of Soviet oil and Polish coal, or we
simply struck a total with the euphemistic label "Free World" and
omitted them from consideration altogether. This offhand
treatment of one-third of global energy consumption and a greater
proportion of its resource base is no longer viable.

If the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, let alone China, embark
upon the path to consumer economics, they will dominate the
evolution of global energy statistics. Soviet industry today has
an energy intensity comparable to the U.S. in the 1950s, prior to
the much heralded "decoupling" of energy and economic growth.
Housing, appliances and above all, transportation are well below
Western standards in all of the communist world. Changing that
situation is the essence of "perestroika".

The Soviet Union is rich in energy resources and, despite an
enormous capacity for increased consumption, can probably remain
self-sufficient. Undoubtedly, gas exports to Europe and probably
the Far East will increase as a mainstay of Soviet hard currency
trade. Eastern Europe, however, will no longer be supported by
the Soviet energy system. Many of these countries will turn to
the West for energy trade and to the world oil trade for a
rapidly expanding petroleum requirement.

It is unlikely that the consequences of these events will impact
energy statistics during 1990, but during the next year the
implications for the future may begin to take form.

Similarly, initiatives to moderate the "greenhouse" effect
continue to gain currency in both the U.S. and international
political rhetoric. Formative notions of what is good or bad for
the atmosphere probably already are introducing subtle biases
into policy decisions.

In 1990, the Clean Air legislation is likely to be enacted within
hours of the Congressional adjournment for the fall elections.
The final version might incorporate some hints of greenhouse
policies.

Overall, 1990 will probably be a kinder, gentler year in the
energy business. In the vernacular of the energy analyst,
however, there are indications that an `'alternative future"
might be taking form.

Daniel Dreyfus is vice president for strategic planning and
analysis at the Gas Research Institute.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

KEN HOLLISTER

The call for a "National Energy Policy" is once more in the van
as we approach the decade of the 90s. I believe we have had other
tries at it in the 30s, 50s and 70s. It seems to be an affliction
similar to the 20-year itch.

This time around there is once again emphasis on the social use
of the product rather than the engineering supposedly needed to
accomplish it. In the 30s, we brought power to rural areas and in
the 70s the call was for a national transmission grid to move
blocks of power across vast distances and hold local rates at low
levels. As it is now all but environmentally impossible to build
a transmission line, (no less a grid), however, the "planners"
want to use already built facilities for the "greater social
good"; roughly translated, that means using investor-owned
property for the benefit of the ratepayer through a contribution
by the owner.

The "policies" surrounding the natural gas segment of the
industry have already undergone major transformations as
unregulated producers now strive to sell to stringently
overregulated local distribution companies that, in many cases,
have only modest prospects for growth, or directly to present
customers of the regulated utilities.

Managers of some electric utilities view the current ferment in
terms of opportunity and some fairly significant combinations of
service territories are brewing. Northeast Utilities seems on the
track to acquire the properties of the bankrupt Public Service of
New Hampshire, including the troubled Seabrook nuclear station.
PacifiCorp, having merged with Utah Power and Light, is now
proposing to acquire Arizona Public Service and Southern
California Edison is wallowing in its attempt to merge with San
Diego Gas and Electric. If something happens in the southeast, we
will have the four corners of the country accounted for and we
can work toward the middle. It may not be a national policy but
it should contribute to availability.

Will there be a "National Energy Policy" in the 90s? With a
profound sense of humbleness, I doubt it. The proposed mergers,
combinations and machinations will do little to provide for
future orderly growth of the industry or provide for the general
welfare. Just perhaps, if we could define it, we might be able to
determine what a National Energy Policy is supposed to do or be.
In the first place, to have an effective national policy, all
participants must have a mutual regard for the totality and look
for some degree of fair and equal treatment.

In practice, the extreme points of view currently being espoused
by some groups that have a meaningful degree of political
presence tends to raise the defense mechanism of a range of
opponents from entrepreneurs to bean counters. As a single
example, the City of San Diego, which for many years was in a
running battle with its electric utility (San Diego Gas &
Electric) now finds it the premier utility in the world and
advocates that its proposed merger with Southern California
Edison be aborted, or at least stopped. The reason, if I
understand it correctly, is that it had been a gouging regulated
monopoly, and if it becomes a bigger regulated monopoly it will
gouge the rate payer by a greater amount. (Regulators of the
world unite!) So much for rationality and we shall see whether
there is a merger or not. Also standing in the way of any
"policy" is the question of whether profit will be permitted. If
not, sooner or later the question of taking of property will go
to court. That could be an interesting group of cases.

Another proposed combination, that of Northeast Utilities and
Public Service of New Hampshire, provides a clue to the cost of
bankruptcy to the rate payer: 5-6 percent per year for 5 to 7
years is the proposal. If that is compared with the rate
reductions put in force when PacifiCorp merged voluntarily with
Utah Power & Light and the proposal of rate reductions for San
Diego customers by the Southern California managers, it might be
argued that voluntary is better. None of this, however,
contributes to National Energy Policy.

A respected competitor in the financial end of the world recently
stated: "Why build a plant when it can be bought more cheaply on
the New York Stock Exchange?" Placing aside the strictures of the
current Public Utility Holding Company Act, that may be one way
in which the electric companies may be reformed in the 90's.
Again, it would not be the basis to a National Energy Policy.

Another piece of legislation, the Public Utility Regulatory
Policies Act of 1978, probably will do much to reshape the
financial structure of the industry in the 90s as facilities from
generation, (and possibly, transmission) are added outside of
the present state regulatory system. It will test the ability of
current managements to meet the requirements of the basic
ratepayer and it will test the political system that created the
current atmosphere of change. We may not get a policy, but we
Certainly ought to have fun.

Ken Hollister is a vice president of Jersey City, New Jersey-
based W. H. Reaves & Co., Inc.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

GUS SPETH

1990 will be the year when global warming has its first impact on
national and international energy planning. Energy efficiency and
renewable technologies will assume a new importance in U.S.
energy strategy as a means of reducing carbon dioxide and other
greenhouse gas emissions. And the industrialized nations will
realize that, whatever international treaties are negotiated, it
will be their task to develop and supply the technologies that
will ultimately allow international CO2 reduction goals to be
achieved.

Gus Speth is president of World Resources Institute and a former
chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

JAMES MILLER

Our view of the energy industry for the forthcoming year is much
the same as was our expectation for 1989 made at this time last
year. We continue to believe that the so called "gas bubble" is a
great misconception and that prices more fairly reflective of its
value as a commodity, its clean burning characteristics and its
current finding costs will be forthcoming.

There have always been seasonal surpluses of natural gas, but
conversely, in periods of high demand, there have been natural
gas deliverability shortfalls with ensuing mandated conservation
via temporary school, factory, commercial building and public
office closings to reduce natural gas consumption and ameliorate
the deliverability shortfall.

While recent total natural gas reserve additions have exceeded
consumption, that fact has been the product of warmer than
average weather which has reduced demand, rather than greater
supplies available from new discoveries of natural gas reserves.
Our nation's deliverability available to satisfy peak period
demand has not improved. An extremely cold, prolonged winter of
the type which we have not experienced nationally since December
of 1983 through February of 1984 will have most serious
consequences in terms of natural gas supply shortages. The
natural gas spot market, favored more and more by natural gas
distributors, in such a scenario will see prices spike
dramatically higher, and worse, an inability to obtain assumed-
to-be-available supplies regardless of price.

In turn, the achievement of natural gas prices which recognize
the value of that commodity on the basis of heating value at
least comparable to its primary competitor (fuel oil) will
result. More realistic prices will provide the stimulus to
producers to increase exploratory drilling, bringing on
production of new reserves of natural gas with the deliverability
capacity to meet those peak day requirements.

If we see that prolonged cold winter period from December 1989
through February of 1990, our forecast at Plains will be a change
in 1990 from the public misconception of the "bubble " surplus to
a better recognition of what is required to satisfy human needs
during periods of greatest demand.

James Miller is chief executive officer of Plains Petroleum
Company in Lakewood, Colorado.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

MARK LUFTIG

The Environment: The most significant event for electric
utilities in 1990 is likely to be the passage of environmental
legislation late in the year. Because the outcome is likely to be
politically motivated, no rational person should hazard a guess
at the shape of the final bill. Maybe this will be the year when
all the scientists, climatologists and soothsayers who are
interested in global warming will be locked in a room until they
agree on whether the world's temperature is increasing or not.
Mine is.

Transmission Access: The dinosaurs and do-gooders will continue
their battle over transmission access, probably without progress.
The debate over changes in the Public Utility Holding Company Act
will continue, also without resolution. The IPPs will prosper but
they will press to be treated on an "equal footing" with
utilities. Not to be outdone, the utilities will continue
searching for the elusive "level playing field." The FERC will be
notable for its inaction. Someone will resort to the courts.

Nuclear Power: Seabrook will go to full power and Public Service
New Hampshire will emerge from bankruptcy. Shoreham will be
officially closed as a nuclear plant. There will only be one
investor-owned nuclear plant sill under active construction at
year-end. There still will not be any site approved for disposal
of high level waste.

Mergers: Hearings will continue and continue and continue in
California. The length of the proceedings and legal bills should
discourage others from trying, but it won't. The PacifiCorp offer
for Arizona Public Service either will die an early death or turn
into a three ring circus.

Deregulation: An interesting concept but the mood could change,
at least temporarily, if the economy continues to slow and
utilities look to regulators to raise rates to make up for the
shortfall in return, while the competitive world is forced to cut
prices because of declining demand.

The Stockholders: Alas, everyone cannot win. Earnings growth will
be lackluster. Dividend growth will be anemic but payout ratios
will creep up nevertheless. The stockholder is likely to get
caught in the middle when the various factions compromise their
differences over acid rain controversy.

Mark Luftig is a Vice President with National Economic Research
Associates.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

LARRY HOBART

The question of the 1990s decade is posed by Admiral Watkins: can
the U.S. formulate and implement a national energy strategy? The
driving forces in determining the answer are economic well-being
and environmental protection. Whether the Administration and
Congress decide to make deliberate decisions or leave it to
chance, there will be choices affecting public planning, energy
security, transmission access, fuels purchases, nuclear's future,
renewable resources and industry organizations. The price and
physical effects of energy conclusions--caused either by
political calculations or market mechanisms--will be visited on
consumers who, together with states, are increasingly looking for
involvement in the policy process. The most likely 1990 policy
scenario: attempts at federal micro-managing of a lot of issues,
e.g. acid rain, PUHCA amendments and efficiency standards,
without serious consideration of the "big picture." And so it
goes.

Larry Hobart is executive director of the American Public Power
Association.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

EDWARD TIRELLO

With a dawn of a new decade, we foresee major changes occurring
within the electric utility industry--some we expect to be
addressed in 1990 and some further out into the 1990s. Near term,
we expect to see important legislative action regarding two key
issues: acid rain and an amendment to the Public Utility Holding
Company Act of 1935. In our view, whether or not PUHCA is
amended, we see a future for independent power producers.

Longer term, we foresee the debate over transmission access
gathering steam. In our opinion, the future of transmission
access policy is being shaped now and the industry should begin
playing a more active role in its ultimate formation rather than
attempting to prevent the inevitable.

Finally, we see the trend toward consolidation continuing and
possible accelerating by the end of the year as the current
competitive forces become more formidable. In our view,
transmission access will also be a driving force toward
consolidation.

We look for the 1990s to be an exciting time for the utility
industry--a time of progress and change and a time of preparation
for meeting the challenges and demands of the 21st century.

Edward Tirello is senior vice president at Shearson Lehman Hutton
in New York.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

WILLIAM DERRICKSON

The licensing process must be changed. Intelligent single-step
licensing must replace existing regulations in order to keep the
nuclear option alive. The NRC needs to protect the future of
nuclear power, as well as pave the way for a return to a more
healthy nuclear industry. Right now, I'm not sure there is an
industry, per se.

Finally, new financial challenges lay ahead for the utility
futurist. Perhaps another large nuke plant won't be built during
our careers, or at least not until some of the big uncertainties
are quantified. The finance people are never going to be
comfortable with risks that can jeopardize billions of dollars
sitting idle. And the political risk is the greatest of all.

Years ago, when he was chairman of EEI, Marshall McDonald perhaps
put it best when he said building a nuke plant is like playing
"you bet your company." One plant can come to equal the entire
property and equipment equity of the owner before it's finished,
and then there's no guarantee it will ever operate. Clearly,
something's gotta give, and it isn't going to be the people
holding the money.

William Derrickson is chairman and chief executive officer of
Quadrex Corporation.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

JERALD HALVORSEN

The natural gas industry has been in transition, but that's
changing.

While the details still need to be filled in, the broad outlines
of the restructured industry have become clearer over the past
year or so.

As pipelines began the shift from merchant to transporter, they
were overwhelmed by take-or-pay costs and they saw their markets
taken by cheap spot gas. Both those situations are improving now.

Take-or-pay liability, three years ago a mind-boggling $10
billion, has been reduced to the more manageable--but still
excessive--level of $2.3 billion, according to INGAA's latest
survey.

And as the gas bubble dissipates, local distribution companies
are moving once more to longer-term, more realistic contracts.

Gas inventory charges, incentive ratemaking and pipeline
expansions into the Northeast and California are all in the works
and the pipelines can only hope FERC quickens the pace at which
the specifics are processed. Likewise, we anticipate the issuance
of a pipeline marketing affiliate rule, and hope that it will be
a reasonable one.

Although FERC's agenda is full, we are encouraged by the early
commitments made by the new chairman, Martin Allday, to move
quickly on the most pressing unresolved problems.

On the legislative front, it frequently seems Congress is
determined to demand the impossible of the gas industry. On one
hand, legislators encourage increased gas use in the clean air
bill. On the other, they simultaneously threaten to lock up our
most promising offshore reserves and forbid our pipelines to
cross wetlands.

This juxtaposition of conflicting demands has the virtue of
making INGAA's legislative mission clear. In 1990, we will work
to retain a flexible, freedom-of-choice approach to meeting clean
air standards, steering clear of any cost-sharing tax. And we
will try to stave off the imposition of drilling moratoria and
too-restrictive wetlands policies. Congress must be made to see
that development of gas resources and preservation of the
environment are not mutually exclusive.

If we can meet this challenge, and if exploration can be roused
from its present lethargic state, the next few years look very
bright for natural gas.

Jerald Halvorsen is president of the Interstate Natural Gas
Association of America.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

GEORGE LAWRENCE

Last year in The Energy Daily's forecast issue I said: "The
natural gas industry looks forward to a year of progress
highlighted by growing demand, competitive prices, adequate
supply and new market development." Well, it happened. For 1990--
indeed, the 1990s--I now make the same prediction...only more so.

A hundred years ago, the last decade of the century was referred
to as "The Gay Nineties." I think the last decade of this century
is going to be "The Gas Nineties." All of the barometers point
toward this inescapable conclusion.

We have transcended the predictions of a few vocal, lonely doom-
and-gloomers regarding the demise of natural gas. The reality of
the 1990s is that natural gas will move to a position of
prominence.

What are the prime factors? I see three standouts. One is the
growing confidence in long-term gas supply from virtually all
industry participants. The second is the corresponding worldwide
recognition that natural gas has many contributions to make in
solving environmental and energy security concerns. Third, and
possibly most important, is that the gas industry's place of
business is moving away from Washington--away from the
debilitating legislative and regulatory intrusions of the past
toward the more constructive arena where the normal challenges
faced by buyers and sellers are of paramount importance.

In short, the gas industry is moving from the public policy
playground to the marketplace battleground. And, while there is
real competition on both the playground and the battleground, the
battleground is for real!

In 1990, the natural gas industry will be characterized by:
continued growth in supply and demand; competitive prices for
consumers, that are responsive enough to provide economic
incentives for producers; and further confirmation of the crucial
role natural gas will have in solving environmental concerns.

Of equal significance is the increased awareness by customers and
public policymakers alike of the benefits of the three market
applications AGA has been beating the drum for during the past 10
years--natural gas vehicles, natural gas cooling and the high-
efficiency electricity generation options of cogeneration,
combined-cycle turbines and co-firing of gas with coal.

Since this is my last submission as president of AGA to The
Energy Daily's New Year's Day issue, I want to close with a few
basic principles, which we at AGA have pretty well lived by.
First, get in mind the basic long-term message you hope to convey
and, while flexibility is fine, don't deviate too far from it as
the years go by. History may well confirm your perspicacity.
Second, hire people who will make sure you are right. And
finally, "illegitimus non tatum carborunden!"

George Lawrence is president of the American Gas Association.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

KENNETH CARR

The last decade of the twentieth century provides a challenge to
the nuclear industry and those of us who regulate it. Briefly
stated, the challenge involves the question of whether it is time
to call the undertaker or whether an ailing industry is about to
make a rebound. The answer rests squarely with those who operate
the plants and manage the companies.

If nuclear recovery is to occur, what 1990 brings will be
important. In reflecting on expectations for the coming year, I
as an optimist see the following:

 *  Industry will develop a standard for the maintenance of
nuclear power plants that will involve the whole plant, both the
nuclear and non-nuclear sides.

 *  The improved performance of today's operating plants will
continue. This will result from the industry's efforts to
increase management attention on the safety of operation and the
emphasis on training of the people who operate and maintain the
plants.

 *  The NRC will continue to press for progress on defining the
issues which are important to considering plant aging and license
renewal. We must give the industry early guidance so that it can
make decisions in an area which is key to continuity of supply
for nearly 20 percent of the U.S. electricity.

 *  Continued progress will be made in the low level waste siting
process.

 *  Much dual regulation will be eliminated as a result of the
combined efforts of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the
Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of Energy and the
Department of Health and Human Services. No one questions that
the comprehensive regulatory program of the NRC has kept public
exposure and public risk to harmless levels. Duplication of
regulation is a burden on everyone's resources.

 *  Legislation to convert the NRC into an agency headed by a
single administrator will not be enacted. The NRC is functioning,
nuclear plant performance is improving. "If it ain't broke--don't
fix it."

For 1990, continued commitment to operational safety, as well as
advances in technology, are the keys to the future of safe,
economical nuclear energy.

Kenneth Carr is chairman of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
Commission.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

DAVID BARDIN

An epidemic of tiny, one-seat, solar powered vehicles, imported
from Switzerland, will infect Aspen and Los Angeles. APPA will
favor a larger, dual-power version with both solar panels and a
plug-in battery. Methanol advocates will demand dedicated lanes
for alternative-fuels cars to "level the playing field."

Governor Cuomo will advocate removing the Yucca Mountain Project
to Manhattan, or Long Island or the Adirondacks.

Governor Sununu will urge a read-my-lips carbon emissions control
research surcharge.

EPA Administrator Reilly will convince the Clean Air Coalition to
support "just enough" nuclear power to decelerate greenhouse
warming. Gus Speth will persuade Secretary Watkins to start a
long-term study to determine how much is just enough.

The SEC, by a bare majority, will tentatively permit acquisition
of EPRI by AEP. NARUC will ask ChairmEn Johnston and Dingell for
a surgical PUHCA amendment to block the deal. The country's
largest combination utility will make a friendly bid to take over
GRI.

President Bush will bless new Soviet natural gas exports, while
proposing petroleum investments by western oil companies in
Eastern Europe.

As U.S. oil imports rise, Trade Representative Hills will
encourage coal-mine, uranium-mine and hydroelectric-site
acquisitions by major European and Japanese investors.

David Bardin is an energy attorney with Arent, Fox, Kintner,
Plotkin & Kahn.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

MARC GOLDSMITH

Electric demand and sales will fall:

 *  AGA will claim it's the result of their gas marketing efforts
and improved penetration of gas appliances.

 *  Regulators will say it's the result of least-cost energy
planning.

 *  Electric utilities will attribute the reductions to demand-
side management.

 *  Utility CEOs will breath a sigh of relief and defer the
construction of anything.

 *  Developers of independent power projects will claim it's an
aberration.

 *  Congress will take credit for single-handedly reducing acid
rain.

 *  OPEC will smile as oil sales go up.

 *  Alternate energy sales and municipal solid waste trash-to-
energy plants will be put on hold.

 *  John Sillin and John Siegel will claim that their model
works.

 *  Amory Lovins will promote nega-something as the cause and
say, "I told you so in 1968."

 *  EPRI will claim credit based on new technology and higher
electric efficiency.

 *  GRI will attribute the decline to new gas cooling technology.

 *  Economists will claim it's the economy.

 *  The Energy Daily will send Kennedy Maize and John Egan to
find the cause.

 *  Others will go searching yet again to show that no linkage
exists between energy and GNP.

As our crystal ball has run out of juice, we must end our
conjecture with thanks for the year gone by and wishes to all for
a prosperous New Year.

Marc Goldsmith is president of Energy Research Group in Waltham,
Massachusetts.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

PAUL PARSHLEY

Like a moth being drawn to a flame, I can't resist the temptation
to make some 1990 predictions for the electric utility industry.
So, look for the following in the year to come:

 *  For the first time in almost a decade, Long Island Lighting
Company will rejoin the ranks of solid investment grade
utilities, as efforts by the Department of Energy and others to
forestall the decommissioning of the Shoreham nuclear plant prove
increasingly irrelevant to continued improvement in the company's
financial health.

 *  PSNH will emerge from bankruptcy as a subsidiary of Northeast
Utilities sometime next summer. At that time, PSNH will have the
credit quality characteristics of a very solid investment grade
electric utility, probably in the High-BBB/Low-A range. From the
standpoint of dramatic credit quality improvement, PSNH will be
the Lilco of 1990. The Seabrook Joint Owners are overly
optimistic in their expectation that Seabrook will enter
commercial operation in March or April, 1990; a fourth quarter
online date seems more likely.

 *  Midland and (possibly) Zimmer, two failed nuclear projects,
will begin operation as fossil-fueled power plants.

 *  There will be two or three unplanned and prolonged nuclear
plant outages beginning in 1990 and extending for at least twelve
months.

 *  Strict acid rain legislation will be passed by the Congress
and signed into law by the President by the fall of 1990. The
legislation will impose significant costs on certain utilities
during the next five years.

 *  In response to recent failures in utility diversification,
the regulatory pendulum in many states will begin swinging back
in the direction of more oversight and control of utility
decisions to restructure and diversify.

 *  The future role of Independent Power Producers in helping to
meet the nation's next increment of electric power demand will
become more clearly defined.

 *  Finally, and most assuredly, during 1990 The Energy Daily
subscription price will grow by a larger percentage than the
national demand for electric power.

Paul Parshley is a senior vice president at Shearson Lehman
Hutton in New York.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

JOHN SILLIN

Over the course of the 1980s much has happened. Below are my
observations with regard to several significant issues.

1. Regarding the outlook for power shortages: "Where there's
smoke, there's fire."

2. Regarding the appropriate level of utility regulation: "The
government that governs best governs least."

3. Regarding the relative merits of utility diversification: "I
refer the reader to the fable of the race between the tortoise
and the hare."

4. Regarding the purported need for amendments to the Clean Air
Act: "Don't confuse me with the facts, I've already made up my
mind."

5. Regarding the relative merits of QFs: "Never in the history of
man has so little been made to sound like so much, been made to
cost so much."

6. Regarding the utility industry's stance on PUHCA reform: "A
house divided cannot stand."

7. Regarding energy forecasters' inherent desire to forever
extrapolate upward oil prices: "What goes up must come down."

8. Regarding the much frequently cited demise of the nuclear
power industry: "The opera's not over until the fat lady sings."

9. Regarding the huffing and puffing in Washington over national
energy strategy and subsidiary policy issues: "Much ado about
nothing."

10. Regarding proposals to mandate open transmission access:
"What's mine is mine and what's yours is mine too."

11. Regarding trying to understand Governor Cuomo's and the New
York PSC's position on Shoreham: "The reader is referred to Alice
in Wonderland."

12. Regarding the often cited end of the natural gas bubble:
"Don't energy forecasters know the difference between a tunnel
and a bubble?"

13. Regarding failure to take these observations to heart: "Those
who ignore the lessons of history are condemned to repeat them."

John Sillin is a consultant based in Management Analysis
Company's Washington office.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

WILLIAM McCOLLAM

As I complete my stint as EEI's president and turn the reins over
to Tom Kuhn in May, I can't help but look back over the 12 years
I have been in Washington and note the dramatic changes that have
taken place in the electric utility industry during this period.
But one thing that has not changed is the importance of an
adequate, reliable and secure electric power supply to the
economic growth and prosperity of our country.

I am constantly struck by the increasing globalization of the
economy and the need for American industry to remain healthy and
competitive in this new economic climate. Electricity's role in
making that possible is more important than ever. Further, as we
struggle to improve our environment, we must continue to keep in
mind the urgent need to prudently balance costs and benefits in
order that we remain competitive internationally.

The issues we are facing today are indeed difficult, but not
unmanageable. We are entering an era where it will be incumbent
upon us to make this nation realize that electricity and a
healthy environment are synonymous. Electricity is the fuel of
choice to attain that healthy environment. Our local electric
companies will generate or purchase from independent producers as
their individual circumstances dictate. The automation and
resulting efficiencies realized in the 1990s will be astounding.
And it will be our greatest challenge to see that this comes to
pass. Graham Greene wrote in  The Power and the Glory  that
"there is always one moment in childhood when the door opens and
lets the future in." Our industry is still in its youth, and I
predict that in the 1990s we will help open that door for this
nation and let the future in.

William McCollam, Jr. is president of the Edison Electric
Institute.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

DENNY ELLERMAN

This is the year in which, we are told, coal's fate will be cast
after a decade of stonewalling on acid rain. But, of course, acid
rain controls are only the beginning. To forestall global
warming, we must do still more and even more quickly. Can anyone
hold out much hope for coal? Only those who take heart from the
Little Engine That Could.

A. Denny Ellerman is a vice president in the Washington office of
Charles River Associates.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

DAVID MOSKOVITZ

Nineteen ninety will bring dramatic changes to not only the
nation's energy policy, but our actual resolve to act
consistently with the energy policy. Among the highlights will be
the following:

 *  The long awaited energy strategy will call upon the nation's
electric utilities to start investing heavily in coal and nuclear
power plants.

 *  The strategy will call for federal preemption of all state
regulation and will specify that all new power plant construction
is per se prudent.

 *  Energy efficiency and energy conservation will be branded as
socialistic concepts that belong more properly in hard-line
eastern bloc countries (if any remain). Amory Lovins will become
the energy czar for the newly formed Federation of Democratic
Eastern European Republics.

 *  Shoreham and Seabrook will commence commercial operation, and
both plants will be transferred to a new federal agency, Nuclear
Operation (NO), that will take over the previous responsibilities
of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. The agency will be headed
by a single commissioner, Peter Bradford.

 *  The Committee for Energy Awareness and the Edison Electric
Institute will become full dues-paying members of NARUC.

 *  A memorandum from chief of staff John Sununu to other cabinet
members explaining why global warming is good for the United
States, will be leaked to The Energy Daily.

 *  To everyone's surprise, the Transmission Task Force will not
merely gather dust; the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
(FERC) will act boldly, initiating reform at every possible
opportunity, and will even follow in the footsteps of the Federal
Communications Commission and the Civil Aviation Board,
suggesting structural reform as a cure to the thorny transmission
issues facing the electric utility industry.

 *  The FERC will undertake to promulgate stringent new
transmission access and pricing policies. Under these policies,
any utility will be permitted to do anything they like,
notwithstanding any other fact or consideration.

 *  Public Service of New Hampshire will ask the FERC for
permission to place toll booths on the major north-south
transmission corridors. Two hundred utilities and other interest
groups will intervene opposing the tariff. It will be approved
without a hearing.

 *  Llewellyn King will slash the amount of space in The Energy
Daily dedicated to advertising The Energy Daily conferences to
one quarter of the annual column inches. The result will be a
doubling of attendance.

David Moskovitz is a energy and regulatory consultant in Alna,
Maine.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

JOHN ANDERSON

We have just ushered in a new decade, one I believe that
electricity consumers will characterize later as the decade of
clean air and increased competition. With luck, these two terms
will not be mutually exclusive.

The generation side of the electric utility industry is more
competitive now than it was in the past. Cogenerators now
represent nearly 4 percent of all generation and utilities have
tripled their construction of generation out of rate-base.
Meanwhile, independent power generators (IPPs) are being built,
although at a slow pace; cities and other public power utilities
are shopping for lower-cost power sources; and states are
carefully analyzing bidding and transmission as means to achieve
ends difficult to reach with regulation.

In addition, transmission no longer is a dirty word. However, it
is still used to protect utility generators from real
competition. Thus, inefficiencies and cross-class subsidies
remain.

The electric utility industry in the 1990s will follow the
lessons learned in the natural gas industry in the 1980s. Truly
independent generators will compete with utilities for the right
to build new generators. The winners of this competition will be
both efficient utilities and non-utilities regardless of any
changes to PUHCA.

Transmission will be recognized as a monopoly and a bottleneck
facility. In fact, nondiscriminatory transmission access at cost-
based rates will be required as a condition of utility
participation in the market.

Shortly stated, utilities that attempt to protect themselves from
competition will suffer lost load and profitability.

Unfortunately, the march down the competitive path may well be
characterized as one of fits and starts along a circuitous route.
Specifically, FERC will not address issues in a generic way.
Rather, major decisions will be made piecemeal through individual
cases. This will require interested parties to intervene in many
cases to attempt to shape generic policy, and while the outcome
looks positive, the process will be expensive and time consuming.

The dark cloud still looming over the industry from 1989 is
consumers' concerns regarding the cost impacts of clean air
legislation. For the first time, we have a Republican president
pushing hard for environmental legislation. The Democrats cannot
be viewed as obstacles. To me, this means legislation will be
passed, probably just before Congress adjourns for the 1990
elections.

The resulting impacts may be substantial. Rates could be
increased 20 to 30 percent, or more.

The irony is that clean air legislation may more than offset
efficiency gains caused by increased competition. Indeed, such
legislation has the potential to eliminate the ability of non-
utility entities to build electric generators. Clean air
legislation such as the Senate bill (S. 1630) or the House bill
(H.R. 3030) also will be the most important energy policy
legislation we've seen in a decade. It may even eclipse the DOE's
National Energy Strategy.

John Anderson is executive director of the Electricity Consumers
Resource Council (Elcon).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet
January 2, 1990

THE LAST WORD...JAMES WATKINS

As we begin the last decade of the twentieth century, once again
we find ourselves at the crossroads of history. The energy crisis
of the 1970s made it clear to everyone that energy affects
virtually every aspect of American life: investment policy,
technology research and development, international trade, prices,
transportation, defense, agriculture and the environment. The
energy crisis alerted us to our burgeoning energy needs and the
country responded with a myriad of innovative solutions ranging
from energy conservation to development of alternative energy
sources. Unless we make further progress, the energy problems of
tomorrow will be every bit as serious as those of yesterday.

 *  Domestic U.S. oil production for the first six months of 1989
was at its lowest point in 25 years. Meanwhile, oil imports
averaged 7.8 million barrels per day, a level 65 percent higher
than in 1985. Only in the late 1970s did we import more oil.

 *  As a result, total imports exceeded domestic crude oil
production for the first half of 1989. Only in the first half of
1977 has this occurred before.

 *  Environmental concerns are putting new pressures on our
ability to use our most abundant domestic fuel, which is coal.

 *  Electricity reserve margins are shrinking across the country.
Voltage reductions have already been required this summer in the
Northeast. Meanwhile, New York State officials are abandoning a
completed, safe nuclear power plant.

To ensure abundant, environmentally-safe and affordable energy
for America's future, we need something the United States has
never had before: a national energy strategy. The time to devise
a National Energy Strategy is now, not while we are in the midst
of the next energy crisis. That is why in July 1989, President
Bush directed me to devise a National Energy Strategy (NES) by
December 1990.

Energy conservation will continue to be a hot issue in 1990. Our
ability to conserve energy resources is nearly as unlimited as
human ingenuity. Since 1973, our economy has grown by 45 percent
but our energy usage has only slightly increased. In 1990,
producers of everything from toasters to industrial machinery
will develop more energy efficient products. And utilities will
increasingly sponsor programs to reduce energy demands,
especially during peak periods of usage.

Coal will continue to be a vital source of energy. With more than
30 percent of the world's coal reserves, about 56 percent of U.S.
electricity is now generated from coal. But the demand for coal-
produced energy comes at a time when greater attention is being
paid to the integrity of our environment.

In 1990, advances will be made in technologies for burning coal
cleanly. By 1992, DOE will have spent some $5 billion to fund 50
to 75 "showcase" projects, each demonstrating a means of burning
coal more efficiently and cleanly, as efforts increase to replace
the vintage-1960 "scrubbers."

We can look forward to incremental improvements in the efficiency
and cost effectiveness of such alternative sources of energy as
wind power and photovoltaics. New sources, such as trees and
grass, will be found for ethanol production. Finally, in the
years ahead we will increasingly see nuclear power as a source of
clean, safe and affordable energy.

Finally, since I came to DOE, I have given health and safety
concerns top priority. In 1990, it is my hope that like never
before we will see a greater emphasis in the energy industry on
health and safety concerns.

James Watkins is the Secretary of Energy.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B34-17</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B003-131</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey93.html 205.156.212.5 19970114231203 text/html 153831
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:09:01 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:30 GMT
Content-length: 153643
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ey93.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>WELCOME TO 1996</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(661 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PUBLICATIONS REVIEW</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>GAS SECURITY AND GENERAL WINTER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2420 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>ENTER THE MIDDLE KINGDOM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2657 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>BOOM NPS GOES BOOM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2741 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>CONFUCIUS, HE SAY...</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2075 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>HUNGARY'S MOL SUFFERS A DOWNGRADE FROM DEBTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1816 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>BRITISH GAS AND A HOTEL IN ROTHERHITHE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1676 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>ENERGY MARKET REPORT:  CRUDE OIL & PRODUCTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(4161 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>ENERGY MARKET REPORT:  NATURAL GAS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1267 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>ENERGY MARKET REPORT:  COAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1317 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>ENERGY MARKET REPORT:  ELECTRICITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1834 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>EDITOR'S EXAGGERATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(110 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>TURKEY TO INCREASE POWER GENERATING CAPACITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(60 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>NORWAY'S OIL OUTPUT HITS RECORD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(43 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>CHINA'S HAINAN ISLAND GAS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(79 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>SYRIA TO AMEND CURRENCY REGULATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(63 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>VIETNAM'S REFINERY PROJECT BACK ON TRACT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(73 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>SOUTH AFRICA TO INTRODUCE UNLEADED PETROL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(62 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>YEMEN APPROVES GAS DEAL WITH TOTAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(42 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>PANHANDLE EASTERN CHANGES NAME</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(73 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>SENSITIVE MATERIAL ABOUT THE KUWAITI OIL INDUSTRY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(69 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>POLAND SEEKING POSTPONEMENT OF LIBERALISED FUEL IMPORTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(64 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>90% OF LUKOIL'S SUBSIDIARY SHARES CONSOLIDATED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(32 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>NIGERIA SIGNS MOU WITH CHINA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(66 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>VENEZUELA'S PRIVATISATION OF ELECTRICITY SECTOR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(78 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>BP TO REDUCE REFINING CAPACITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(66 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>DABHOL DEAL AGREED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(76 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>DR ROBERT MABRO AWARDED CBE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(34 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>SURVEY OF UK CONSUMERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(36 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>ACCIDENT AT MONJU FAST BREEDER REACTOR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(56 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>INTERSOLAR AWARDED CONTRACT BY WORLD BANK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(55 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>G7 COUNTRIES SIGN MOU WITH THE UKRAINE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(49 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>EXPLORATORY WELLS IN CHINA'S TARIM BASIN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(62 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

WELCOME TO 1996

The year has not exactly started well. Like the Spanish border guard
who reportedly played Russian roulette with four bullets in his
revolver, last week, the world seems to have an unerring capacity for
foolish mistakes. Gone, for example are the happy days when anybody
could make cheerful assumptions about Russia and oil investment there.
Christopher Warren, the US Secretary of State, may well warn Boris
Yeltsin that if any more Russian liberals are thrown out of government,
the west will take its ball away and play elsewhere. However this is
about as effective as telling a hippopotamus that it has bad breath.

Meanwhile, China throws a spanner in the rising prosperity of the
Pacific Rim by suggesting that it is not impossible that it will start
to bombard Taiwan with rockets for 30 days if the Taiwan President Lee
Teng-hui wins his election in March. Such warnings have to be taken
seriously, but it is a tribute to the mentality of the Chinese
leadership that they seem fully prepared to give the entire region such
a shock merely to assert their right to a "province" now infinitely
more prosperous than the mainland.

In Japan, Shigeo Hishimura, the chief investigator into the accident at
the Monju fast breeder reactor, commits suicide by jumping out of his
hotel window. Aside from the fear amongst the Japanese that this will
trigger off a sudden rash of suicides amongst middle management, his
reasons were interesting. He was apparently worried that his report
might not be fair and that it would have a negative effect on his
colleagues. The 280 MW reactor lost three tonnes of sodium coolant,
management did not shut down the reactor for 15 minutes after
discovering the leak and then promptly covered up the seriousness of
the accident. It seems there was rather a lot to be unfair about.

Finally, in Europe, it has become so obvious that European monetary
union is going to be postponed that even Chancellor Kohl will have to
notice it eventually. With characteristic fastidiousness, the central
bankers have made the conditions of entry so ferocious that no country
in Europe can afford to join! As it is, the French and Germans are
diving so fast into recession the last thing they need is the
ludicrously named Euro. Just wait for all those banner headlines: Euro-
Over!

So what should the conscientious energy observer expect from this year,
which is - incidentally - the 100th anniversary of the first fatal car
accident? (The judge apparently said that he hoped there would never be
another one.) First and foremost all the runes point to a deal with
Iraq and its re-entry to part of its market. The Kuwaitis, the Saudis
and even the Syrians seem to feel that enough is enough and want the
Iraqis to be able to sell $2 billion-worth of oil under UN supervision.

Secondly, there is likely to be more trouble in the Caucasus, with
considerable implications for the future of the Caspian. The war
between Russia and the Chechens is certainly not over. Equally there
was a certain symbolism about the suggestion that the Chechen
supporters should blow up their Russian ferry in the Bosporus. The
threat of a tanker accident there has been pre-occupying the Turks for
some time, not least if the output of the Caspian region through
Novorossiysk starts to grow substantially. A fault line between Russia
and Turkey has appeared since the Soviet Union collapsed. The
activities of the Chechens can only make it bigger.

Finally of course, neither of the above is really going to have much
impact on energy prices, generally. Some Australian operators of a
radio telescope, who scanned the stars for intelligent life in the
universe, thought they had got lucky last month. Unhappily, the steady
rhythmic pulse, present every evening between 6 and 9 pm turned out to
be the microwave ovens in the nearest towns. Oh well.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

GAS SECURITY AND GENERAL WINTER

Energy security conjures up images of war: petrol rationing in Britain
during the Suez Crisis; gas station queues in the US during the Yom
Kipper War; American, British and French warships on tanker protection
duty in the Gulf to prevent Iran from literally or metaphorically
closing the strait of Hormuz. But as Tsar Nicholas the First indicated,
perhaps the real issue is quite another power altogether, the might of
generals January and February.

The International Energy Agency, in a massive new tome on natural gas
security, certainly fears political disruptions with regard to natural
gas supplies to Europe -but shares the Tsar's views with regard to
likely causes of gas supply disruption in North America.

In many ways, the IEA's analyses of Canada's experience during the
bitter winter of 1992/3 and of the US' East Coast whiteouts a year
later constitute one of the work's most interesting facets; an
experience which by all accounts is currently being repeated right now.
 There were production, transportation and contractual difficulties.
Yet while prices soared, production also rose. But there were failures
of wells to produce at anticipated levels, "due to lack of systemic
testing and cost saving measures taken during the preceding surplus
period; there were "freeze-offs'' in which ice restricted gas flows at
the well head, prompting a six per cent cutback in natural gas output
in late December and early January compared to record output levels
reached at the start of December.

But overall, the system responded well. Somehow the producers managed
to extract an extra 10 Bcm to meet demand (which the IEA compares to a
total demand figure for the whole of 1992 of 110 Bcm), even though
tightness in the supply/demand balance "was reflected in sharp
increases and volatility in short term gas prices, from a level of
around $1 per gigajoule one year earlier, short term gas prices went as
high as $4.50 per gigajoule during the winter of 1992-93." Whilst there
some problems with initial deliverability by producers, the IEA noted
that even the number of wellhead "freeze-offs" was not out of the
ordinary and, perhaps most important of all, "there were no significant
outages on the transmission system."

Where the Canadians did suffer a problem was over the issue of
linepack, the amount of gas physically maintained in the in the
pipeline system. Normally, the pipeline's customers balance their
deliveries into the system and their extractions from it once a month.
So long as the brief input or output shortfalls of the gas companies
are in rough balance, the system works fine. But during the winter
freeze, a number of shippers found they faced problems over their
deliveries into the system -but continued to make withdrawals from the
system. This practice, known as drafting, ran the risk of reducing the
linepack below acceptable levels.

Pipeline operators, who needed to maintain linepack at safe levels,
responded by requiring other shippers to increase their deliveries into
the system and by imposing pro rata cuts on the amount that all
shippers could take out of it. One operator insisted that as from
December 1, each shipper should balance his input and output on a daily
basis, a move widely supported by the gas industry but which posed
considerable difficulty for some individual shippers.

Contractual problems, triggered by sudden changes in market prices and
inadequate transportation arrangements were exacerbated by the fact
that gas may change ownership five or six times between wellhead and
final consumption. Naturally, there was a tendency for some producers
to try to earn as much from booming spot market as they could,
sometimes reallocating gas to the spot markets that was supposed to be
earmarked for longer term contracts - a practice which became known as
price majeure.

Perhaps it is because the IEA is headquartered in Paris that its
conclusion on this point was stated in the following terms: "The risk
of price majeure underscores the importance of good contracting
practices, particularly if the contract includes a fixed price over an
extended period when price volatility may be experienced. The fact that
price majeure may occur illustrates the difference between contracting
culture in North America and in Europe, where such a phenomenon has
hardly been conceivable." (Or at least not yet: Ed)

The way in which in Canada tackled its gas problems in the winter of
1992/93 and the US experience in tackling the cold snap during the week
of January 16-22, 1994 are detailed, and thus reveal some interesting
comparisons. The IEA considered that "these systems perform very well
under stress and that the entire gas industry works very well together
especially when the image of gas in the public opinion is at stake."
Canada witnessed a curtailment of deliveries to some customers with
several suppliers determining that "there was often no financial
penalty for failing to deliver nominated volumes under long-term,
reserve-based contracts with supply aggregates." But most producers and
marketers sought out alternate supplies to maintain gas flows rather
than curtail buyers. There was a common belief that failure to deliver
supplies, even under force majeure, could jeopardise a seller's
reputation.

The use of drafting was widespread before the system of daily balances
was introduced and is still available option to buy time to resolve
relatively small or isolated supply disruptions. But in the Canadian
freeze it was the spot market that was the most commonly used option to
maintain gas deliveries. Because there are four different options for
spot gas purchases - in the field, upstream at storage sites, at
regular delivery points and inventory transfers from shippers willing
to put more gas into the system than they need to withdraw - the IEA
concludes that "spot gas is almost always available as an alternative
source of supply, but sometimes only at a very high price." It notes
that many producers and marketers incurred large financial losses by
purchasing higher priced spot gas to maintain deliveries under lower
priced contracts. Gas swaps and loans, which suppliers in western
Canada used to import US gas to meet peak demand, also proved helpful.
But the IEA notes that unless these have been arranged in advance "they
can take two or three days to organise and in a volatile market, prices
can swing widely, suddenly undermining the economics of such
arrangements."

The following year, severe ice storms followed by bitter cold in New
England and down the Atlantic coast prompted disruption of natural gas
supplies, along with transmission of electricity and distribution of
propane, kerosene and fuel oil. Yet gas demand soared to record levels,
with most suppliers witnessing demand levels that were around eight per
cent above any previous peak. The cold did not hamper production, which
also reached new records. Imports also rose to record levels and all
available storage was optimised. The Canadians helped considerably.
Capacity on the Iroquois pipeline, normally maintained at 670 mcf/d was
upped by a further 140 mcf/d by the abnormal practice of operating all
its compressors. At the same time, local distribution companies in
Eastern Canada funneled additional supplies into system. Algeria
shipped an extra tanker load of LNG to Boston's Distrigas, which not
only helped to meet peak demand but also to maintain the system
integrity of both the Iroquois and Tennessee Gas pipelines.

But while the system generally worked well, there were still some
lessons to be learned. The different parts of the gas industry might
have communicated well with each other, but "information to the public,
especially in the beginning, was deficient in both timing and content "
Better cooperation with electric utilities was required to make them
aware of the impact which rotating blackouts could have on crucial gas
facilities. The IEA cites the US Department of Energy's conclusion that
in some cases the industry should consider replacing electrically
operated compressors with natural gas fuelled compressors.

The IEA report argues that although US gas demand is set to grow
steadily - from 17.4 Quads (614 Bcm) to 23.9 Quads (843 Bcm) in 2010
according to a 1994 study by the Gas Research Institute - the manner in
which the US gas industry has completed pipeline expansion projects and
has prepared plans for further such schemes and for increased storage
"show the willingness of the industry to undertake the investment in
the new facilities needed to serve future load growth." Ultimately,
however, it comes to no firm conclusion as to whether the North
American systems can truly cope with sustained disruptions. On the one
hand it notes that the US and Canadian experiences have led the gas
companies to offer new services to reduce the strain during shortfalls
and to reduce the possibility of shortfalls, whilst on the other it
says that "since both the United States and Canada have recently gone
through a period of gas surplus, the performance of their gas
deliverability systems may not necessarily be representative of a
future situation." In this regard, the experiences of the US LDCs
during the January 1996 ice storms are awaited with great interest.

What lessons can Europe, or Japan, learn from the IEA's great tome?
Whilst Generals January and February may routinely focus their
attention on North America (with occasional glances at Scotland, where
this piece is being written), their role in Russia, so great in
securing Napoleon's retreat, is currently seen by the IEA in Napoleon's
capital as quite definitely subordinate to old-fashioned political
disruptions.

In OECD Europe, the IEA considers the potential consequences of a
disruption of both Russian and Algerian supplies at the same time. And
although the report specifically declines to comment on "either the
likelihood or precise cause of incidents leading to an interruption of
supplies" it does make the point that a political disruption represents
the risk with the greatest consequences." However, in a further effort
to stress the theoretical nature of the exercise, the IEA report also
includes a summary of a separate IEA study which concluded that neither
Russia nor Algeria had an interest, whether economic or political, in
disrupting gas supplies to Europe. But the IEA Natural Gas Security
Study does consider the possibility that such disruptions might occur
as the result of a breakdown in relations between Russia and the
transit countries of the former Soviet Union or as a consequence of a
worsening political climate within Algeria. It also considers that a
disruption in Russia would provide an incentive for Algeria to maximise
output, and vice-versa.

The IEA's approach with regard to Europe is to consider the impact of
such disruptions on a country-by-country basis since each country
differs from its neighbour in terms of both supply and demand
flexibility. Thus Austria, which gains almost three quarters of its gas
from Russia, is particularly vulnerable to supply disruptions, as is
Spain, which gets 53 per cent of its gas from Algeria (and a further 28
per cent from Libya). Turkey, however, is the most vulnerable OECD
country, since it imports no less than 96 per cent of its gas from
Russia, although it intends to diversify substantially over the next 15
years. Overall, simultaneous supply disruptions affecting both Algerian
and Russian gas exports to Europe would affect 31 per cent of OECD
Europe demand, though nine countries would suffer at least 50 per cent
supply losses. That is one consequence of Europe's reliance "on a
comparatively small number of large transportation facilities and
dependence on a small number of outside suppliers."

In producing its report, the IEA's gas team, which collaborated with a
variety of other international institutions, plainly saw its role as
being largely to collate and to summarise a host of data concerning
both the structure of international gas markets, the consequences of
specific disruptions, and the approaches being taken in various parts
of the world to adapt to changing conditions. It then buttressed this
wealth of information with a host of annexes detailing the specific
issues confronting the 23 member countries of the IEA, a cluster of
former communist nations in eastern and central Europe and more than a
dozen of the world's major gas producers. For some of the 44 countries
studied, the emphasis is on their vulnerability to specific
disruptions; with others, it is their role in contributing to such
disruptions or in helping to resolve them that is tackled. It is thus
on the basis of the collective experience of a host of disparate
countries that the IEA team are able to base their broader conclusions.

In sum, for OECD Europe, the study considers that "most countries could
continue to supply their core customers for any months, in some cases
indefinitely, in the event of a total disruption in deliveries from
their single largest non-OECD suppliers." There is spare import
capacity that can be utilised by other suppliers whilst use can be made
of fuel-switching, notably to heavy fuel oil. But countries with
comparatively new and small gas markets would fare badly in the event
of a sustained disruption. and therefore need to diversify supply
sources and boost storage facilities. For Japan, the issue concerns
security of its LNG imports. The IEA's conclusion is striking.
"Reliance is placed on long term contracts with several stable
suppliers" and these "arrangements have served Japan well and no short-
term security problems have been encountered."

But then there is North America, home to the most advanced and
diversified supply structure. In this era of reported global warming,
is perhaps instructive to consider whether it is extremes of weather,
rather than a single trend, that should be considered. Certainly the US
Department of Energy, in a conclusion reiterated by the IEA, noted that
in the 1994 US crisis some local distribution companies found that
their programmes for dealing with conditions on specific days - so-
called design day capabilities - were exceeded more than once in the
same week. The IEA notes: "The fact that an LDC has exceeded its 25-
year design day in more than one cold spell in the past few years may
indicate that weather norms have changed and that design-day criteria
may need to be re-examined." In layman's language, this means that the
North American gas industry should think about revamping its emergency
plans since Generals January and February cannot be expected to play
the weather game by predictable rules. John Roberts.

The IEA Natural Gas Security Study, pp. 564. IEA/OECD Publications
Service; 2 , rue Andre Pascal, 75775 PARIS CEDEX 16, France.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ENTER THE MIDDLE KINGDOM

The fact of China's exponential economic growth cannot be denied. The
wires are simply too full of it. Apparently the Chinese are installing
40,000 new telephones every day. There are 3.63 million mobile
telephone users already. Shanghai, according to Premier Li Peng, is
going to be one of the world's business hubs for both aviation and
shipping by 2010. By roughly the same time China's car-making industry
will apparently be a "pillar industry" according to the Ministry of
Machine Building Industry with an output worth over Yuan 1 trillion
($120.5 billion). By 1997 China will have eight car-makers, which will
be encouraged to form into regional conglomerates and the Chinese
government will invest Yuan 100 billion to make sure this happens.

Yet if you look underneath this barrage of apparently good news, the
picture is not quite so pretty. In relation to the telephones, there
are now 4.7 telephones for every hundred households. By 2000,
sufficient progress should have been made to have one household in ten
wired up for gossip, but naturally this is an average and the urban
areas will have 30-40 telephones per hundred households. The rural
areas will still require a pretty long walk to call the doctor. This
investment level is now slowing down.

It is easy enough to be critical but China is country with a great many
people in it. Statistics tend to reflect the sheer size of the task in
hand. Yet this is not the main point. The unhappy fact is that China's
explosive economic growth has not yet solved its fundamental dilemma:
How does it sustain such a level of modernisation and growth, while
still wrapped up in the elderly and aging structures of Mao's great
revolution?

Take for example Li Peng's splendid ode in early January to the future
of Shanghai; a city now bursting at the seams with migrant workers and
in the middle of building boom that is trashing rare local agricultural
land. (Losses of Chinese agricultural land to urban uses are expected
to be from 3-6 million hectares in this decade, by the Chinese Academy
of Sciences. This is around 3-6 per cent of the total in 1990.)
Shanghai's existing airport handled 11 million passengers in 1996 and
simply cannot take any more, so a new one is to be built in the Pudang
area by 2000. Equally, the new port facility will be at the deep-water
port at Beilun. The new Shanghai maritime and aviation will also be a
world-class insurance capital as well as a financial and trading one,
with huge container networks.

There is naturally nothing wrong with planning this expansion. Any city
father would be a fool not to do so. Yet Li rather put the whole
exercise in doubt when he said during a visit there that "the centre
should not be profit-making, but should aim to supply high quality
services and cut transport costs." That is the trouble with China. The
leadership does not seem to understand what is happening. After all,
what other government would seek simultaneously to build Shanghai into
a world financial, insurance and trading centre, while abruptly
announcing that it intends to censure all foreign sources of economic
news? There has to be screw lose somewhere in this machine!

The ban on external economic information would be funny, if it did not
so accurately reflect the paranoia in the Chinese leadership. Beijing
cited "national security" and ordered all foreign information providers
in China to submit their work to the Communist Party's Xinhua news
agency for distribution. What is so amusing about this is the Xinhua
agency has a well-deserved reputation for the chronic inaccuracy in
economic matters. One broker, contacted by Reuters, responded to the -
no doubt - excited reporter, by saying that the ban would be helpful
since it would cut down the amount of garbled nonsense coming out of
China anyway!

This is just a little too cynical. In practice China is already full of
fax machines as the dissident movement, led from Hong Kong, already
knows. Attempts - Ayatollah style - to clamp down on satellite dishes
have been a failure. Hong Kong is certainly no slouch on the internet
having at least 40 web sites accessible from China's increasing
population of computers. Two days after the announcement of the
crackdown, the Xinhua Agency at least clarified the rather ambiguous
announcement by saying that they would merely monitor the information
flow simultaneously with transmission. They would not slow down
transmission.

However even so, the "crackdown" on foreign information will mean a
greater ability for the Chinese government to prevent the Chinese from
hearing what is going on in China, while mutis mutandi reducing the
flow outwards if news agency's utter a rude word about China. The
chosen offenses are "slander of China" and "jeopardising China's
economic interests". Needless to say, the news of the news restriction
went down rather badly in Hong Kong, where morale is already rather low
in preparation for 1997 and the return to China. And it is the attempt
to control economic information that is so surprising.

It is to some extent unsurprising, if regrettable, that stories of
disastrous human rights, or ill-treatment of orphans might require to
be smuggled out of the country. The brother of the woman who revealed
the terrible state of Shanghai's so-called Children's Welfare Institute
- where children die from starvation and lack of medical care - has now
apparently been arrested for the crime of being her brother. He could
face the death penalty since it seems he is charged with counter-
revolution. It is an extremely risky proposition to be rude about
senior Chinese officials or reveal anything much about them to
foreigners that sounds derogatory. The Middle Kingdom does not like
losing face and does not like foreigners much anyway.

Yet in economic affairs and business matters things are obviously
different. What precisely is "economic slander"? Should this category
perhaps include the current World Bank report, produced late last year
in association with the China Securities Regulatory Commission. This is
certainly not very flattering on the subject of the Chinese
government's intervention, which it says is hampering the development
of China's capital markets. The main burden of criticism is - guess
what - the chronic lack of information!

According to the study, Chinese capital markets have seen extensive and
remarkable growth in the recent past but they are struggling "to
realise their fundamental functions  of increasing the efficiency of
resource allocation, aiding the pricing of risks and returns and
providing a vehicle for risk management." In effect, the government
still has control over the commanding heights of the economy. This it
maintains by the government credit plan, interest rate controls and the
creation of a environment for state corporations that is entirely free
of any kind of risk. The latter have a cheerful disregard for paying
off loans, while the role of the capital markets generally is to fit
into the governmental credit squeeze.

The government exercises this by amusingly abrupt interest rate
changes, which adds hugely to volatility. Equities are paid out through
the credit quota plans and so are dividends, so the point about
equities generally is that they are attractive primarily for capital
gains rather than investment income. This means that equities are
primarily a source of speculation, rather than investment. Unhappily
the level of financial disclosure about them is rather inadequate,
making the market a dangerous place for speculators. The non-payment of
interest on bonds, combined with high inflation does the same thing for
the bond market. The Chinese have certainly grasped the essentials of
capitalism in this regard. The fledgling bond futures market had to be
closed down last year because one major broker tried to corner the
market and the whole sheebang was simply too volatile for comfort, due
to interest rate subsidies. Indeed the Bank suggests that China's
secondary markets are remarkably sophisticated. However, "the closer
one gets to primary markets, the more apparent are the conflicts due to
the controls imposed by the government."

If one did not know that the World Bank was always entirely serious and
operating with the best of intentions, it might be suggested that it
seems to think it is talking about a communist country! Sure the
secondary markets are a whizzing along, made volatile by the existence
of a credit control system that is decided at the highest reaches of
the state. Perish the thought, but what an opportunity these markets
give for a bit of skillful insider dealing. The Chinese are certainly
inventive, but there really would be something truly original about a
futures bond market tied neatly to the actions of the Communist Party!

Needless to say, the report suggests that the the government should
reduce the role of credit and investment plans in capital allocation.
They want nothing less than the reform of the banks so that they lend
on the basis of creditworthiness. And, heaven forfend, they want the
state enterprises to pay their debts.

The trouble with this kind of advice is that it hacks at the roots of
the entire power base of the state, not to mention the local bosses who
control the provincial governments and who also control the state
enterprises.

To give the Chinese authorities their due, the Ministry of Finance has
promised to improve the liquidity of their bonds in 1996. There has
also been a significant crackdown on the exchange and futures crime in
Shanghai, were known fraud has amounted to Yuan 530 million since 1993.
Significantly however, insiders on the market wonder whether Shanghai's
new breed of brokers really know when they are breaking the law, not
least because of the rather foggy nature of the regulations.

The secondary markets are really a sideshow. China fundamentally has
three basic problems in its struggle to become a cornerstone of the new
world order. It is short of water. It is short of food and it is short
of oil. In relation to water, the China Meteorological Administration
now predicts a severe drought for Spring 1996, which has already harmed
winter crops along the lower reaches of Yangtze and elsewhere. This
need not necessarily harm agricultural prospects in the immediate term.
Last year saw drought also, but the grain harvest grew to a record
466.4 million tonnes. The Ministry of Agriculture believe that rice
output can be increased by 2.5 million tonnes a year for the next five
years to give each person in China 150 kg of rice a year. The trouble
is that the more affluent the coastal markets become the greater the
per capita consumption becomes. The ministry may be optimistic, but in
mid-January 23 out of 41 state ministries were told that their
officials must stop drinking the traditional corn spirits at banquets
to save grain.

In relation to oil, the International Energy Agency expect China's
imports to increase from 248,044 bd in 1994 to 2.8 mbd by 2010, or
roughly the amount produced domestically at present. Supplies will
therefore need to double. Currently the policy debate is split between
investing for domestic self-sufficiency or increasing imports,
predominantly from the middle-east. It is too early to say whether the
sudden restructuring of UNIPEC, the joint venture between the state oil
trader China National Chemicals Import and Export Corporation
(SINOCHEM) and the state refiner China Petroleum Corporation (SINOPEC)
is a victory for the domestic path or a victory for import reliance.
UNIPEC, responsible for buying 60 per cent of China's imports had
developed an impressive array of offices and contracts, which will be
trimmed to two - London and "Asia". This could mean nothing more than
an attempt to rationalise the alphabet soup that constitutes Chinese
purchasing companies abroad. Either way, the import route will require
at least $5 billion in oil, port facilities and refinery upgrading for
sulphur.

On the home front, the Chinese admit to difficulties. Theft of oil from
domestic production is now regarded as an increasing crime and
according to SINOPEC cost $120.5 million last year. Output did increase
in 1995, but only by a 1.5 per cent. The offshore has been a
disappointment and that is where the hard currency oil resides.
Onshore, potential improvement is not aided by the slow pace of price
reform. The jewel in the crown may just be the Tarim Basin fields, but
unhappily the jewel is rather a long way from the crown; roughly 2,500
kilometres. A line would cost a minimum of $10 billion.

Mention of oil naturally brings in the geopolitics. While the IEA et al
now regard China's monstrously rapid growth as a key indicator of the
future of oil prices, China has never really been a player in the
international oil diplomacy game. If it does not find significant new
quantities of oil and gas at home, this has to change. Suddenly China
ceases to be merely an arms dealer in the Gulf and becomes a player.
Whatever happens in this regard, China is most unlikely to regard the
west and Japan as guardian of its interests. It is also unlikely to
take much notice of western style worries about human rights. Split
neatly between the twin polls of its domestic development versus
imports policy, is the unfortunate problem of the Spratley Islands.

The Chinese boundary claim in this regard seems a reassertion of its
ancient maritime empire. It includes the Vietnamese field of Thanh
Long, the Natuna Sea area of Indonesia and the Saderi fields of
Malaysia as well as the pivotal Spratleys. (At least the Vietnamese had
the decency to exclude from their ambitions the newly producing Yacheng
field off Hainan Island.) It was only as recently as April 1992 that
China's naval deputy commander, General Zhang Xusan, demand a re-
assertion of China's rights in the South China Sea, while China now has
the third biggest navy in the world and the world's largest submarine
fleet of 181 vessels. This may not mean very much, but nobody can
easily dismiss the view that as China gets richer she could not try to
assert herself.

There is a tendency in the west to think that "the collapse of
communism" is inevitable as the Chinese get a great deal richer and the
old men die off. Democracy will eventually open up as the economy
"makes the transition". Yet the Communist Party did not collapse in
China as it did in the old USSR. Indeed, there is something to be said
for the view that the attitudes to human rights now apparent in the
Chinese elite are being strengthened by the huge rate of economic
growth. If it carries on growing economically at its current rate, then
China may have to face the dangerous consequences of an imbalance
between an affluent coastline and chronic rural poverty, with further
mass migration and rapidly increasing imbalances of resource
distribution. Yet it was Deng and the Communist Party who has brought
about this new found dynamism and Li Peng has never renounced the
control of the Party. Why should he? He is in charge of it.

There is consequently a need for caution when talking about China's
huge success and its future, plus the "model" it offers. Capitalism
cannot be sustained for long without free information flow; markets
depend on it. Yet free information flow is not easily compatible with
political authoritarianism. Hong Kong will be a huge test. If China
fails that test and the economy of the ex-colony starts to rapidly
decline, it will not just be Hong Kong and its investors that suffer.
It will have a really profound impact on geopolitics. Taiwan is already
militarily fearful of a growing Chinese power. Japan would need to
rearm and the Vietnamese would be none-to-happy either. What happens to
your very wonderful Asia-Pacific century then?



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BOOM NPS GOES BOOM

The nuclear industry has a problem with accident and emergency planning
exercises. In relation to the recent problem of a sodium coolant leak
at Monju, the Japanese fast breeder, the Japanese Land Agency announced
that it would now include nuclear disasters within its planning.
Observers widely took this to mean that the official Japanese position
was that there was no need for the agency to come up with a plan,
because there was unlikely to be a serious accident. This was unfair.
The Japanese have emergency planning and emergency planning exercises
just like everybody else with nuclear plant. The problem is that being
open and overt about such exercises has a tendency to undermine the
official public relations stance that scale 3 to scale 7 nuclear
incidents are very unlikely. If, runs the argument, such disasters are
so unlikely, why plan for them at all? Consequently, nuclear agencies
tend to keep quiet about their game playing.

It is thus refreshing that the Nuclear Energy Agency of the OECD has
recently published a report on the results of the first international
nuclear emergency exercise ever carried out, with participation from
Austria, Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Luxembourg, Norway, Romania, Sweden, Switzerland, UK, Ukraine and USA.
This was not, it has to be said, a simultaneous and real time scenario,
carried out utilising all the players in one gigantic nuclear power
station armageddon. The notion that all these players could be involved
in one multilateral incident simply does not make any sense. A nuclear
disaster in the USA is most unlikely to affect Switzerland with any
kind of immediacy, or at least at a level likely to make much of an
emergency.

Such accidents may be multilateral, but only if a number of
neighbouring small countries are involved. They are much more likely to
be bilateral, where radioactive fallout crosses the nearest border and
this was the scenario chosen. The real key to the international nature
of the exercise, known as INEX 1, was that each of the emergency
planning groups of all countries were playing to an identical scenario,
either as the countries with the disaster or as their near neighbour;
and sometimes as both. The intention, beautifully achieved by the
Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA), was to get a fairly complete picture as to
the differences in approach adopted by the different countries as a
means to start the difficult process of creating a common agenda and
emergency response system.

War-gaming, or table-top emergency response simulations are extremely
easy to laugh at. Frequently, the game planners help create cynical
reactions by the simple means of creating places and scenarios that
sound straight out of Ruritania. Such flights of fantasy are not aided
by the problem of communicating the same scenario to an international
audience and INEX 1 was no exception. The nuclear power station in
question was the Boom NPS, situated in Acciland. (Any power station
with a name like this would have had it changed by deedpoll immediately
on initial fuel-loading!) Equally, the NEA's wonderful multilingual
connections allow the determined traveller to go by train through
Neighbourland, from Hallcity to Rechstadt or Seahafen, before crossing
the border to Blueport and Capitalia. Tourists seeking Italian food
should try Locagri, before eating wild-boar, shot in the Jager Forest
in Huntsdorf. The participants themselves believed that different
linguistic names for each country might have been more sensible.

Leaving such matters aside however, the crucial point is that all the
countries were playing the same game. "All participating countries
were... required to superimpose their normal emergency procedures and
provisions on the scenario." The game was played in three 2-3 hour
phases in a single day by all participating country teams, each phase
representing a different day of the initial three days of the crisis.
(As noted, each country could chose a different day to simulate, they
merely followed the same scenario over the same time frame.) The
results were then collated and a subsequent conference held to discuss
better co-ordination.

Before noting the results, it has to be said that the exercise started
at T plus four hours (T+4), where T represented the time when a fire
started in a switchboard at Boom NPS leading to an emergency shut-down
of the reactor. T+2 was the time when the authorities were informed and
T+4 was initial loss of primary coolant. This lead to the prediction
that at T+9 a major fuel uncovering would be inevitable and the
generation of a radioactive cloud would occur. Phase 1 of the
simulation was thus about a period prior to the development of serious
radiological problem, known as the "threat" phase, the remaining phases
being "release" and "post-release". (There are a number of flaws in
this as a scenario, of which more below.)

In terms of notification to the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) and neighbouring countries, eg Neighbourland, the variations are
considerable, ranging from 15 minutes to two hours and 13 minutes in
relation to neighbours. The longest time the scenario players took to
call the IAEA was the case of the Swiss team and amounted to four
hours. Given the structure of the exercise this meant that the IAEA was
informed - at the latest- at T+8, or roughly one hour before the
reactor produced ambient radionuclides.

Under a scenario that gave the disaster country nine hours warning of a
potential leak both the neighbouring country and the IAEA were warned
prior to the actual disaster. However the crucial matter is the
difference in time of warning between countries. This needs to be
addressed, even in games playing, and the INEX 1 analysis points this
out. For a start, utilising standard diplomatic procedures clearly
spells out the nature of the problem to the bordering state, but takes
time. Straightforward warning, as in the case of Romania as a
neighbour, ended up being in free text english as an IAEA EMERCON
notification. With the EU and the IAEA Convention the notification
worked adequately, although there was some confusion as to the correct
INES code rating for the scale of the disaster, eg, whether it was
scale 3 or 5 or 7 in the information transmitted.

In relation to cross border traffic, the "threat" phase of the incident
produced only three restrictions, within Italy, Japan and Switzerland.
In the "release" phase, matters became much more diverse. Switzerland
as the scene of the disaster expected all its neighbours to close its
borders, but did not close them itself. Germany as Acciland
decontaminated vehicles exceeding a 1 microSv/hr dosage and limited
food exports. Canada closed its borders and embargoed all foodstuffs.
The UK, with characteristic sang froid decided to "monitor"  all goods
from its neighbour, even through the accident was it's own. Japan did
not bother with border controls of any kind, even after phase 3,
although it had ordered travel restrictions within Japan. Norway as
"victim" was demanding the end of harvesting for all vegetables. The
Ukraine issued something called Temporary Permissable Limits (TPLs) for
food consumption.

It is perhaps in the population protection countermeasures where the
variety of different measures began to diverge excessively. The basic
split is in the concept of shelter as against evacuation and to a
lesser degree the provision of stable iodine. In relation to the
latter, in Acciland the provision of KI (potassium iodine) ranged from
those between none at all, and those within 64 kilometres. The US does
not use it and the Japanese decide to use it on an ad hoc basis. Only
Switzerland, Romania and Sweden have a distribution capacity before the
accident happens, and even this is questionable. (For those who do not
know about KI, its function is to fill the thyroid gland with stable
iodine so that the body rejects the ingestion of radioactive iodine-
131. It is particularly important in the prevention of thyroid cancer
in pregnant women and young children. It cease to function around 10
hours after being taken, so prompt action is necessary.) The shelter
versus evacuation argument is rather more complex, but no less varied.
Countries involved in the scenario posited evacuation of populations
between 1.5 km and 15 km of the disaster plant, with Japan being the
smallest area and the Ukraine the biggest, at least during phase 1 of
the exercise. Beyond this evacuation zone and sometimes including it,
the range of those forced to seek shelter is put between 5 kilometres
and, in the case of the Ukraine, 64 kilometres. (What is it about these
Ukrainians? Anyone would think they have done this before.)

In relation to the whole business of shelter and evacuation, detailed
analysis of the available data at the US Nuclear Regulatory Commission
suggests that sheltering produces little by way of reduction where
doses exceed 200 rems within 1 or 2 miles of the plant, so the best
solution is to high-tail it out of this radius. Above 3 miles, shelter
in large buildings is as good as evacuation, although oddly enough,
sheltering in basements is no more effective than an ordinary
sheltering. The odd thing about the reactions of Neighbourland
countries is that, on the whole, they use the same terminology to
discuss the shelter and evacuation scenario as those of Acciland,
namely distance from the plant. The French, being more knowledgeable,
give a distance ratio when it is French plant and a mSv dosage rate if
it is somebody elses'. The entire population is moved out when the dose
gets to 300 mSv and everybody takes cover on a 50 mSv (thyroid dose).

Evacuation versus shelter presents significant logistical difficulties.
However it is also true that the shelter option is not without
logistical difficulties. For a start, people need to be fed. To some
degree shelter predicates future evacuation anyway. (This Swiss, bless
them, seem at one point to have decided to evacuate the entire
country.)

The same spread of opinions can be found in the phase 3 clean-up. This
produces some amusing questions. Romania, for example, does not mention
the idea of relocating any of its people after the event, although it
does end the restrictions. As an alternative it engages in "massive
decontamination". By contrast, the US does not end the restrictions and
moves the population away, while failing to mention anything about
decontamination. (The explanation is presumably that the US is a very
big country!) The other countries varied between these two positions.

The agriculture countermeasures involved in the accident scenario and
examined by all participants are extremely varied and - on the whole -
characterised by good sense. However the rapporteur involved, Monsieur
Ginot, of the French Institut de Protection et de Surete Nucleaire, did
produce one or two pure pieces of delight in his post-operational
debriefing. While most countries spent a considerable amount of time
monitoring of the condition of the crops and animals in the
contaminated zone, most forgot to protect their teams from
contamination. Meanwhile "the consumption of fresh vegetables goods was
unevenly treated and sometimes ignored." And - wonderfully - "Water:
Drinking water and water for irrigation were considered by all players.
Only two countries thought to inform the public that the water supplied
by the public network remained drinkable". (!)

So much for the results. They reveal a considerable diversity in the
way countries have planned their responses to a major nuclear incident
and suggest that there is a need for continuing discussion on the
ground rules of nuclear disaster planning. It is also to be devoutly
wished that INEX 1 is followed up by INEX 2 to 100, with ever growing
sophistication. A great deal of what follows is written in this spirit
and comes from a veteran of emergency response simulations. For, as the
report itself suggests, the nuclear industry has a great deal to learn
from the oil industry in games of this kind. The oil industry does not
regard disaster as a rare event, but as an ever present likelihood and
treats it as such.

First and foremost, it is virtually impossible to create a disaster
simulation that reflects real life without including some component of
the media, as everybody involved in INEX 1 agreed. The simple fact is
that media involvement can destroy a table top emergency response team
with remarkably despatch and efficiency. The continuous requests for
information, combined with the addition of misleading and often
erroneous knowledge can be an extremely destructive force, if not
separated from the decision-makers examining the issues.

It is suggested in the debriefing of INEX 1 that emergency decision-
makers cannot allow the media to dictate the decisions, but must act
before they are forced to react. This is easier said than done,
particularly by government information officers, whose normal role is
to react, rather then act. Handling the news media in the event of a
nuclear accident is going to be very difficult indeed and Chernobyl
gives no guide. INEX decision-makers cannot be expected to do it
without an extra layer of protective support. This is the numero uno
rule of emergency response: Defend the decision maker from extraneous
pressure, but keep that defence fully informed at all times. The media
will, if allowed to do so, destroy the ability to communicate. This is
not deliberate. It is merely an accident of too many enquiries. Besides
of all industries worldwide the nuclear one probably has the worst
reputation for covering things up.

Equally, the media will not be alone. Not for nothing do many emergency
scenarios include the general public. Relatives of those perceived to
be in danger will rarely stop at anything to find out what is happening
to their loved ones. This area is fraught with dangers. For a start,
not all those making enquiries will fit neatly into any limited
category, such as wife or son. Some will be secret lovers and many will
be hysterical. Any command and control exercise that ignores the
pressure placed on it by extraneous demands is doomed to seem unreal.
There will, for example, be many messages from the completely crazy,
either admitting that they caused the accident, or alternatively saying
that they can solve the problem by prayer, volunteering or for a
suitable sum of money. This is why emergency response trainers use out
of work actors and actresses for a stiff dose of the actualite.

Equally, real time response is vital for the value of INEX 2. The
unhappy fact is that a few hours around a table creates no guide as to
what an accident is going to feel like. To look like reality,
gameplaying should leave those involved exhausted. It should also show
the need for a second string of players, to take-over. In the event of
a major nuclear emergency it is most unlikely that the initial team
will still be in control within 24 hours of the incident. Back-up of
personnel is likely to be vital.

Another factor is that an emergency that gives the emergency response
team a five hour notice warning period is a remarkable and probably
unique event. Admittedly the accident at Boom NPS was about the slow
failure of containment, but true reality would not assume that the
plant operators would calmly inform the central authorities of
impending disaster two hours before loss of coolant and two hours after
a switchboard fire. Experience of nuclear faults almost universally
suggests that plant operators keep as quiet as possible until
significant problems occur. Consequently the phase 1 or "threat phase"
of INEX 1 is unlikely to happen in reality. It may be less comforting,
but it might be good to start the simulation when disaster actually
strikes, rather than several hours before it. Any NPS operator who sat
on his hands for two hours in the case of a power failure leading to
potential loss of coolant, would have to be insane, so the premise of
the story is just false.

All this said, the INEX 1 simulation is an excellent start. It reveals
how much individual countries can learn from each other. Emergency
exercises may be expensive, but so are nuclear disasters. They are a
valuable exercise in understanding the dynamics of disaster control.
Defined by the Swiss monitor, the best principle for emergency planning
is "as normal as possible and as extraordinary as necessary." This kind
of decision-making cannot be done without practice.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CONFUCIUS, HE SAY...

The bookshelves and filing cabinets of businesses throughout the world
are stuffed with reports, analyses, studies, and treatises on Topics Of
Importance, usually dubbed "must-read" for a week or so, then consigned
to the archives as newer, supposedly more informative successors
appear. Rarely - all too rarely - there appears an assessment that is
cogent, well-written, includes new information based on informed and
informative sources, does it all with candour, humour, and some well-
placed trenchant (if obscure) quotations, and leaves the reader wanting
more.

The latest in this elite group of reports likely to wind up remaining
close at hand on the desks or credenzas of those with more than a
passing interest in the current and future state of the US electric
utility business is the fifth annual edition of the outlook for the
electric industry compiled by the Washington International Energy Group
(WIEG). With exhaustive detail based on a survey of a universe of more
than 3,200 principal executives in US and Canadian electric businesses,
the WIEG report presents specific survey results, but also quantifies
them, draws conclusions based on them, and boldly provides
prescriptions for palliatives to ease the industry's heartburn at the
upheavals of the transition to a completely open marketplace.

The irreverent style characteristic of the previous four annual WIEG
prognostications for the utilities is hardly missing from the 1996
outlook. For an "authoritative" work by a respected consulting firm,
the new report if refreshingly open and honest, even going so far as to
concede that "nobody knows what the future [utility] industry structure
(or structures) will ultimately look like." That said, however, WIEG's
authors note that "even if someone did know, this information would be
worthless unless it was used to stay ahead of the competition." This
sets the stage for the firm's "agenda for 1996," or what it terms "the
ten things every utility needs to do".

First on WIEG's "top ten" list, which it uses shamelessly without even
passing credit to comedian David Letterman, is "know your competitors
and stay ahead of them". Hardly a novel idea, and one calculated to
make the novice reader wonder if this study is all it's cracked up to
be. But the second recommendation changes the pace quickly: "beware
your new friend, the state regulator". What? Is the regulatory compact
shattered forever? Well, no, says WIEG, but regulators have a vested
interest in slowing the pace of change, and protecting the status quo.
The utility world is moving past the era of state domination, warns
WIEG, and utilities that exercise too much caution will miss the boat
to new markets.

The third WIEG imperative is also heresy to utility traditionalists:
"stop protecting dividends". Since many, indeed most, utilities will be
forced to cut dividends whether they like it or not, they should cease
past promises never to drop dividends, and confess honestly to
shareholders that times have changed and that overall yield
appreciation may have to come from rising stock prices at sharply
competitive firms rather than form any guaranteed dividend. WIEG thinks
shareholders will appreciate this and credit honest companies with
forward-looking management. For institutional investors, this is quite
probably true, but some utilities may be quite reluctant to "betray"
their dividend-sensitive "mom and pop" shareholders.

WIEG's next "need" is for utilities to get ahead of impending
regulation by starting their own "retail choice" programmes, on the
premise that seizing the initiative may preclude rules that don't
exactly fit a specific company's real needs. In a similar vein, the
consultants urge utilities to "go beyond FERC's functional unbundling"
proposal, dump unprofitable ventures, and move as much debt as possible
into the regulated side of the business to enhance the value of newer
non-regulated entities.

The sixth recommendation seems a trifle late for many of the foremost
electric companies: "merge if you are too small." WIEG's yardstick for
what constitutes "too small?" "If your neighbours are bigger, then you
are." But the report goes beyond just consolidations of electric
utilities themselves, calling for "gas-electric combinations and
telecommunications deals."

Next on the list of musts is the need to act, not react - and while
you're at it, act quickly. WIEG suggests eliminating committees, task
forces, consultants (and this suggestion from a consultant!), and other
"action blockers" to demonstrate the ability to make a "big decision"
happen in record time through creative efforts and "exciting
incentives" to relevant staffers.

"Zap your surplus," says the WIEG analysis, "(even though new ones will
keep emerging.)" Again, the study makes recommendations that wouldn't
have had a chance a few years ago, such as selling off generation to
direct end-use customers, selling capacity in wholesale markets, and
abandoning outright or scrapping obsolete generation.

The penultimate WIEG suggestion is perhaps the most wrenching of all
for utility troglodytes: "stop selling electricity, invest in
technology and new products, and start selling entertainment, comfort,
security, safety, and reliability". In other words, sell those simple
electrons as part of "a larger package" offering convenience and easy
access. WIEG says utility executives will have to accept the "endemic
reality of low core growth," and depend instead on newer non-
traditional businesses for profit enhancement.

Finally, in what seems almost an anticlimax, WIEG says the savviest
utilities will move the head of marketing into the executive suite and
recruit more outside talent to give marketing a shot in the arm. "No
matter what you have already done to improve your marketing department,
it's only a start."

Roger W Gale, president of WIEG, warned in releasing the report that
"the industry is being divided into winners and losers." He added that
the fundamental changes affecting North American electric utilities
offer both dangers and opportunities for investors, as the universe of
companies with substantially similar low-risk, steady-return profiles
has become a smorgasbord of companies with dramatically varying
potential for future profit.

"For those utilities that so far have taken a wait-and-see attitude, it
may already be too late," Gale said. But, while some utility executive
may be dragging their feet, the WIEG survey indicated that only 42 per
cent of the senior executives responding to the survey expect their
company to survive the next decade without seminal changes. Fully 40
per cent are convinced that their own company will look substantially
different a decade hence.

For instance, nearly two-thirds of the respondents, 62 per cent, expect
"hostile" takeovers to increase in the electric utility business,
despite the fact that virtually all the marriages announced to date
have not required a shotgun. Just under half of the survey answers
indicate a belief that their company will either acquire another
utility or be acquired by another within ten years. By contrast, fewer
than a third of the responses indicated that their companies were
currently involved in any merger and acquisition activities.

Seven of every ten utility executives responding to the WIEG survey
identified "loss of industrial customers" as their number one concern
in 1996, and fully 80 per cent believe that will remain a principal
problem for utilities at least through the rest of this decade. Half
the respondents believe that most of their customers, in all categories
of service, would take advantage of direct access if it were offered to
them.

Half the executives responding also said their utilities have already
offered to provide service to customers of other utilities. With that
answer in mind, the fact that only half the responses indicated a
belief that protected monopoly utility service areas will continue is
perhaps more credible, despite the implied collapse of the traditional
utility "bargain" with regulators.

Interest among utility executives in maintaining transmission assets if
full-scale "unbundling" is mandated has waned dramatically, with only
15 per cent of the respondents picking transmission as the field of
choice if forced to pick among generation, transmission, and
distribution. Some 28 per cent would pick generation, while a majority
of 57 per cent would opt to stay in the distribution arena.

The WIEG survey found that nearly three-quarters of the companies
polled expect to expand their activities to provide services for "the
other side of the meter," with those services including both energy-
related services and non-traditional areas such as telecommunications
and other services. Also, the responses indicate that nearly two-thirds
- 62 per cent - are pursuing customers outside their franchised service
areas.

One startling result of the survey is that 76 per cent of the responses
concede that not all utility costs have been prudently incurred.
However, 73 per cent believe "stranded costs" should be fully
recovered, while only 44 per cent think they will be allowed to do so
by regulators. Of the respondents, 62 per cent say their companies are
"taking action" in a variety of ways to reduce their exposure to
stranded costs.

Earnings, long a "hot button" for utility officers, remain in the
forefront of executive concerns, but just under half - 49 per cent - of
the replies express a belief that earnings will decline. A virtually
identical number, 48 per cent, believe revenues will fall as well.
However, a huge majority, 76 per cent, remain convinced their companies
will not have to slash dividends, a belief that may be wishful thinking
to avoid scaring investors, and one that runs counter to one of WIEG's
ten priorities.

In the single most lopsided response to WIEG's inquiries, fully 92 per
cent of respondents say their companies will be engaging in dramatic
cost-cutting initiatives in the near future. Nearly 90 per cent of the
investor-owned utilities in the survey have already undergone
downsizing, as have 81 per cent of municipal utilities and 65 per cent
of independent power producers.

Not surprisingly, a scant 8 per cent of those polled believe there will
be anything approaching a resurgence in nuclear power, and nearly 90
per cent concur that no new nuclear plants will be ordered. As to
existing nuclear generating facilities, just under 40 per cent believe
their power can still be priced competitively, while an equal number
hold the opposite view.

WIEG concludes from its conversations with utility middle management
and executive personnel that the constant pressure to downsize so many
utilities has made for severe morale problems. The analysts believe
that the "winners" as the utility industry sorts itself out will be
principally those companies that "get past" the layoffs and
restructurings inherent in downsizing and get on quickly to the process
of renewed expansion, albeit in new and different directions.

The most successful utilities in the coming decades will be those who
view their customer base as an asset (despite the fact that it appears
nowhere on the balance sheet). Those "captive audiences" will be key to
marketing new services as they are developed. WIEG suggests that new
utility investments in technology keyed to consumer demands and needs
that can be readily marketed to a pre-existing clientele will be a
"primary differentiator" between winners and losers.

"Utilities that are investing in technology and new product development
today may be building an insurmountable advantage over their less
visionary competitors," according to WIEG. "The visionary utilities are
forming alliances and partnerships with firms that bring expertise and
capabilities that these utilities would otherwise take years to build."

The "losers" will be those companies that WIEG identifies as "prime
failure candidates." Their principal failings will be adopting a "just
say no" approach to competition, "fine-tuning" operations in preference
to radical change, a lack of a sense of urgency, a "follow-the-leader"
business strategy, a reluctance to bring in new talent, and a continued
treatment of customers as captive ratepayers.

"Our conclusion," says the WIEG report, "is that it is quickly becoming
too late for some passive utilities to position themselves for the
future. Their plight will be aggravated as it becomes more visible,
making them even less able to deal with their problems. This also will
make them more vulnerable to the threats of others, including
competitors or those interested in a takeover. Once the spiral begins,
it will be increasingly difficult to escape. Utilities at the wrong end
of the widening gap need to act quickly and decisively to get into the
race." Paul Feine.

The 65-page WIEG report is available at $48 a copy from Washington
International Energy Group, Suite 202, 1155 21st Street, NW,
Washington, D.C. 20036; phone (202) 331-9820; e-mail wieg.com.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

HUNGARY'S MOL SUFFERS A DOWNGRADE FROM DEBTS

Hungary is a small and mature hydrocarbon province but privatisation
and access to western seismic technology has given the energy sector a
new lease of life. MOL is currently the only company producing oil and
gas in Hungary but western companies are active in exploration bids.
Domestic output has been falling gently in recent years and import
dependence on Russia particularly is on the ascendancy. Hungary is
linked to Russia by both oil and gas pipelines. Hungary's refining
infrastructure, notably the Danube Refinery is superior to the rest of
Eastern Europe. The retail end of the market is sophisticated and
competitive. The gas sector has now been privatised so it consists
essentially of a clutch of regional privatised monopolies, which have
been stripped to their privatisation essentials and the thorny question
of gas pricing has received government attention but is still a drag on
profitability.

Hungary's primary energy consumption in 1994 comprised gas (34 per
cent), oil (33 per cent), solid fuels (17 per cent), nuclear (15 per
cent), and electricity (1 per cent). Most of Hungary's proven oil and
gas reserves are in the Pannonian Basin in the south-east of the
country which is in close proximity to Romania and Serbia. (Romania has
the greatest Eastern European oil reserve base (1.6 billion barrels/220
million tonnes). Its production is six to seven million tonnes a year
with the Czech Republic, Albania and Hungary in the second tranche of
importance and Poland, Slovakia, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia having
negligible oil reserves. Amoco, Shell and Enterprise are definitely
looking for oil in Romania.)

At the end of 1992 Hungary's estimated oil reserves were about 92
million barrels and the country was replacing less of its reserves than
it was consuming in 1993 and 1994. The Hungarian reserves to production
ratio is currently in the seven year ball park but reflecting the
dependence on imports the reserves to consumption ratio for oil is
below two years. By comparison the United Kingdom has a current
production to reserve ratio of six years and a consumption to reserves
ratio of seven years.

Hungarian gas reserves stood at 60 billion cubic metres at the end of
1994 and the reserves to production ratio at about 12 years while the
reserves to consumption was six years, indicative of the dependence on
imports. Hungarian gas reserves may not be of striking international
significance but in a regional context they are the third largest
holder of gas reserves in Eastern Europe after Romania and Poland. In
1994 Hungarian production of oil was 12.5 million barrels and 4.8 bcm
of gas. MOL discovered 2 million barrels of crude and 1.8 bcm of gas at
an average finding cost of $2 a barrel.

The latest 1994 statistics indicate that there were about 1,100 oil
producing wells and 300 gas wells in Hungary. Some of the fields are
ageing and oil production is therefore into the secondary recovery
phase. Carbon dioxide injection and a variety of other methods are
being used to boost production. Secondary recovery methods are being
applied to about 20 per cent of Hungary's crude oil production. Most of
the Hungarian crude oil is of a relatively high quality with an API of
40 degrees and a sulphur content of less than 0.5 per cent. This
compares well with many crudes in the North Sea and is superior in
quality to what is currently being imported from Russia. A small amount
of heavier fractions of crude is being produced in the far west of
Hungary near Austria, which is supplied to the Zala refinery for making
bitumen. However Hungarian oil production peaked in the latter part of
the 1970s and after a brief plateau to 1982 has continued to fall.

Imports accounted for 75 per cent of Hungarian crude oil use in 1994
and M C Securities believe it will rise to 83 per cent of Hungary's
requirement by 2000. Hungary has an existing oil transport system in
the region and is therefore able to diversify its crude oil sources
more easily and without capital investment. This is not the case in
Poland, the Czech Republic and Slovakia.

There are three important pipelines conveying crude to Hungary. Within
Hungary the pipelines are owned by MOL, Eastern Europe's and Hungary's
only integrated oil company. Outside Hungary (ie in the Ukraine,
Croatia and Slovakia) they are owned by those countries. Two of the
three pipelines are linked to the CIS. Until recently only the main CIS
export pipeline, Friendship II has been routinely utilised by Hungary.
The pipeline now converges on a hub at Szazhalombatta refinery outside
Budapest.

Friendship II has a capacity of 10 million tonnes a year. It conveys
CIS (mainly Russian) crude oil across the Ukraine and into Hungary from
the east where it supplies refineries at Szazhalombatta and Tisza.
Friendship I is the CIS export pipeline to the refineries of the former
Czechoslovakia and East Germany. The latter has only been used
infrequently and given that Friendship II is currently underutilised,
Friendship I provides a back-up of 5 million tonnes a year. The Adria
pipeline from the Croatian Adriatic port of Omisalj enters Hungary from
the south-west and joins the Friendship I/Friendship II system at
Szazhalombatta, outside Budapest. The Adria has a capacity of 10 mtpa
but has been closed since 1991 because of the Serbian occupation of the
Croatian Krajina region. It was reopened recently and MOL was able to
recover its oil which had been trapped for four years.

Oil price and pipeline tariff considerations may lead Hungary to
continue to buy crude from the CIS. The Adria line is essential for
supply security and as a bargaining chip with the Russians. Adria is a
dual system pipeline having been the conduit for CIS crude to the
former Yugoslavia but it was built with pumping stations with reverse
flow capability and has been used to supply Hungary with crude from the
Middle East. There is also a very limited domestic crude oil pipeline
network which connects the southern Hungarian oil fields at Szeged and
the pipeline hub at Szazhalombatta.

Hungary has three refineries and a lubricants plant whereas Romania has
16 refineries of which five are large modern complexes. Hungary and
Romania currently both have a refining surplus. MOL has title of all
known Hungarian reserves and the government has a royalty interest in
these reserves. It is estimated that excluding the concessions already
operated by MOL, the remaining Hungarian discoverable reserves are only
20 per cent of the country's hydrocarbon base. Potential success in
these areas is therefore much reduced.

Despite these odds the first licensing round took place in 1993/94 and
attracted bids from four companies. The first exploration periods were
for four years with the possible extension of 50 per cent if necessary.
If commercially exploitable reserves were found, the production licence
was for 35 years with a possible extension to 52.5 years. Mobil Erdgas,
Occidental Corporation, Coastal Corporation and Blue Star, a Hungarian
company submitted bids. Mobil was awarded eight blocks, five as sole
operator and three in joint venture with Occidental. Coastal and Blue
Star formed a joint venture to operate a block on which they both
submitted bids. Concessions totalling 9,000 square km were awarded.

Mobil have been exploring onshore Europe for some time particularly in
Germany and are reported to be looking for additional natural gas
reserves. Coastal has considered Romania as a target for exploration
mainly for natural gas. Occidental has long standing connections with
former Soviet-bloc countries. This licensing round is likely to be the
last and no further opportunities will be available for onshore
exploration in Hungary by foreign companies.

MOL is at present the only company producing oil and gas in Hungary and
has 59 concession areas covering almost 20,000 square km. Prior to this
licensing round only MOL and OKGT its predecessor company had explored
for oil and gas in Hungary. The privatisation of MOL took place in late
1995 in two parts. The international offering was oversubscribed but at
the lower end of the pricing range and it represented 19 per cent of
MOL's equity. The issue was primarily sold to investors in the US (who
got 45 per cent ), the UK(45 per cent) and Europe (10 per cent) .The
domestic tranche was sold in Hungary.

MOL's third quarter results, its first as a privatised concern were
below expectations. Its earnings for 1995 have been downgraded from HUF
10.2 billion forecast at the time of the international offering to HUF
6.9 billion now by M C Securities. The downgrading can be ascribed to
firstly a HUF 3 billion provision for bad debts and secondly to MOL's
natural gas business which is the biggest turnover component but has
historically been a loss maker. According to Stephen O'Sullivan, oil
analyst at MC Securities: '' The downgrading is primarily related to a
recent change in accounting provisions but also to changes in the
operation of MOL's natural gas business particularly in respect of gas
storage.''

Gas consumption has switched away from industrial usage to domestic.
Unlike other countries, the Hungarian government has typically kept
domestic prices below industrial prices and by so doing exaggerated the
financial losses. Changes in accounting treatment leading to a profits
downgrade so soon after privatisation is hardly the way to win friends
and influence international investors. A strengthening of the company's
management muscle seems appropriate because with the embracing of
privatisation has also come the responsibility of shareholder
accountability.

Nevertheless the company has a number of interesting future
developments which if correctly managed could bolster profits. MOL is
the operator of a number of underground gas storage facilities in
depleted gas fields and will soon be commissioning the first phase of
the new Zsana facility, which has partly been financed by the EBRD. The
normalising of the Bosnian situation is likely to lead to increased
transit volumes of natural gas for MOL. Historically traffic has passed
through Hungary to Bosnia, Croatia and then Serbia. The lifting of UN
sanctions against Serbia and the rebuilding of the Bosnian economy
should have beneficial effects on MOL's earnings.

Western companies were present in Hungary long before the Berlin Wall
came down but Hungary has been tardy in its embracing of the
privatisation process in the oil and gas sector. Investors are right to
be concerned about the 1995 profits downgrade barely a month after the
international offering of MOL. The issue of gas pricing is critical to
the company. Although the Hungarian government has made its intentions
clear on this issue, it needs to ensure that the actions which it takes
assist it to implement its intention of achieving market-related gas
prices by 1997. MOL needs to look at its financial management urgently
in order to maintain the goodwill of foreign investors.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BRITISH GAS AND A HOTEL IN ROTHERHITHE

As many readers will undoubtedly recall (FTEE 166), British Gas has
since the summer found itself to be in a rather desperate situation as
regards its long term agreements with gas suppliers in the North Sea,
and has continued since then to do its utmost to get itself out of
them, backed rather ferociously it appears by the government. The
problem that British Gas faces is twofold. Firstly the current beach
prices for gas are so low as to be under half the price British Gas now
finds itself paying to producers under the terms of take-or-pay
agreements, some of which it has had for nigh on twenty-five years. And
secondly, despite knowing that some of its market would have to be
surrendered to new competition introduced onto the gas market with the
withering of regulation, British Gas nevertheless continued to buy gas
which it should have known it was never going to be able to sell. Thus
it is that British Gas is left with a mountain of gas that nobody wants
as well as numerous and very expensive gas contracts with an estimated
value of #40 billion for gas it neither needs nor wants and that it
can't free itself from.

British Gas finally managed to off load some of its gas glut over the
Christmas/New Year period when temperatures in the UK hit an all time
low. Temperatures fell to minus 20 degrees Celsius in Glasgow, where
demand for gas rose by 10 per cent, indeed, sales of gas were
reportedly 50 per cent higher than the same time last year. Although
British Gas was able to maintain supply in England and Wales, many
customers in Scotland, where British Gas was even reduced to halting
supply to businesses in favour of homes, were without central heating
over the Christmas period and the company now faces compensation
payments to thousands of customers for failing to respond quickly when
central heating systems broke down.

Following the appointment of a new negotiator to deal with British
Gas's long-term gas agreements, producers have been told that the first
to agree to renegotiation of the take-or-pay terms with British Gas
will get the best deals. Unsurprisingly, producers remain unwilling to
reopen supposedly legally binding contracts with British Gas and so far
not one has agreed to renegotiations. However British Gas has indicated
that pressure on producers will be stepped up after February 1st when
all supply contracts will be moved to a new subsidiary company.

Since the appointment of the new negotiator to handle the take-or-pay
agreements problem faced by British Gas in the North Sea, the big news
of the month was revealed on Saturday, 6th January, in a meeting held
in a pub in Rotherhithe between the Department of Trade and Industry,
Ofgas, the gas watchdog, British Gas and the Shippers Forum after it
was announced on Friday that the set date for the release of the new
Network Code was to be put back from 1st February to 1st March. The
purpose of the meeting was to discuss the new Network Code, which will
lay out the conditions by which new competing companies on the UK
domestic gas market will be allowed to use existing pipelines currently
owned by British Gas. Without it, new competition will be impossible.

However with the present government keen to cover any further
consequences of the 1986 privatisation of British Gas with roses in
light of the coming general election, it was reported that the DTI
raised two new issues that could have serious implications on the UK
gas market. Firstly the department raised the possibility of the
government taking powers to impose a levy (probably about 1p/therm) on
the marketing of gas, to be payable to British Gas Transco, which would
present one possible way of forcing gas producers to absorb more cost,
thus relieving the problem of costly write-downs currently faced by
British Gas. Exactly how this levy would work remains unclear, yet the
point is that whether or not the levy is imposed is not the issue. What
is important is that the government would have the power to impose it
at any given time, rendering producers with take-or-pay contracts with
British Gas on rather shaky ground.

The second issue reportedly raised by the DTI is even more serious.
This is the idea that British Gas may be allowed to move all its long
term agreements, both buying and selling contracts, into a subsidiary
of very little substance, without a British Gas backup guarantee that
gas will be paid for. This will remove British Gas's (the signature on
these contracts) responsibility to take or pay and placing it in the
hands of the new company. Moving all long-term contracts in this way
will give British Gas the power to pressurise producers into
renegotiation of the take-or-pay clause in their agreements. Although
until now this has remained mere speculation, it now appears that this
course of action will be taken.

At the Saturday meeting, only thirty of the gas suppliers were present,
yet over 200 more such companies exist who sell or transport gas to
British Gas. What is not yet evident is whether the government intends
to consult the remaining shippers as to whether or not this move is an
acceptable one. Indeed by the following Tuesday, one of the major
independents spoken to still had not heard that these proposals had
even been tabled and it remains to be seen exactly how and if the
government intends to consult these companies. Furthermore, eyebrows
have been raised by some gas experts as to the legality of the whole
proposal itself and one major international oil company has been heard
to comment that the whole thing is a smokescreen and entirely illegal.
However, there remains the possibility that such a move by British Gas
is not illegal, but is in fact provided for under the new 1995 Gas Act.
Although the creation of a new subsidiary company was going to be
necessary anyway, it now appears that British Gas could possibly get
away without providing it with a backup guarantee.

Moreover it is clear that if such action is taken, British Gas's long
term sales contracts - all of which are interruptible agreements with
power stations, over half of which are independent power projects - are
likely to be affected as well. Every one of the independent power
projects has been financed by banks who lent money on a contract basis
involving long term power agreements backed by long term gas supply
agreements. The banks lent money because British Gas was meant to be
supplying the gas - indeed so confident were the banks under such terms
that the commitment to lend was happily described by one lender as a
"no brain decision". If the contracts are moved, there will be no
further support from British Gas, and if the new subsidiary company
taking on British Gas's long-term agreements does go bust under the
strain of the North Sea take-or-pay agreements, then the banks face
high potential losses. Just how comfortable are the lending banks going
to be if British Gas makes this move without a guarantee?

At issue will be the perceived security of the supply of gas to power
stations. At the moment it may be that nobody is particularly worried
about this with UK beach prices so low at this time. However, one gas
expert has warned that this perception of the gas market is a
distortion - the supply of enough gas to run a base load power station
represents a wholly different kettle of fish. The quoted spot and
forward prices for gas at the beach represent small quantities only. To
be certain that gas can be obtained on a scale large enough to assume
the availability of CCGT capacity, buyers need to be looking at
different gas prices entirely - most likely ones much higher than the
current beach prices. The value of stranded capacity in a power plant
with no fuel is nothing more than nil.

When asked for comment on this state of affairs, both Ofgas and the DTI
declined to say anything at all - indeed Ofgas declined even to confirm
that a meeting had taken place, while the DTI admitted that it had and
said that discussions about a levy were continuing, although refused to
outline any details. The DTI confirmed that British Gas would be
allowed to set up one subsidiary company (and one only) although it did
not wish to talk about the holding of long term contracts, preferring
instead to describe the holdings of such a company as "considerable
assets" and declining to comment on whether or not this company would
be provided with a back up guarantee by British Gas.

All this takes place against the background of the rush to greater
competition in April, when competition goes down to the household
sector, initially to 500,000 homes in the south-west. The regulator
refuses to see any reason for delay, in spite of British Gas moans that
the whole process cannot yet be done. The producers anticipate
undercutting BG's domestic market by around 20 per cent, thereby
producing yet more bad news for the company.

It has to be said that neither the new subsidiary company nor the levy
are established facts. They are just "ideas" to quote a government
official. Their aim is however pretty obvious, namely to scare
producers with high priced gas contracts with British Gas to agree to
change them. This approach is dangerous. It simply removes
responsibility for its actions from BG's management and involves
returning government back to the centre of the UK market. Such actions
are also random and are likely to destabilise the marketplace. Why keep
the levy at only one pence per therm; why not ten? Mind you, if BG does
set up a new subsidiary to hold all BG's bad contracts with no
guarantees, what will they call it? Going Bust Gas Company, perhaps?



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ENERGY MARKET REPORT:  CRUDE OIL & PRODUCTS

Initially, crude oil prices firmed by more than a dollar per barrel in
recent weeks, continuing the rise that has added more than $3 per
barrel to Brent Blend prices since the end of October. The grade closed
on 8th January at a review period high of $19.17. This was the highest
closing price since early last May and was some $2.40 up on the levels
attained just after the last Opec meeting.

More recently, prices have retreated and Brent for March was priced at
$16.92 on 12th January, as the vicious winter weather in parts of the
United States relented and as the view that prices had over-reacted to
increasing demand and tight supply gained ground. There was some profit
taking and prices were also influenced by a more relaxed view on events
in Saudi Arabia, where King Fahd has handed power, at least
temporarily, to the Crown Prince. (See FTEE December 1995).

Prices are now just under a dollar per barrel below the levels recorded
at the same time last year and, although political and other factors,
such as the resumption of bad weather in the key oil-consuming areas
could still intrude, the best hope for cynical bulls must be that the
consensus view, that prices will continue to ease, will be wrong.

One of the more intriguing factors exercising the oil market is what,
if anything, will happen in Saudi Arabia?

Succession-temporary or permanent?

In April 1976, when UK prime minister Harold Wilson retired at the age
of 60, he gave way to James Callaghan, who was four years his senior.
There is not, of course, any similarity to what has happened in Saudi
Arabia. King Fahd, who apparently suffered a minor stroke in November,
has handed over power, at least temporarily, to Crown Prince Abdullah,
a half brother who is supposedly up to two years younger than the
unhealthy king. King Fahd is quoted as saying that the crown prince
would take over whilst he, the king, enjoyed rest and recuperation.

The oil market, previously fretting over the possible succession, may
feel, possibly correctly, that any permanent succession problems have
been solved and that normal business may now be resumed, if, indeed, it
was ever disrupted. However, some analysts feel that the king's
recovery must be slower than anticipated, otherwise there would not
have been a formal transition. Perhaps this tactic is to demonstrate
that the formal and permanent succession, when it comes, will be
uncontested.

Short-term changes in Saudi's foreign or oil policies are unlikely, not
least because the king could return to power and, to misquote the then
Mrs Thatcher, there is little real alternative.

Nevertheless, the oil market may remain potentially nervous until there
are clearer indications on Saudi's attitude to the west and to oil
production. Traders will have heard the rumours, circulating for some
weeks before the transition, that Saudi was considering a voluntary cut
of up to 200,000 barrels a day in the coveted quota of 8 mbd, with
which King Fahd is personally identified.

The kingdom is making progress towards financial balance, after years
of deficits on the budget and on the current account, caused in part by
low oil prices and the enormous cost of the Gulf war. Any violent
change in strategy would be politically, as well as economically,
dangerous. Furthermore, it must be assumed that King Fahd, for as long
as he retains ultimate power, would oppose any significant changes in
stance. The most recent Saudi budget reflects continued reductions in
government spending and efforts to encourage the non oil sector, which
still only provides about a fifth of total export earnings and two
thirds of gross domestic product. The budget deficit for 1996 is about
$5 billion, surprisingly up by some 20 per cent on the likely outturn
for last year, and official subsidies are maintained.

In the oil sector, any attempt to increase prices by reducing output
would be welcomed by non Opec, whose burgeoning production will be
seeking markets this year. Equally, some Opec members might welcome the
opportunity to add much-needed revenue by raising output. Conversely,
any increases in production, to force discipline on miscreants within
and outside Opec would prove as painful to Saudi as to others and would
give governments in the main oil-consuming countries another
opportunity to increase taxes, and their own income, whilst denying the
producers a bigger market.

Additionally, of course, there is a clear link between Saudi Arabia,
the world's largest oil producer, and the United States, the leading
consumer. Saudi, heavily reliant on the US for its defence
requirements, both in terms of equipment and personnel, would be
unlikely, under any regime, to deliberately upset the United States in
a presidential election year.

Although the United States is becoming less dependent on oil imports
from the Persian Gulf area, and is relying more on regional supplies,
the Gulf remains one of its key export markets for armaments. Saudi
Arabia spends about a third of its total budget, some $9 billion, on
arms and, reportedly, the US has at least a third of this lucrative
market. To complicate matters further, some newspaper speculation,
anticipating the fifth anniversary of the Gulf war, suggests that Iraq,
against all logic, may be preparing to launch a new attack on Kuwait.
Most analysts, although acknowledging Saddam's seeming delight in doing
the illogical and unexpected, would doubtless be surprised to see new
conflict.

The relationship between Saudi Arabia and the United States at once
poses an advantage and a problem for Fahd's successor. There is a
growing challenge, from both within and outside Saudi to the continued
preservation of the status quo, as the bombing of the National Guard
Communications Centre, in Riyadh, shows. Crown prince Abdullah is head
of the 57,000 strong National Guard.

The fact that the crown prince is deputising for the king is no
guarantee that he will eventually change his job title, although it
does, of course, give him a significant advantage over other
candidates. Many commentators have argued that the crown prince is more
conservative and less inclined to favour the west than the king but
Fahd remains in ultimate control. Consequently, until a more permanent
succession is established, the longer-term implications will not be
apparent.

Indeed, as discussed in FTEE previously, the age of most of the
aspirants, and the family's mortality record, suggests that Saudi will
be embarking on a period which could be characterised by sudden and
frequent leadership changes, creating continued uncertainty. As
recently as last March Donald Hodel, formerly the US energy secretary,
opined that instability could come with the death of King Fahd. "The
level of civil unrest in Saudi Arabia is such that some close observers
fear that Fahd's demise could spark the onset of civil war." The world
could be "on the brink of another oil shock".

Although the details of the discussions remain confused, the apparent
Saudi "request" that the UK should expel a Saudi dissident from London,
thus seemingly removing one impediment to the implementation of an arms
contract, indicates a basic sense of profound insecurity within the
closed kingdom. Oil traders may wonder just how stable a country is if
it fears the actions of a dissident group overseas armed with a fax
machine.

The affair also says something about the UK, not least as a government
minister observed that the dissident's activities had been
"complicating" UK relationships with the Saudis, to whom the UK exports
goods worth some $4 billion each year, but that is not for FTEE to
discuss. Mohammed al Massaari, the leader of the London-based and now
internationally publicised Committee for the Defence of Legitimate
Rights in Saudi Arabia, who had bombarded Saudi with faxes complaining
lustily about alleged corruption and anti-Islamic practices in Saudi,
is probably to be removed to Dominica on 19th January. Do fax machines
work from Dominica?

The weather

Apart from the continuing concern on what might happen in Saudi Arabia,
there were other weather-related and political issues exercising the
market. The arrival of low temperatures in some of the key oil-
consuming areas, now seldom expected in the winter, inspired thoughts
that, contrary to recent experience, the next few months could be cold.
The east coast of the United States saw its most severe blizzards for
about 50 years and large parts of Washington were brought to a complete
halt.

Although different statistics paint different pictures, the general
impression was, and is, that stocks, especially of the crucial middle
distillates, in the United States and in north west Europe, are
relatively low. Overall demand in some OECD countries may have
increased faster than expected, even allowing for the bad weather.
Between October and November, according to the IEA, global oil
production rose by 1.04 mbd but some commentators think that demand
rose even faster, at 2 mbd, implying a big reduction in inventories.

Recent thinking argues that fast-increasing supplies of non Opec oil
did not justify holding expensive stocks and this was borne out by the
pattern of prices on the futures exchanges. The perceived wisdom now
seems to be to imitate manufacturing industry by receiving stocks "just
in time". Clearly, this concept must be linked to a given level of
demand, so, if demand proves higher than expected, prices for crude or
products will prove more volatile than in earlier years.

The overall supply-demand balance was also disrupted by the weather in
Russia, which caused exports of fuel oil to come to a virtual halt, and
crude production was hampered elsewhere.

It might have been cold in the last few weeks but the abiding memory of
1995, in many countries, will be the high average temperatures. Indeed,
for the world as a whole, 1995 was the warmest since reliable records
were first maintained, about 140 years ago. Since 1860, the ten warmest
years have occurred in the last 13 years and the four leading years
have all been in the nineties, according to the Meteorological Office
and the University of East Anglia. Global temperatures were about 0.41
degrees Celsius above the long-term averages for the 1961-1990 period,
inducing further thoughts about the potential of global warming and the
prospect of an increasing pace of change.

Opec, embargoes etc.

Apparent Opec production discipline also helped to firm prices: there
was little evidence that members took advantage of higher prices and
raised output levels further.

A few years ago most analysts expected crude oil prices to rise, year
on year and one senior oilman, long since departed, was forecasting a
level of around $100 before the end of the century. How bizarre it must
seem to those commentators now, that with Iraq removed from the
international market and Opec forced to implement allocations, that
prices have been sustained, in part, by boycotts imposed not by the
producers, but by consumers.

Unless Iraq suddenly accepts the UN Security Council conditions for
limited sales, which remains unlikely, despite the UN secretary
general's hints on a possible compromise, Iraqi oil exports are
unlikely until after the US presidential elections. Iraq still
maintains that it should be allowed to influence the way in which the
oil was exported and it remains opposed to the proposed distribution of
the resulting income inside Iraq.

General Prince Khaled Bin Sultan, the Saudi who was joint commander of
the Gulf war allied forces, has claimed that the sanctions against Iraq
are ineffective, so the UN should seek alternatives. He claimed that
the embargo had strengthened, not weakened, the Saddam regime.

The US has already banned the importation of Iranian oil and is now on
course to adopt controversial measures to discourage other countries
from providing any support to Iran which allows it to develop its oil
sector. A bill passed by the Senate would treat overseas companies
investing in Iran's oil sector less severely than implied in earlier
versions and that still favoured by the House of Representatives. Such
companies could be ineligible for US-backed financial aid or credits
worldwide. The avowed intention of the current bill is "to deny Iran
the ability to support international terrorism and to fund the
development and acquisition of weapons of mass destruction and the
means to deliver them by limiting the development of petroleum
resources".

The European Union condemns extra-territorial applications of US
jurisdiction, as was apparent when the US introduced measures against
Iran last May. Irrespective of the final shape of the legislation, some
financial institutions and oil-related service companies are already
pondering the wisdom of participating in Iran if such action alienates
the US administration. This is of more than passing interest because
the US government has indicated that, in the absence of allied support,
as happened with the initial anti-Iran measures, more action would be
taken.

The US remains keen to tighten sanctions against Libya and although the
international community remains ambivalent on sanctions to prevent the
sale of Nigerian oil, the United States, which imports about 600,000
bd, might still impose a unilateral ban. The German parliament and the
French government favour a ban on Nigeria's international oil sales, as
do sundry groups in Europe and Africa, but the real momentum for a
significant international embargo seems to have evaporated.

Indeed, at a meeting of the Southern African Development Community,
where only five of the 12 member nations were represented by their
heads of state, the group declined to take any initiatives of its own,
whilst simultaneously supporting international efforts to persuade
Nigeria to move towards the restoration of democracy. President Nelson
Mandela of South Africa had convened the group to garner regional
support for his efforts to boycott Nigerian oil. Another apparent
defeat for Mandela's policy came from the secretary general of the
Organisation of African Unity who reportedly opposed a policy which
isolated Nigeria.

The Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group, set up after the
Commonwealth suspended Nigeria from membership, is to send a senior
delegation to Nigeria, to stress the need for reform. However, it is
clear that a ban on oil exports would only be considered if the mission
failed and failed conspicuously. Of course, the pressure could soon
return if Nigeria chooses to execute some of those still facing trial
or if it jails the FT journalist now released on bail, who was arrested
and charged with possession of seditious material when visiting
Ogoniland.

Presumably seeking to create the impression that it was moving towards
the restoration of democracy, General Abecha and his colleagues set up
three supervisory bodies to oversee the transition, which is scheduled
for October 1998. Four political aides of Moshood Abiola, widely
believed to have won the presidential election 30 months ago, have been
released from detention but Abiola himself continues to languish in
prison.

Opec and non-Opec

Opec remains confident that non-Opec supplies will be curtailed,
voluntarily, to help firm prices. The latest edition of OPEC Bulletin,
discussing the need for Opec's sacrifice to be shared, claims that
"there are signs that the message is getting through". "OPEC soundings
have revealed that some non-OPEC countries now admit that it might be
sensible to share out future growth in oil demand between OPEC and non-
OPEC. In addition, economists in at least one major western oil company
have said much the same. Specific quotas might not be acceptable: the
exercise of quiet restraint might be."

The editorial suggests that "a better response from non-OPEC is
expected in the next six months". FTEE, admitting to just a soupcon of
cynicism and a dash of deja-vu, will believe that some form of genuine,
sustained restraint has occurred only when it is apparent in the market
place. Corporate breath will not be bated.

Forecasts

The arrival of January inevitably induces a flurry of forecasts, which,
doubtless, in some cases, the authors regret by March. Analysts Wood
Mackenzie, widely respected, citing NatWest Markets, suggest that in
the world excluding the former Soviet Union, economic expansion this
year and next could be 3.2 and 3.3 per cent, respectively, compared to
2.7 per cent in 1995. The implication is that oil demand might go up by
2.6 and 2.7 per cent: this, in turn, suggests an increase of 1.7 mbd
this year and a further rise of 1.9 mbd in 1997. Wood Mackenzie note
that in 1996-97, many non-Opec countries will be extracting at peak
rates: "between 1997 and 2000, non-Opec production outside the former
Soviet Union is estimated to rise by less than 1.0 per cent annually,
in contrast to an average annual rate of 2.8 per cent sustained in 1990-
95".

NatWest Markets expect the price of Brent this year to average $19,
compared to the likely final figure for 1995 of $17.5. However, prices
could dip to $18 in 1997, because of the return of Iraqi oil to the
market, before climbing to $20 in 1998 and $21 the following year. "If
the 1996-97 period is to be characterised by relatively strong world-
wide economic growth, and non-Opec supplies begin to reach their upper
limits, the likelihood of recovery in crude oil pricing is high." The
analysts contend that the risks to the oil market are now shifting
towards higher, not lower, prices. Wood Mackenzie, using research
undertaken by colleagues in NatWest Securities, opt for a "Brent oil
price working assumption" of $17 this year, remaining constant
thereafter in real terms.

The Independent Petroleum Association of America, publishing its short-
term forecasts, predicts that total US crude and products imports will
rise this year to 9.123 mbd, from the expected 1995 average of 8.948
mbd. Crude production will continue to fade, falling by 2.3 per cent
from 6.456 mbd to 6.395 mbd, which would be the lowest level since
1954. Unsurprisingly, oil import dependence will exceed 50 per cent for
the fourth consecutive year. However, separately, the American
Petroleum Institute suggests that the 1995 cost of US oil imports was
about $50 billion and that this figure, which was only marginally
higher than the cost of imported clothing, probably represented about
six per cent of the cost of all imports.

According to the IPAA, US oil demand may advance this year by 1.3 per
cent, or 238,000 bd, to 17.969 mbd. The consumption of distillate fuel
could go up by 1.7 per cent, from 3.193 mbd to 3.246 mbd. Gasoline
demand might increase by 1.3 per cent, to 7.881 mbd.

Having fallen year on year for eight years, Russian production could
rise again in 1996, according to the Moscow-based World Energy Analysis
and Forecasting Group, which also thinks that consumption could
increase marginally. Wood Mackenzie expect total FSU production could
slip by another 100,000 bd this year but would then stabilise before
rising again. The Russian communist party secured 22 per cent of the
recent vote in parliamentary elections and the ultra-nationalist group
won 15 per cent, but western investors in the oil sector do not seem
dismayed: the Duma has little influence in determining oil policy and
the forthcoming presidential elections in June could will be more
significant for western investors.

Crude oil production this year could go up in Mexico and Angola. PEMEX
suggest that 1996 output could average 2.860 mbd, up from last year's
2.620 mbd, which was depressed by the October hurricanes. 1996 exports
might be 1.50 mbd, up from 1.318 mbd. Angolan output this year could
climb by 70,000 bd, to average 720,000 bd and, according to Sonangol,
production could be close to 1 mbd by the end of 2001. The Department
of Trade and Industry expected 1995 full year UK crude oil production
to exceed one billion barrels, for the first time. Output in both 1996
and 1997 could be 140 million tonnes, compared to the 130 million
tonnes probably attained in 1995.

According to Ida Bagus Sujana, the minister of mines and energy,
Indonesia will sustain production at 1.5 mbd to 1999 but could become a
net importer thereafter unless new oil reserves are found and brought
on stream. In his Indonesia-The political economy of energy, Philip
Barnes argues that between 400 and 500 million barrels would be
required to be proved up each year, to sustain production close to
current levels. Such a level has not been attained of late and
sustaining current output will not suffice if exports are to be
maintained. "Even in conjunction with modest economic growth, it is
likely that demand for commercial energy will at least have doubled by
the year 2010."

Supply and demand

According to the International Energy Agency, world crude oil
production rose from 71.13 mbd in November to 71.54 mbd in December but
the increase was less than expected. Temporary weather and technical
problems that closed existing fields and delayed the start-up or
expansion of others were cited as reasons. Opec production went up from
25.65 mbd to 25.76, with higher output being recorded by seven members
and declines being registered by two. Iran added 40,000 bd and the UAE
and Venezuela each increased production by 30,000 bd. Neutral Zone
extraction eased by 30,000 bd. Opec aggregate output exceeded the quota
level by 1.24 mbd, although direct comparisons ignore different
definitions.

Outside Opec, UK production fell back by 120,000 bd, to 2.86 mbd, as
bad weather offshore and onshore reduced effective capacity, especially
for the Forties systems crude. Norway, in contrast, thanks to the
swifter pace of Heidrun output, added 80,000 bd to average a record
3.26 mbd, and Russian yields, possibly significantly, rose from 6.16
mbd to 6.22 mbd. Mexican production in December, still recovering from
the previous hurricanes, averaged 3.25 mbd, up from 3.01 mbd.

Prices

Despite the recent and relatively high prices enjoyed by both products
and crudes, prices will probably weaken as the new year unfolds and as
winter recedes. Supply will increase and demand, for seasonal and
economic reasons, could falter. Economic activity in Germany is
expected to slow and this could influence regional oil demand.

The strong demand for heating oil, which has helped to push up crude
prices, will weaken and the refinery problems, which always occur at
this time of the year, will either vanish or will become less
significant.

Whilst a new low trend in inventory levels suggests more short-term
volatility, the underlying trend in prices is expected to be downwards,
not least as more non-Opec oil reaches the market.

The Centre for Global Energy Studies, in its mid December report,
offered a stark warning to Opec. Opec will have to reduce production
from the current level of around 25.4 mbd if current prices, (as at mid
December), are to be maintained. "Failure to do so will bring about a
dramatic weakening of prices in the second half of 1996. Unusually,
four new fields are due to be brought on stream in the UKCS during the
first quarter of 1996...This could reduce the normal second quarter dip
in non-Opec output and shift the year's price peak into the first
quarter. If Opec continues to produce at a rate of 25.4 mbd throughout
1996, the price of their basket of crudes could average less than $12
in the fourth quarter of 1996 and little more than $14.5 for the year
as a whole."

The CGES report contends that "even if Opec does reduce its output
after its meeting in June, it may be a case of too little, too late, as
stocks will have been built up to 88 days' worth of forward consumption
by the start of the third quarter, two days more than at the same point
in 1995." Even a long, cold winter in the major oil-consuming countries
would only delay the onset of price weaknesses. The price of the Opec
basket of crudes in 1995 averaged $16.86 per barrel, in comparison with
the previous year's average of $15.53. The December 1995 figure was
$17.74, up from $16.49 in the previous month.

The price of Brent, which closed at $17.69 per barrel on 8th December,
reacted to the pressures of demand and reached a high of $19.17 on 8th
January. As noted before, this was the highest closing price since last
May. February Brent dropped to $17.41 on the IPE at the close on 12th
January and the Brent Blend contract for March finished on the spot
market at $16.92. Backwardation is firmly based on the International
Petroleum Exchange, with July crude oil futures contracts available at
$15.98. West Texas Intermediate moved from $18.86 on 8th December to
finish on 12th January at $17.96, having peaked on 5th January at
$20.19, the highest level since last May. Dubai moved up sharply during
the review period from $16.91, $1.08 behind Brent and $1.95 adrift of
WTI, to $17.67, before falling back on 12th January, to finish at
$16.04.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ENERGY MARKET REPORT:  NATURAL GAS

In Europe, the big news is that the Danish state owned Dansk Olie og
Naturgas (Dong) and Amerada Hess have embarked on a joint investigation
of a new gas transportation system in the Danish North Sea which could
possibly tap UK and Norwegian as well as Danish reserves, following a
sharp rise in demand for natural gas in Denmark.

Norwegian gas appears to be in high demand elsewhere as well;
deliveries of gas from Norway to Continental Europe hit a new high in
December following the sharp decline in temperatures over Christmas.
The Italians have joined the bandwagon as well with negotiations going
ahead which could establish Norway as a major source of natural gas in
Italy. It was reported that the agreement likely to be made in the very
near future between Italy and Norway will provide for annual import of
10-12 Bcm from the Norwegian North Sea over a period of twenty years.
Polish oil and gas company Polskie Gornictwo Naftowe i Gazownictwo
(PGNiG) is viewing the new 292 km Netra pipeline, built by a consortium
of BEB, Norsk Hydro, Ruhrgas and Statoil, as good news and as a good
way of diversifying its gas imports away from Russia. The company hopes
to begin negotiations with Norwegian field owners over the next few
months with a view to starting supply in two or three years time.

Talking of Russia and Ruhrgas, the joint venture company Wingas, set up
between Russian company Gazprom and German Wintershall has managed to
make the first step to breaking Ruhrgas's traditional domination of the
Ruhr when it signed a deal with Stadtwerke Wuppertal in December under
which it is now the proud new owner of a connecting pipe from the Wedel
line to Wuppertal. Ruhrgas ally, Thyssengas has pointed out that it has
exclusive rights to contracts with Wuppertal, but the new pipe has been
passed off as being "for emergencies only".

Further west, in Austria, the introduction of a CO2 levy has been
further delayed by the resignation of finance minister Andreas
Staribacher, who has argued in favour of the levy as part of a general
environmental initiative to encourage reduced consumption of energy
rather than simply shifting from one energy source to another. His
replacement, Viktor Klima, as previous finance chief at OMV which has a
monopoly on Austria's gas imports, is expected to be more sympathetic
to the demands of the energy industry. This coupled with the recent
cabinet reshuffle following an indecisive election last month could
spell short term trouble for the introduction of the levy.

The UK-Zeebrugge Interconnector gas pipeline project is to go ahead
with companies soon to be invited by Belgian Distrigaz to apply for
transit pipeline capacity. Jean Vermeire, Distrigaz gas supply and
sales director, made assurances that all studies and preparatory work
to put the required transit capacity in place by October 1998 were on
schedule. He added that shippers willing to enter into long-term
agreements by the end of the first half of 1996 would be assured of
availability of the requested transit service.

However, problems such as potential exposure to the disequilibrium on
the UK market caused by continued regulation following privatisation of
British Gas remain. It is felt that the current UK spot prices are the
result of a supply overhang, one of the consequences of an
unsatisfactory privatisation structure of British Gas following
privatisation in 1986. Ruhrgas, however, remain confident that even if
the spot market would not disappear completely, it would nevertheless
be contained as the disequilibrium could be reduced via the
Interconnector.

On a more intercontinental level, British Gas has joined a consortium
with Shell International, Malaysian company Calgary and Gaz de France,
fresh with new president Pierre Gadonneix, to bid opposite Australian
BHP for construction of a Pakistan-Iran pipeline, planned by the
Pakistani government to stretch 1,700 km and importing 1.6 Bcfd of gas
from Iran. The successful bidder will be expected to begin on the
pipeline by June 1996 and would be responsible for the operation and
maintenance of the project on a build-own-operate (BOO) basis as well
as for the purchase of gas from Iran and its delivery to Pakistan.

The long awaited Nigerian LNG Bonny project is now finally on track
despite repeated international calls for reprisals against the Nigerian
military regime for its execution of Ogoni activists. In partnership on
the project for engineering, construction and procurement of a
liquefaction plant with Nigeria LNG Ltd. are Shell, the major
international component, the Nigerian National Petroleum Corp., Elf and
Italian company Agip. Transmission and collection of gas will also form
part of the project, presenting the first ever available way of
disposing of large quantities of gas produced in the Delta region. The
trouble with Bonny LNG however is that has been said to be back on
track so many times that it produces cynicism.

The Nigerian government seems to have an almost infinite capacity for
getting in the way. Killing Ken Sara-Wiwa and eight other Ogoni
activists was just one action in a long line that has threatened this
project. Now however it does seem as if progress will be made. Out of
the $3.8 billion total cost some $500 million has been spent in ground
clearance and on ships, while a further $2 billion is in escrow
accounts. Contrary to the general impression that Shell, Elf, Agip and
the rest are doing General Sani Abacha one big favour, the project is
not due to start making money for the government until 2007, when all
the construction costs are paid off. Ships can move of course and the
Nigerian government does not have a reputation for a hands off attitude
to money, but if Bonny does not finally get off the ground now, Nigeria
will have zero credibility for foreign investment.

Meanwhile pity the poor Ukrainians. The Kiev government has increased
coal and gas prices by 24 and 34 per cent respectively in line with its
promise to the International Monetary Fund that it would introduce
price reform. Currently rents and communal services are charged at
roughly 60 per cent of cost. Further increases in prices are due in
April. However help is at hand. The government has raised pensions by
192 per cent as a means to soften the blow. This perhaps explains why
inflation is at 4.6 per cent per month

Finally a quick cheer for the US winter. Philadelphia provides the
numbers with the National Weather Service reporting that December 1995
had an average temperature of 32oF or 10oF colder than December 1994.
Using a heating degree day index December came out as nearly twice as
cold as December 1994 and 37 per cent colder than in November. Local
electricity sales from PECO Energy were 8 per cent up on the previous
December, but local gas sales increased by 44 per cent. All of which
explains why US gas prices went above $3 per MMBtu for the first time
for ages and ages.

Unhappily many consumers particularly in the north-east reacted fast
enough to switch to heating oil. This reduced the price spike, but did
at least mean that there was no supply crisis. Yet it does explain the
strange truth that although US gas consumption is rising at roughly
three times normal energy demand growth - according to the American Gas
Association - it requires the worst winter weather since Washington was
in Valley Forge to get the gas price to go up. Don't spend all your
profits at the same time, you lucky people!



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ENERGY MARKET REPORT:  COAL

Anybody who knows anything about the Japanese energy scene knows that
the Institute of Energy Economics (IEE) is an important part of
Japanese decision making. It is not a group of academics, sitting in an
ivory tower, waiting to be let out for the occasional cucumber sandwich
and an opportunity to bore people silly. On the contrary the IEE has
clout across the country's energy institutions and uses it. That is why
it is stuffed full of utility salarimen on secondment.

It is thus interesting to discover that it is advocating that the
Japanese power utilities start buying more coal on the spot market
instead of being so dependent on contract purchases. The IEE study
points out that the Japanese utilities buy virtually no coal on the
spot market, whereas the Europeans, Taiwanese and Korean generating
companies take 28-44 per cent, 10-30 per cent and 10 per cent
respectively from spot sales. Given that Japanese coal power station
utilisation is coming more into line with practices elsewhere, namely
falling, IEE points out with some straight talking that current buying
practices bring no benefit at all in terms of lower prices. It makes
less and less sense to buy on contract for stations that are likely to
be only 59 per cent in utilisation.

A big shift of this kind, perhaps towards a 1.8 million ton minimum
spot purchase, could have an interesting impact on the market. The
Japanese utilities are, after all, the primary setters of world market
prices. There is something comforting in a difficult world about the
steady old Japanese, who buy in neat and predictable chunks, with
option tonnages sitting on top. However the shift towards a 10 per cent
spot purchase arrangement, as advocated by the IEE would not be quite
as simple as it looks. The Japanese utilities buy high quality coals,
whose purchase is rather predictable. To enter the spot market on this
basis would probably require closed tenders for specific brands. Yet
this method would not impose much downward pricing pressure on the
producers. To really get towards lower prices, the process would
require open tender spot procurement and this might mean buying
material of unknown origin; a process that is distinctly un-Japanese.

The utilisation of the spot market is also perhaps something the German
coal buyers will have to learn, assuming that is that they really wish
to save money. According to the German Coal Importers Federation
(GCIF), the border price of steam coal into Germany averaged DM76 per
ton, or $53.10 per ton. Before however looking shocked and astonished
at this apparently absurdly high price, it should never be forgotten
that the average price of the home-produced material is a cool DM291
per ton of hard coal before subsidies kick in. Given that the imported
product is consequently only a quarter of the price of German produced
material, it seems odd that German imports only rose by 3 per cent in
1995.

This said, the importer's association are not expecting bigger things
in 1996. While import prices are expected to be stable, the irony is
that the GCIF are expecting imports to fall by 10 per cent. The
regrettable fact is that the large consumer utilities have a serious
hangover of stocks, following the last days of the infamous Jahrhundert
arrangement. The last year of this forced the utilities to buy more
coal from local mines than they could actually use. Having tested the
water in 1995, the utilities are now looking to put a hold on imports
until the stockpiles shrink, hence the importers pessimism.

The day of the German importer must surely come eventually however,
even if Bayernwerk - the utility - managed to do a five year deal with
Saarberg just days before the Jahrhundert blew off into history. It
bought 2.3 million tons from Germany's second largest coal producer on
December 21 1995, just days before its workforce departed to the
festivities. This deal lines up with the one signed in July for 4
million tons from Ruhrkohle over five years. Bayernwerk consequently
will burn around 1.26 million tons of German coal for the next five
years. Imports in 1996 are but at a lowly 300,000 tons. Old habits
clearly die hard, but Bayernwerk at least has the excuse that it has
limited access to unloading facilities using imports by water, which is
the reason why one of Germany's largest power utilities likes to buy
foreign coal in ludicrously small 15,000 ton part cargoes.

If the German utilities are being less than enthusiastic about leaping
into the exciting new world of foreign coal purchasing, at least
Ruhrkohle is game for foreign travel. Ruhrkohle International, a
subsidiary of Ruhrkohle's trading arm Ruhrkohle Handel wants to
increase its stake in Australia's German Creek from around 12 per cent
to 20 per cent. Maybe the name makes them feel at home. Either way,
Ruhrkohle is on the scout for foreign talent, but pretends not to have
much money, in spite of the extraordinary resources of the German
state. There is a PhD to be written about the political economy of
German energy. While the Brits liberalise everything to the point of
self-destruction and the French are blatantly proud of their state-
owned centralisation, the Germans seem to muddle along with a cartel-
like structure and the highest electricity prices in Western Europe.

The oddness of their "model" of "the market" can only be fully
appreciated when it is understood that the German consumer is still
shelling out numerous pfennigs per MWh as a contribution to a fund to
"decommission" the Kalkar fast breeder reactor! Since the reactor was
never commissioned and consequently does not need a fund to
"decommission" it, the money presumably goes towards the German
electricity industry's annual Christmas Party, or some such worthy
cause. Kalkar, of course, is being turned into a fun fair by the Dutch.

Either way, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that the German
consumers are so dumb that they are being taken for a serious ride.
While it is possible on rare occasions to meet a poor German farmer, it
is extremely rare to meet a poor German energy utility or producer. The
local distributor may be poor, but not the supplier. After all, what
could possibly be more anti-competitive than the late lamented
Jahrhundert, which sold coal at approximately five times the world
market price! Given that the British and the French seem to grab most
of the attention in the European Union's ever continuing liberalisation
debate, perhaps it might be valuable if a closer look was taken at the
"German model".

Talking of amusing differentials between world prices and local ones,
the Andhra Pradesh State Electricity Board has suddenly got cold feet
about importing coal into India. After requesting tenders for 500,000
tons in September in a moment of bravado, the board opened all the
envelopes and realised that, at Rs2,900 per ton, the lowest offer was
three times the cost of the local Andhra Pradesh mines. What appeared
possible in September had become impossible in December following the
spectacular collapse of the value of the Rupee against the dollar.

By contrast Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (TNEB) has finalised its 1996
contracts, settling for $59.45 per ton (CIF). The total volume amounts
to 2.4 million tons. Alagendran exports got the biggest slice with a
mixed bag of coal from Indonesia, South Africa and Australia, while PT
Sarita Prima offered the lowest price at $49 per ton. Other Indian
buyers include Karnataka Power Corporation (KPC) which is looking for
250,000 tons on the international market. KPC has a problem with stocks
following the strikes in Andhra Pradesh mines. Its previous attempt to
purchase coal abroad failed in 1993 on both technical and commercial
grounds. However, this time KPC are asking for sellers to quote in
Indian rupees.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ENERGY MARKET REPORT:  ELECTRICITY

Following the collapse of the European Commission's latest attempts to
establish an internal market for electricity (FTEE 170/26), Energy
Commissioner Christos Papoutsis has warned new constitutional powers
may be necessary to push through the reforms.

Unveiling the Commission's first white paper on energy, which targets
overall competitiveness, supply security and environmental protection,
Papoutsis said; "if we are to achieve all these objectives, the
Commission must raise the question of whether a modification of the
Treaty of Rome is necessary, as Community action I believe is now
limited by the absence of clear provisions."

A key area of concern identified by Papoutsis is that of public service
obligation, France's all-serving system security excuse for rebuffing
foreign distribution company entry into its power market. More
transparency is needed in the pricing and taxing of all forms of
energy, including fossil and nuclear fuels, says the Commission:
"Energy prices, especially electricity prices, should not be used as
parafiscal instruments to support specific forms of energy, since this
will form distortions of competition unless such measures reflect
external factors". Allowances, however, are to be made for renewable
sources.

An odd response issued from France. "We need to have a directive as
soon as possible", cried industry minister Franck Borotra. Hang on,
France (along with Greece and Ireland) has been the IEM's fiercest
critic in the last five years; why the volte face? But wait. Borotra
has a tiny condition - "there is no way we will step back from our
position which is based on the single buyer . . . the monopoly of
transport and distribution belongs to the state". Such a directive
hardly constitutes an open market and would probably be unacceptable to
the UK, Germany or the Commission. France is safe in adopting pro-EU
outer garments in calling for a directive while declining to play on a
level field.

There has been a ripple of dissent, however, from the country's 180-
strong grouping of independent power distributors. They are lobbying to
become "eligible consumers", able to pick and choose a supplier, and
have challenged the government line excluding non-nationalised
distributors from the right to choice. Countering the government/union
argument that such a policy would lead to serious price differences
between communities, depending on whether they had their own utility,
the independents suggested an equalisation fund could resolve the
problem.

Never mind differing prices of supply, any supply at all would do for
industrial customers in India who are suffering the worst spate of
power shortages in lining memory. Industry officials say the problems
stem from the country's failure to reach power project installation
targets, inadequate rainfall hampering hydropower generation, continued
coal shortages for a number of reasons and what is being described as
"inter-grid indiscipline".

Andhra Pradesh's government has had to increase power cuts to high
tension industrial customers to between 40-60 per cent of their
sanctioned loads above 70 kVa. Restrictions on peak hour consumption
for industrial consumers and five-hour supply cuts daily for households
are common. Street lighting is being restricted to alternate poles; use
of neon signs in shops and on billboards is banned.

Maharashtra, meanwhile, will suffer shortages until a new 500 MW unit
at Chandrapur goes on line in mid-1997. With peak demand at 8,300 MW
and availability at 7,700 MW, the state is at present operating with a
significant shortfall. Perpetual overdraw by Madhya Pradesh state by
200-500 MW from central power stations at Korba and Vindhyachal has
worsened shortages in Maharashtra.

The news, then, that the state had finally approved Enron's 2,184 MW
Dabhol project as well as two other long-pending IPPs at Bhadrawati and
Patalganga was hardly surprising. The politicisation and subsequent
renegotiations on Dabhol, however, has inspired emulation from states
elsewhere. Seven other fast track power projects, offered central
government payment guarantees, have come under similar pressure to
reduce project and tariff cost.

Perhaps the worst example is the case of AES Transpower, a US energy
group, which is into the fourth renegotiation of its power contract
with the state of Orissa. AES has had to reconfigure its three-year-old
project to meet cost-cutting demands; another government review is in
progress. No one foresees a post-Enron glut of projects - just two or
three deals closed this year, two or three next year and maybe three or
four in 1998, a UK power group director said. AES' last expatriate
manager left India for China at the beginning of the year; "we cannot
afford to lock up resources here," he said.

For the record, Dabhol's approval was dependent on Enron cutting the
project's power tariff to Rs1.86/kWh (3.4p/kWh) from an original Rs2.4
and a reduction in the initial #1.8 billion cost of the plant. Enron
felt the tariff was "achievable" and that it had proposed the capital
cost cut last November. The new deal would see the two-phase plant's
net output of 2,015 MW rise to 2,184 MW but capital costs fall by at
least $335 million.

Japan's long-term fast-breeder reactor (FBR) programme has suffered a
major setback following an accident at the 280 MW Monju experimental
plant located in Fukui prefecture. The accident itself was severe,
involving the leakage of sodium-based coolant. Just as serious,
however, were delays in dealing with the problem and attempts to play
it down. Both have damaged the overall image of the country's ambitious
BWR/PWR programme.

Leakage of about three tonnes of sodium-compound coolant on December 8
seems to have resulted from a faulty pipe weld. The leakage was
detected at 7:47pm but shutdown did not start until 8:00pm. It had
taken the head operator eight minutes to get in contact with his
division chief to ask permission to shut down the plant, a delay which
Hiroshi Oishi, head of the Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel Development
Corp (PNC), admitted was a contributory factor in the delay in
reporting the accident to the local authorities.

PNC's initial version of the incident had meanwhile been found to
contain falsified data bringing forward the time of inspection of the
accident site. It has come to light that sections of video footage
showing extensive damage to pipe structures caused by the leakage had
been withheld. PNC has now dismissed four officials associated with
Monju, including one of the directors in charge of operations - they
will remain in PNC employment, however, at other sites.

Not surprisingly, Fukui prefectural government has expressed dismay at
the way the national government is handling the nuclear programme.
Governor Yukio Kurita said the citizens of Fukui felt "betrayed by
PNC's deceptions". The prefecture has a total of 15 reactors, mostly
operated by Osaka-based Kansai Electric Power Co; it now wants to delay
any decision to allow Japan Atomic Power Co to build two more reactors
in the Tsuruga region. Monju itself is slated to serve as the technical
foundation for a pre-commercial FBR, leading to commercial technology
in 20-30 years time. The accident could have a wider impact than on the
FBR schedule, however. Monju is fuelled by plutonium, and the
falsifying of details, slow response rate and general maladroitness of
its safety operations may result in a serious re-examination of the
country's plutonium policy.

Japan has planned to use some plutonium in the form of mixed-oxide
fuel, MOX, in as many as 10 BWRs and PWRs by 2000-2002. The Institute
of Energy Economics predicts Japan should have 75-90 GW of nuclear
capacity by 2020 and 90-110 GW by 2030. These plans, overseen by the
Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI), could be delayed
considerably. Demands for improved safety provision and training will
have cost implications for utilities as well as for the reprocessing
facility being built at Rokkasho-mura in Aomori prefecture. The
facility will be subject to greater scrutiny from local authorities
after Monju. Aomori has sent officials to Fukui to investigate first
hand the accident and the subsequent cover up.

The future destination of the constituent parts of Siemens' MOX
"nuclear village" at Hanau remains open as the facility prepares to
close. Now it is clear the German government has no intention of
disposing Russian weapons-grade plutonium at the plant, preparations to
decommission all facilities have been speeding up. These comprise the
old MOX plant, closed in 1992 for safety reasons, a uranium fuel
element plant, shut down last September, and the new virtually
completed MOX facility, costing $765 million (half of which was
shouldered by German utilities), and never brought into operation due
to political opposition. Germany's nuclear operators are now having to
turn exclusively to foreign MOX plants - Belgo-Nucleaire's 30t facility
at Dessel, the 25-30t Cadarache unit at Marcoule in France and the 5-8t
plant at Sellafield in the UK. The 100-120t Thorp MOX plant at
Sellafield should provide additional capacity it comes into operation
in 1997 - although this date is considered optimistic in Germany.

Siemens hopes to sell the whole Hanau system or at least parts of it to
a foreign producer of fuel elements. France's Cogema is said to have
shown an interest in certain components; Belgium, the UK and Japan are
also in talks with the German company. For security reasons, Siemens
does not feel exporting the plant to Russia is an option.

Siemens will no doubt get a poor return on its investment, as will the
UK taxpayer if and when the country's viable nuclear industry is
privatised in the summer. The government is still considering how to
present the assets to the market. Analysts generally agree that the
right price for a merged AGR/PWR business is obtained by prudently
discounting a number of factors - liabilities first, political and
regulatory instability next, perhaps public antipathy last. What is
left is, by one assessment, worth just over #800 million- not a good
return considering the Sizewell B PWR alone cost #2.5 billion. Gordon
MacKerron of Sussex University suggests the government will be tempted
to retain the #3 billion ($4.658 billion) cost of reprocessing spent
AGR fuel presently residing in the cooling ponds of Sellafield to
ensure the AGR/PWR business fetches something like the #2.6 billion
value it has placed on it.

While superficially attractive, MacKerron feels this would be
unsatisfactory and possibly illegal under European Commission state aid
rules. The argument that the reprocessing costs constitute a historical
legacy and have nothing to do with the operation of a new company is
fallacious, he says; "There are provisions in the accounts of Nuclear
Electric and Scottish Nuclear of some #3.5 billion to cover these
liabilities for reprocessing AGR fuel irradiated to 1995, and these
provisions have in principle been invested in the assets which British
Energy will acquire. In other words the assets contain the provisions
for paying for the inherited spent fuel. To exempt BE from the need to
pay for them would be to allow the company to enjoy the future incomes
from the assets while escaping a major liability which those assets are
designed to pay for."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

EDITOR'S EXAGGERATION

Keen eyed readers may have noticed two alarming failures in FTEE's
December coverage. According to a recent version of Nostrodamus's
famous prophecy's, namely December's editorial, the world may have
difficulty living with 142 billion people on it, even if global warming
does not happen. While not denying that the world will indeed have
problems with feeding, clothing and above all paying 142 billion
people, FTEE would like to point out that this level of population
growth is unlikely in the near term. The figure should have read 14-12
billion people.

The other chronic failure was to omit to wish all our subscribers a
very happy and prosperous new year.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

TURKEY TO INCREASE POWER GENERATING CAPACITY

Turkey is to increase its power generating capacity by 37% to 29,000 MW
by 2000, according to its energy minister, Sinasi Altiner. The target
is to increase output from 78.3 TWh to 1,300 TWh by the end of the
century. The new stations will have an average capacity of  500 MW. The
target for 2010 is 59,500 MW of capacity.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

NORWAY'S OIL OUTPUT HITS RECORD

Norway's oil output hit a record 3.07 million barrels a day in
December, in an increase of 54,000 bd over the November figure. This
output confirms Norway's position as the second largest oil exporter
after Saudi Arabia, exporting 2.87 mbd in the period.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CHINA'S HAINAN ISLAND GAS

China's Hainan Island gas will shortly be reaching the mainland. The
Yancheng 13-1 offshore gas field will start pumping gas to the Nanshan
power station and a commercial fertiliser venture in Hainan province on
March 1. The field is a joint venture between the China National
Offshore Corporation, Arco and the Kuwait Foreign Petroleum Exploration
Company. It will produce 3.4 Bcm a year and has already started
supplying Hong Kong's Black Point station. It cost $1.13 billion to
develop.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SYRIA TO AMEND CURRENCY REGULATIONS

Syria is to amend currency regulations used to calculate the cost of
oil operations in the country. These previously kept the dollar pegged
to the very low rate of 11.2 Syrian pounds, whereas the official rate
is SrP 42 to the dollar. Now the value of oil revenues will be pegged
to SrP 23, effectively making oil activities less expensive for foreign
companies.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

VIETNAM'S REFINERY PROJECT BACK ON TRACT

Vietnam's new and first refinery project is now back on track, with new
partners replacing France's Total, which had pulled out. Vietnam has
invited South Korea's LG Group, Malaysia's Petronas and Conoco to join.
PetroVietnam and LG Group will now have 30% each, with Petronas and
Conoco sharing 30% and Taiwan's China Petroleum and Investment
Corporations taking the rest. The 130,000 bd refinery will be built at
Dung Quat Bay, south of Danang.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SOUTH AFRICA TO INTRODUCE UNLEADED PETROL

South Africa will introduce unleaded petrol in February, initially at a
4 cents per litre discount. Members of the South African Petroleum
Industry Association (SAPIA) have so far spent R270 million in refinery
upgrading to meet the change. Sasol has invested R300 million since
1993 to produce the new fuel. SAPIA are looking for a 20-25 market
share as rapidly as possible.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

YEMEN APPROVES GAS DEAL WITH TOTAL

Yemen's parliament has approved a $3 billion gas deal with Total. This
clears the way for a deal struck in May for the development of Marib
field, with a pipeline to an LNG plant and terminal at Balhaf on the
Arabian Sea.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

PANHANDLE EASTERN CHANGES NAME

Panhandle Eastern is dead, long live PanEnergy Corporation. The US gas
group clearly has a mission for expansion into other areas than gas,
having changed its name on January 2nd "to more accurately reflect our
current focus." This is just a little sad. Panhandler is a wonderful
word. Having started out meaning gold digger, it has ended up meaning
beggar. Pan, by contrast was merely the Greek god in charge of drunken
orgies!



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SENSITIVE MATERIAL ABOUT THE KUWAITI OIL INDUSTRY

An unnamed British businessman bought a set of second hand office
furniture and found highly sensitive material about the Kuwaiti oil
industry in a drawer. The Kuwait Petroleum Corporation paper contained
oil reserve figures and details of oil accords with other countries.
The Briton is demanding a large sum of money to return the papers. Is
it any wonder that the Brits always play the villains in Hollywood
movies!



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

POLAND SEEKING POSTPONEMENT OF LIBERALISED FUEL IMPORTS

Poland is seeking a postponement of its deadline for liberalising fuel
imports, from 1997 to 1999. Under a treaty with the EU, Poland is
supposed to be liberalising imports from the end of 1996. However the
Polish government now feels that this will damage its refineries.
Poland plans to rationalise and privatise its refining capacity at a
cost of $3 billion in new investment.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

90% OF LUKOIL'S SUBSIDIARY SHARES CONSOLIDATED

LUKoil, the Russian integrated oil company is succeeding in its attempt
to consolidated the shares of its subsidiaries into the main company.
By January 1st 90% of subsidiary shares had been consolidated.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

NIGERIA SIGNS MOU WITH CHINA

Nigeria has signed a memorandum of understanding with China, which will
build two new power stations in the country. The North China Electric
Power Company and the North China Electric Design Institute will build
plants located at Abuja and Geregu. The Chinese will provide the
finance. China is getting closer to the Nigerian regime, having agreed
to modernise its railway system for $500 million in December.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

VENEZUELA'S PRIVATISATION OF ELECTRICITY SECTOR

Venezuela's government hopes to raise $400 million from the
privatisation of its electricity sector. Sistema Isla de Margarita,
Enelven-Enelco and Enelbar companies will be sold this year, although
the sale of 2000 MW Planto Centro plant is to be delayed. The World
Bank's International Finance Corporation is helping with the
privatisation. The capacity for sale amounts to 1,700 MW out of a total
capacity of 18,000 MW. However 10,000 MW on the system comes from the
Guri dam.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BP TO REDUCE REFINING CAPACITY

BP is to reduce its refining capacity from 3 mbd to 1.4 mbd by the sale
or closure of its Lima,. Ohio complex in the US; its Lavera refinery in
southern France and the Pernis section of the Nerefco complex in
Rotterdam. This still leaves BP with 11 refineries worldwide and the
aim is to bring its refining to marketing ratio more in line with
competitors.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

DABHOL DEAL AGREED

Enron has finally got its Dabhol deal. Maharashtra state government has
agreed to the project, providing that Enron reduce both the capital
costs and the power tariff. Ms Rebecca Mark, chief executive officer of
Enron Development is now confident that work will start again in the
next three months. The tariff is to be cut from Rs 2.40 (6.7 cents) to
Rs 1.86 per unit and capital costs from Rs 90.6 billion to Rs 64.2
billion.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

DR ROBERT MABRO AWARDED CBE

Dr Robert Mabro, head of the Oxford Institute of Energy Studies,
England and noted expert on oil economics and the politics of Opec was
awarded a CBE in the British new year's honour's list.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SURVEY OF UK CONSUMERS

A British survey by the Consumer's Association has revealed that two-
thirds of UK consumers will not switch to a foreign electricity
producer when allowed to do so with full competition in 1998. We shall
see.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ACCIDENT AT MONJU FAST BREEDER REACTOR

Japan's Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel Development Corporation has been
criticised for attempting to cover up the accident at its Monju fast
breeder reactor. The company deliberately withheld video footage of the
sodium leak because it should more extensive damage than expected. The
company also failed to report the accident to local authorities
immediately it happened.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

INTERSOLAR AWARDED CONTRACT BY WORLD BANK

The Intersolar Group of the UK has been awarded a contract by the World
Bank to produce prototypes for small solar-lighting units for use in
the developing world. Fifty units will be produced of two designs and
tested in Kenya during 1996. The units are based on 2W thin film solar
cell produced by Intersolar.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

G7 COUNTRIES SIGN MOU WITH THE UKRAINE

The G7 countries have signed a memorandum of understanding with the
Ukraine. The two remaining reactors in operation at Chernobyl will be
shut by 2000. The deal is underpinned by $500 million in grant
assistance and $1.8 billion in projected investments. Two unfinished
Soviet-designed reactors will also be completed.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

EXPLORATORY WELLS IN CHINA'S TARIM BASIN

Four exploratory wells in China's Tarim basin suggest that the area may
have a large oil and gas field. One of the wells produced 218 tonnes of
crude and 177,000 cubic metres of gas per day. The Xinhua news agency
suggested that the structure extend over 50 km. The agency claims that
nine fields have been discovered in the Tarim so far.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B34-18</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B003-191</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey50.html 205.156.212.5 19970114231300 text/html 109114
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:10:54 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:02 GMT
Content-length: 108926
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ey50.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 22, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>California board wants 10% sales of zero-&nbsp;emission autos in 2003</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1305 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>N.J. first state to sign  on to 49-state LEV</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(269 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>Nickel-hydride battery to double range of &nbsp;GM's electronic vehicle </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(418 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>SCEcorp to lease, sell, install charge &nbsp;systems for EVs in California</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(176 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>DOE considers an executive order to &nbsp;implement federal AFV purchases</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(672 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>NYMEX panel selects coal specifications &nbsp;and delivery points for coal futures</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(915 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>Utilities link two-way communications with &nbsp;customers on interactive systems </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1307 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>Senate, House energy leaders disagree on &nbsp;need for full deregulation bill</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(726 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>FERC should get tougher on mergers; &nbsp;municipals and co-op groups say</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(358 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>Southern tries to block TVA's move to sell &nbsp;power well outside its service area</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(472 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>Pa. utility pushes for competition</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(234 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>Coal industry study says EPA's NOx plan &nbsp;could cost utilities billions</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(208 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>Oil's share of energy market drops to 30-&nbsp;year low; 1995 imports decline</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1148 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>Exxon reaches partial settlement with &nbsp;underwriters in Valdez costs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(292 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><LI>Wildlife group produces oil and gas at more &nbsp;than one wilderness preserve</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(275 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>WTO makes it official: Clean Air Act RFG &nbsp;requirements ruled 'protectionist' </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(886 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><LI>Federal appeals court upholds right of New &nbsp;York to adopt Calif. LEV rules</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(458 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><LI>O'Leary names Grumbly to under &nbsp;secretary spot</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(110 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#19"><A HREF = "#19"><LI>Enron gets official offer from India to revive &nbsp;Dabhol Power project</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(178 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#20"><A HREF = "#20"><LI>IPPs accuse NiMo of trying to slip out of &nbsp;contracts with tax proposal</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(372 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#21"><A HREF = "#21"><LI>Independents argue for case-by-case &nbsp;determination in FERC's OCS inquiry</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(569 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#22"><A HREF = "#22"><LI>Nuclear industry pushes for economies as &nbsp;new polls slam/praise its future</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(701 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#23"><A HREF = "#23"><LI>Dueling polls reach opposite results for &nbsp;pro-nuke, anti-nuke agendas</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(507 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#24"><A HREF = "#24"><LI>Oil crisis likely within 10 years, Energy &nbsp;Dept. officials predict</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1067 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#25"><A HREF = "#25"><LI>Exploration and production spending will &nbsp;jump, worldwide survey shows</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(375 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>Environmentalists applaud SDG&E </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(122 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>WEP wants 6.2% rate increase</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(87 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>Gasoline prices increase</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(68 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>Nuclear plants shut</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(158 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>Westinghouse scores fuel cells</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(138 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>Calendar</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(207 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>Joint venture formed in Shanghai  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(57 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

California board wants 10% sales of zero-
emission autos in 2003

     The controversial California 2% zero-emission vehicle (ZEV) 
sales mandate for 1998 was officially scrapped late last month by 
the California Air Resources Board (CARB) in favor of an 
alternative plan that would instead require that 10% of new car 
sales be ZEVs by 2003.
     This latest development adds a bit of clarity to California's ZEV 
plans, but clouds an already murky picture for the immediate future 
of ZEVs in states that have adopted the California Low-Emission 
Vehicle (LEV) plan -- including ZEV mandates -- under authority of 
the Clean Air Act Amendments (CAAA), with New York and 
Massachusetts being the largest.
     Yet the move was hardly a surprise, since CARB had told its 
staff in November to develop an alternative, "market-based" plan 
that did not include the 1998 mandate for ZEVs that the board 
concluded are not "technologically competitive with gasoline-
powered vehicles at this time."
     Right now, electric vehicles (EVs) are the only ones that qualify 
as ZEVs.
     The CARB staff is charged with submitting a final plan for board 
approval no later than March.
     Environmentalists, who initially offered faint support for the 
mandate roll-back in November when CARB Chairman John Dunlap 
said emissions reductions would not lessen and a 5% sales mandate 
due in 2001 would go forth, are now charging the board with caving 
in to political pressure from Gov. Pete Wilson and the estimated 
$24 million media campaign and legislative lobbying launched by 
the Big Three automakers and oil companies against the plan.
     "We have seen no scientific or technical reason to delay [the 
mandate]," said Tim Carmichael of the Coalition for Clean Air. 
"The agency responsible for worldwide adoption of catalytic 
converters, unleaded gasoline and reformulated gasoline has never 
before buckled to political pressure."
     But CARB staff reviewing the technological feasibility of 
introducing EVs on such a large scale in 1998 found that the driving 
range before recharging would be too low and the cost too high to 
attract the needed consumers for the amount of cars that had to be 
sold.
     By abandoning the mandate, CARB officials said, they would 
avoid poisoning the market for the next generation of EVs that 
would meet consumer expectations at a reasonable cost.
     "This plan provides for a [future] successful launch of 
commercially viable electric cars," said Dunlap.
     Automobile experts called the proposal a practical move.

Carmakers still not happy

     In its preliminary assessment, the board found that by 2010, 
when technology is more advanced and mass production reduces 
cost, automakers would be able to successfully sell 10% of their 
fleet as EVs.
     Environmentalists think that could happen sooner.
     "This is inconsistent with the conclusions of the independent 
battery panel that called for strong requirements beginning with the 
year 2000 in order to maintain research and investment," said 
Roland Hwang of the Union of Concerned Scientists.
     Under the original proposal, there would have been around 
60,000 ZEVs on the road by 2000. CARB's preliminary proposal 
now only calls for two demonstration projects in Sacramento and 
Los Angeles that require only 3,750 ZEVs between 1998 and 2000.
     The original plan also called for the 10% mandate to go into 
effect in 2004, not 2003 as now proposed.
     Although seemingly the victors in what has been a contentious 
fight among automakers, regulators and environmentalists, the 
automotive industry issued hesitant praise for the plan.
     Said Chrysler, "the pull ahead of the 10% mandate timing from 
2004 to 2003 ... will risk the launch of EV technology."
     And Ford called CARB's acknowledgement that the 1998 
mandate will not work "positive," but that CARB's new proposal 
"leaves many important questions unanswered and lacks needed 
details. There is still much to be clarified before we can endorse 
this proposal."
     The preliminary proposal presented by CARB -- and still subject 
to revision -- is to drop the 2% requirement in 1998 and to "ramp 
up" to 10% ZEVs by 2003, when all car companies that sell more 
than 3,000 vehicles per year statewide must comply (GM, Ford, 
Chrysler, Toyota, Nissan, Honda and Mazda).
     Manufacturers will also receive ZEV credit through 2003 for EVs 
sold before 1998 and through 2010 and those equipped with 
advanced battery types, including lithium and nickel-based designs, 
which are expected to be available commercially by 2001.
     Right now, the lead-acid batteries are the only ones available 
commercially but provide limited ranges, around 60 miles.
CARB asks carmakers to promote ZEVs 
     Other proposals call for manufacturers to agree to a "Cal/Big 7" 
Technology Development Partnership through a memorandum of 
agreement that includes the following stipulations:
     ** All vehicle manufacturer-supported media, publicity and 
legislative initiatives against the ZEV program would be converted 
to media, publicity and legislative initiatives in support of the ZEV 
program.
     ** Voluntary introduction of ZEVs on a graduated scale until 
1998.
     ** From 1998 through 2002, manufacturers would achieve the 
loss in emissions reductions as a result of the mandate roll-back by 
the production of cleaner gasoline-powered cars.
     ** ZEVs should be placed in the Los Angeles and Sacramento 
basins in the following numbers: 750 in 1998, 1500 in 1999 and 
1500 in 2000 (without credits applied). 
     ** Extra ZEV credits would be provided for longer-range 
vehicles and pre-1998 vehicles.
     ** Manufacturers would commit to continue ZEV research and 
development.
     ** The state would purchase some advanced battery vehicles 
each year.
     ** Ongoing review process with annual reports.
     Northeast states in legal limbo
     The California LEV program, including the 2% sales mandate 
for EVs, was adopted in 1990 prior to enactment of the CAAA.
     Congress included the California LEV as an alternative for 
states to adopt in their State Implementation Plans (SIPs) under the 
CAAA in lieu of the federal vehicle emissions reduction plan.
     New York and Massachusetts chose the California LEV plan as 
part of their state SIPs as has Vermont and Maine, including 1998 
EV mandates. The Northeast Ozone Transport Commission (OTC), 
comprising the 12 states of the Northeast and the District of 
Columbia, also opted for the California LEV with a modified EV 
provision allowing individual states to elect whether to impose an 
EV mandate or not.
     Now that California is altering its plan as to ZEV mandates, the 
legal issue of whether those states must make similar changes is 
being debated.
     A Massachusetts air policy official said that Gov. William Weld 
was "very disappointed" by CARB's action but would not let it 
affect his state's intent on continuing forward with its mandate.
     New York Gov. George Pataki has also dismissed the possibility 
of changes in the California program affecting New York's mandate.
     However, attorneys general in both states are researching 
whether a change in the California plan automatically changes their 
plan under the CAAA. Under federal law, the California plan was 
meant to be the strictest of the two choices for states: California 
LEV and a federal LEV. With changes in that plan, Massachusetts 
and New York would have the strictest of three possible plans and 
officials worry whether they could maintain such a standard since 
the CAAA forbids a "third vehicle" standard.
     Also adding confusion to the dilemma is the ongoing, but now 
on-hold, talks among the OTC states, including New York and 
Massachusetts, automakers and the Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) to develop a so-called "49-State," or National LEV 
(NLEV), vehicle plan for all states outside of California. A major 
obstacle to an agreement in those talks is automakers' steadfast 
refusal to accept individual state adoption of EV mandates.
     The CARB proposal, sources say, definitely will complicate 
those talks further, or at least until after March, when the CARB 
plan is finalized, and the tangled legal issues can be resolved. 
     However, the deadline for the states to submit their 
implementation plans for the OTC LEV is February 15. The 
automotive industry will more than likely file lawsuits to stop such 
plans once the California LEV is completed.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

N.J. first state to sign  on to 49-state LEV

     New Jersey is the first state to officially sign on to the National 
Low-Emission Vehicle (NLEV), or 49-State, plan proposed by the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the automotive 
industry as a replacement for the Northeast Ozone Transport 
Commission (OTC) LEV.
     OTC officials have been negotiating with EPA and automakers 
to develop the NLEV program for almost a year to replace the OTC 
LEV, a slightly modified version of California's strict LEV plan, 
approved last year.
     However, those talks have been stalled over carmakers' 
objections to a provision advocated by several OTC members that 
individual states could implement electric vehicle (EV), or zero-
emission vehicle (ZEV), sales mandates.
     New York and Massachusetts, along with Vermont and Maine, 
have adopted 2% ZEV sales mandates.
     The NLEV plan would affect all states outside of California, not 
just the 12 Northeast states, including the District of Columbia, of 
the OTC. EPA has endorsed the program as a way of achieving 
emissions reductions nationwide, not just in the Northeast.
     However, the plan would call for cleaner gasoline-powered 
vehicles gradually introduced through the next decade and would 
not dictate the introduction of advanced-technology vehicle 
mandates in set years as the OTC LEV plan calls for.
     States that have already adopted plans that include mandates for 
introducing EVs have argued to keep them. Automakers have been 
steadfast in refusing any technological mandates, especially for 
EVs.
     OTC has already adopted, and EPA has approved, the modified 
California LEV as a backstop should NLEV talks break down.
     New Jersey, in endorsing the NLEV, also retained the right to 
implement the OTC LEV should NLEV fail to succeed.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Nickel-hydride battery to double range of 
GM's electronic vehicle 

     Nickel-hydride batteries will soon power General Motors Corp.'s 
electronic vehicles (EV) and more than double the mileage of the 
initial line of cars that will be introduced in California and Arizona 
this fall, said the president of the company that developed the 
battery.
      Earlier this month GM announced it will introduce the EV-1 
"Impact" this fall with a lead-acid battery giving the car a range of 
60 to 70 miles (TER 1/8, p. 2).
     However, GM plans to install a nickel-hydride battery in the EV-
1 as soon as the battery is available in production quantities, said 
Fubhash Dhar, head of Ovonic Battery Co. of Troy, Mich. "The 
range of the car will be more than double to well over 200 miles," 
with the nickel-hydride battery, Dhar said.
     Ovonic has a joint venture with GM to produce the nickel-
hydride battery. 
     Dhar said the nickel-hydride battery will be installed in the EV-1 
"immediately after the initial introduction [of the EV-1] is done," 
but he declined to give a date, because he said GM has not made 
that public.
     The nickel-hydride battery will be installed in the electronic 
version of the S-10 Chevrolet pickup truck as well, Dhar said. This 
vehicle is scheduled to be built in a Shreveport, La., plant 
beginning in 1997, according to GM's prior announcement.
     Chrysler officials had no comment on the deployment date  for 
the nickel-hydride battery, but a spokesman for GM's EV program 
referred to remarks Robert Purcell Jr., executive director of GM 
Electric Vehicles, made earlier this month at the Los Angeles and 
Detroit auto shows.
     "We are continuing aggressive development work on the 
advanced nickel-metal hydride battery through our GM Ovonic 
venture, and we are encouraged by the progress we are making," 
Purcell said. "We hope to have these batteries available as an 
option for both vehicles (the EV-1 and S-10) when the technology is 
ready. The battery technologies will be interchangeable, allowing 
the customer to select the battery that will best meet their driving 
requirements."
     The nickel-hydride battery will cost more than the lead-acid 
battery, the GM spokesman said, but would not give a price range.
     The California Air Resources Board (CARB) has extensively 
reviewed vehicle technologies to set air quality regulations. A 
CARB spokesperson said the board's battery panel assessed battery 
technologies and estimated the introduction of the nickel-hydride 
battery as early as next year on GM vehicles is plausible.
     Initially, the cars will be sold through 25 Saturn dealerships in 
Los Angeles, San Diego, Phoenix and Tucson, Ariz.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

SCEcorp to lease, sell, install charge 
systems for EVs in California

     SCEcorp has announced a partnership with General Motors Corp. 
to lease, sell and service charging systems and provide installation 
services for GM EV customers starting next fall in Los Angeles.
     SCEcorp created a new company, Edison EV, to distribute 
vehicle chargers that can be installed in home garages and 
businesses. GM's Delco Electronics unit makes the chargers. 
SCEcorp is the parent company of electric utility company Southern 
California Edison.
     Edison EV will install chargers for EV customers throughout 
California, working with other utilities that have fleets of electronic 
vehicles. Edison EV also plans to arrange with other automobile 
makers to sell chargers for vehicles too, when Ford, Chrysler and 
other makers put their EVs on the market.
     SCE Corp. is promoting the EV market because it expects an 
additional demand on its system of 5 billion kilowatt-hours a year 
by 2010 to charge EVs.
     Other utilities also are getting into the business of distributing 
GM's charging systems, including Virginia Power Co., but so far 
fleets of electric vehicles belonging to the utility companies are the 
recipients.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

DOE considers an executive order to 
implement federal AFV purchases

     Alternative fuel vehicle (AFV) proponents are supporting an 
Energy Dept. proposed executive order directing federal agencies to 
adhere to Energy Policy Act (EPACT) AFV mandates by paying for 
them out of their own budgets.
     EPACT directs that 25% of 1996 federal fleet purchases be 
AFVs. But Congress stripped DOE of the $20 million it requested 
this year to help federal agencies meet that requirement. And AFV 
supporters believe that many agencies will not purchase the 
vehicles without DOE funding.
     Following the budget blow at DOE for AFVs, and hits other 
departments and agencies took, officials have been in limbo over 
how to meet the EPACT requirements.
     DOE officials believe the executive order, if approved by the 
White House, would be the only way to satisfy the law.
Private fleets still waiting on rule
     On another AFV front, private fuel-provider fleet purchasers are 
still awaiting a DOE rule on their responsibility to buy AFVs under 
EPACT after the department let lapse the Sept. 1, 1995, deadline 
for issuing the fleet purchase rule.
     A "delayed implementation" was expected sometime before 
Christmas. The rule has apparently been held up at the Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB), the administrative agency that 
looks at federal rulemakings with an eye to their costs.
     Some sources, though, doubt the White House will release 
anything at this point and instead sit on the rule for as long as 
possible. 
     Doing so would accomplish two things -- it would effectively 
delay the rule, while at the same time allowing DOE to avoid 
taking a position that would upset either industry or 
environmentalists. 
     "There is a rumor going around that the political trouble [Energy 
Secretary] Hazel O'Leary is in has played a part in the delay," one 
source said. "While she is under a lot of heat, it's going to be harder 
for her to take on a politically unpopular issue."
     The fleet-provider rule is a loser for DOE whatever O'Leary 
decides, the source noted.
     One of the stickier points in the proposed rule is how far DOE 
will stretch the definition of "fuel provider." Will it go all the way 
to companies that extract the crude product from the ground? Or 
will it be tightly defined to include only those companies that are 
directly related to the final product?
     "If Secretary O'Leary comes out with something that is a little 
more pro-industry, the environmentalists are going to scream," he 
said. "But the oil patch would go berserk if producers got defined as 
fuel providers -- there would be this huge hue and cry in Dallas and 
Houston and that's not what they need."
     Another source suggested that by not filing a lawsuit and calling 
DOE's hand, the AFV industry is not forcing the issue. That makes 
it easier for DOE to delay things indefinitely.
     "There hasn't been a lawsuit yet that I've seen, and that sort of 
plays into DOE's hands," said a source in the AFV industry. "If this 
gets taken to court, that at least forces DOE to deal with us."
     Jeff Clarke, counsel to the American Gas Assn., said he still 
expects DOE to come out shortly with a delayed rule, with the 
implementation date pushed back to Sept. 1, 1996.       
     "I understand there are people at DOE who are pushing it and 
want it out as soon as possible," Clarke said.
     "Our only disappointment is that it's going to be delayed," 
Clarke added. "I'm sure with the budget talks they have higher 
priorities." 
     Many in the industry are "very frustrated" with DOE's failure to 
release a rule in a more timely fashion.
     "We already know there's going to be a delay," said an industry 
official. "The biggest issue is can you supplant a medium- or heavy-
duty vehicle for a light vehicle" and get a credit. 
     "It's really distressing to see what's been happening in that 
arena," said Jason Smitherman, state alternative fuels director in 
Oklahoma. "I know I would be in trouble if I had a rule to 
implement and it took me three years."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

NYMEX panel selects coal specifications 
and delivery points for coal futures

     An advisory subcommittee assembled by the New York 
Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) has tentatively selected initial 
coal  specifications and delivery points for its first ever coal futures 
contract. This one would cover Central Appalachian coal.
     NYMEX has futures in crude oil, heating oil, gasoline, natural 
gas, propane and even electricity in its energy trading activity, and 
is now seeking to establish coal futures. Setting standards for 
commodity trading of this fossil fuel is a challenge because of the 
varying types and qualities of coal.
     Emphasizing that the specs and points selections are tentative, 
sources said NYMEX's Coal Delivery Subcommittee decided to 
recommend a contract for a steam coal containing 12,000 Btu/lb, -
1% sulfur and no more than 14% ash. 
     The delivery point would be in a region that includes 10 coal 
terminals on the Big Sandy River and five or six terminals on the 
Ohio River between the mouth of the Big Sandy and Huntington, 
W.Va. The advantage offered by this region is the abundance of the 
above-specified coal and the multiple modes of getting coal to the 
river (truck, CSX Transportation and Norfolk Southern Railway). 
     These tentative recommendations were made at a December 
meeting of the subcommittee, which convenes again this month.
     The panel of about 40 coal and utility executives did not have 
time to discuss initial parameters for a contract for sub-bituminous 
coal from the Powder River Basin (PRB), but that discussion is 
planned.
     A NYMEX spokesperson emphasized the preliminary nature of 
the recommendations and the many layers of approval required for 
developing a contract. Further discussions could alter early 
decisions, the spokesperson stressed.
     In a 15-page, Dec. 7 memo to subcommittee members, NYMEX 
officials Karen Klitzman, Brian Johnson and Jay Gottlieb outlined 
what they saw as the key questions which must be settled in order 
to write effective PRB and Central Appalachian coal futures 
contracts. Aside from primary quality specs and delivery points, 
these included whether pricing should be expressed in dollars per 
ton or cents per million Btus. Apparently the subcommittee 
recommended a cents/mmBtu formula.

Definitions of coal quality also mulled

     In addition, according to one source, the subcommittee decided 
to drop secondary coal specs, including moisture, grind, volatile 
matter, ash softening temperature, fixed carbon and size. There was 
also a recommendation that premiums and penalties not be 
associated with the contract. Apparently the subcommittee is urging 
NYMEX to adopt a generic coal with as few specs as possible, 
thereby avoiding the inherent limitations associated with coal's 
numerous quality parameters.  
     In the memo NYMEX underlined several points for 
understanding delivery of a physical commodity in satisfaction of a 
futures contract. For example, "only a small percentage of contracts 
traded for each delivery month actually result in delivery, typically 
less than 1%. All other contractual obligations are offset by opposite 
trades which close out the original position ... It is precisely this 
ability to easily enter into a position and then liquidate it without 
having to return to one's original counterpart in the transaction that 
is one of the great advantages of future contracts as risk 
management tools."

Delivery ensures accuracy

     While most people use futures as financial instruments for 
"price discovery" and risk management, the memo states, "the 
actuality of deliveries for each contract month helps insure what is 
called convergence of cash and futures markets. In other words, 
delivery ensures that the futures market is an accurate reflection of 
prices for the physical commodity ... The futures contract must 
accurately model typical cash market transactions."
     The standardized formal futures contract specifies quality, 
delivery mode, destination and all other terms except price and 
quantity (number of contracts). "This is what makes possible the 
provision of price transparency and risk management tools."
     While "there has never been a delivery performance failure on 
NYMEX contracts," the Exchange nevertheless has rules to be 
applied in the event of a failure. Futures contracts for particular 
commodities define what constitutes late performance, failure to 
perform and force majeure.

Benchmark provides many benefits 

     Coal is the only energy commodity which has not developed "a 
specific grade of product that is designated as the par value grade 
and is used as a benchmark to gauge spot market value," the 
NYMEX memo observed.
     A benchmark grade of coal could be used in several ways, such 
as adjusting a supply contract price that is related to a market 
sensitive number, NYMEX argues.
     While some critics have said futures will not work in coal 
because coal is not an homogenous commodity, NYMEX believes 
coal can be subjected to the same benchmark criteria applied to oil 
and pork bellies. According to NYMEX, these include:
     ** The commodity should be readily available.
     ** There should be significant proven reserves.
     ** There should be a diversity of buyers and sellers.
     ** Wide acceptability by consumers.
     ** Transportation access is readily available.
     ** The willingness of the trade press to survey the market on the 
value of the benchmark.
     ** Ability to standardize.
     "Consistency of transportation costs for a buyer receiving coal 
from any possible delivery facility within the designated delivery 
area is critical," the NYMEX memo continues. "This requirement 
sets the upper limit to the size of the delivery area. The objective is 
to find a delivery area that is easily accessible to adequate supplies 
of coal, with consistent transportation costs and sufficient 
transportation facility flexibility to prevent bottlenecks."
     At least tentatively, the advisory subcommittee seems to 
believe that the Huntington/Big Sandy region satisfies this latter 
requirement.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Utilities link two-way communications with 
customers on interactive systems 

     The trend toward smart homes and businesses is accelerating 
rapidly.
     Several utilities announced deals with telecom, cable, data 
service and electronic marketing companies last week to establish 
electronic communications links with electric and gas customers.
     First there are the big commercial customer ventures of telecom 
giant AT&T in New York and Newark. But while that could become 
the biggest marketing effort, Enova Corp. in Southern California is 
reaching out to touch customers in their homes and integrate utility 
choice into the daily lives of thousands of people via home 
computer. 
     AT&T announced a partnership with Consolidated Edison Jan. 
16 to develop a two-way communications system for customers in 
New York City where Con Ed is headquartered.
     AT&T also started similar ventures with two other utilities in 
Newark, N.J., and Louisville, Ky., and more utility partnerships are 
expected as AT&T plans to market the interactive products to 
utilities worldwide. The company has organized the AT&T Utility 
Solutions division in Whippany, N.J., to push the deals.
     Con Ed and AT&T will install the first of the "Integrated 
Broadband Utility Solution" systems in about 100 businesses 
beginning in April. The term "broadband" refers to the large amount 
of information that will be sent through coaxial cable.
     With the communication system the utility will be able to 
inform customers of special time-of-day pricing, new rate plans, 
special conditions because of cold or hot weather and other 
information and get customer responses to the offerings and 
conditions, an AT&T spokesperson said.
     Devices will be placed on each appliance or piece of 
electricity-using equipment. A box called an "interface unit" will 
gather the information from each device via telephone lines in the 
building and route it to the utility offices.
     Services will include power-quality monitoring, real-time 
pricing, load profiling, customer-controlled load management and 
other interactive services. Advanced networks will be customized 
for hospitals, banks, hotels, office buildings and other large 
customers. However, smaller commercial buildings, such as 
restaurants and supermarkets, will be offered an array of new 
services.
     AT&T said its system provides utilities and their customers 
automated meter reading, remote outage detection, remote control 
to turn power on and off, real-time load management, tamper 
detection and distribution automation.
     Services that also can be included are condition monitoring 
reports on equipment or appliances, power quality monitoring, 
energy pricing, electronic billing, home security, medical alert 
systems, and "what if" calculations of power supply and use 
alternatives.
     AT&T said residential and commercial customers will be able 
to program their appliances to run at times which minimize energy 
costs.
     Last November AT&T announced it was teaming with Louisville 
Gas & Electric Co. (LG&E) to introduce two-way communications 
between utilities and customers. LG&E's goal is to build interactive 
customer communications systems for its 345,000 electric and 
270,000 natural gas customers in Louisville and 16 Kentucky 
counties. Last fall LG&E began working with TKR Cable of Greater 
Louisville to build a fiber optic network for a two-way system and 
signed similar agreements with other access providers for 
communications links. 
     A year ago AT&T announced an agreement with Public Service 
Electric and Gas (PSEG) of New Jersey (PSE&G) to eventually 
deploy the two-way system to 500,000 customers. The partners have 
nearly connected the first 1,000 PSE&G customers.
Contacting utilities through home computer
     While AT&T has bitten into the Big Apple market, on the 
Pacific Coast, Enova Corp. is making it possible for customers to 
select utility options on home computers in addition to home 
shopping, and other computer services.
     Enova, parent company of San Diego Gas and Electric, 
announced Jan. 17 a joint venture between its subsidiary, Enova 
Technologies and Philips Home Services of Burlington, Mass., to 
provide a consumer-based electronic commerce network that 
integrates utility management along with electronic banking, home 
shopping and other computer services.
     Customers will be able to pay their utility bills, check real-time 
prices of electricity (assuming a competitive market develops), 
automate electrical appliances and screen phone calls.
     "This venture brings the utility and consumer electronics 
industries together for the first time," said Gerrit Schipper, president 
of Philips, in a prepared statement.
     Initially 30,000 phones will be hooked up in San Diego. Philips 
already provides systems for customer access to banks, phone 
companies and other businesses.
     The companies envision the system will reach 500,000 
customers in San Diego and Orange counties and from there 
national marketing will be launched.

Wisconsin Energy hits mid-U.S. market 

     In the Midwest, Ameritech Corp. and Wisconsin Energy Corp. 
announced Jan. 15 they formed a company called Energy Oasys to 
market a new utility automation system for homes and businesses in 
Wisconsin Electric Power Co.'s (WEP) Milwaukee service area and 
to other utilities. WEP is a subsidiary of Wisconsin Energy, a 
holding company. WEP has tested the Oasys system in 15 prototype 
homes and is installing it in 200 homes in Milwaukee. Installations 
will be made in 5,000 homes this year. Oasys costs the utility 
company between $1,000 and $1,500 a home.
     The system has modular open architecture that will allow other 
utility companies to assemble and expand the systems as they see 
fit.
     The system allows meters to be read automatically, provides 
remote power connection and disconnection, and has security 
features for meter tampering and power outage detection.
     In the future, Oasys will provide utility companies with the 
capability to offer customers programmed control of security 
systems, lighting, irrigation systems, indoor air quality, pool heating 
and other features, the utility promises.
     The system is designed to be networked over power lines and 
used in telephone networks, fiber optics, coaxial and other media.
     Ameritech is a communications company with more than 13 
million telephone, cellular, paging, data and video service 
customers in the United States and overseas.
     Meanwhile, in a business link between companies from opposite 
ends of the United States, Duquesne Light Co. of Pittsburgh 
announced its "Customer Advanced Reliability System" will be 
installed during the next two years to provide real-time information 
about the status of power delivery to individual homes and 
businesses in Pennsylvania.
     Itron Inc. of Spokane, Wash., a supplier of energy 
communications systems to the utility industry, will begin installing 
the network in February or March for Duquesne to provide the 
communications link with 580,000 customers in Allegheny and 
Beaver counties. Itron will have the installation completed next 
year and has a contract to service the system for 15 years.
     Customers' use of the system will be sent electronically to a 
utility control center so customer service personnel know the status 
of power delivery across the system for individual customers. The 
system will automatically report the time and location of power 
outages to speed restoration.       Customers in turn will be able to 
request electric service to start or stop around the clock. Meters will 
be read from the control center without the need to have meter 
readers enter homes.
     Customers will choose which day of the month to pay their bills. 
And the system will enable the utility to define a daily profile of 
electricity usage of each customer. 
     This will provide the utility with the ability to track more 
effectively electric power load growth so that higher capacity 
distribution equipment can be provided.
     Customers eventually will be able to signal their choice of 
power supplier.
     At Con Ed, John Arceri, vice president of energy services, 
summed up some of the reasons for all of this. "We'll make 
available to our customers the tools they need to manage more 
efficiently and to reduce their energy and operating costs. In turn 
Con Edison will be able to avoid costly system upgrades."
     However, an even more important motive is profit. As utilities 
are driven to cut costs in a commodity-driven market for low-priced 
power, they are looking for ways to provide services so they can 
charge more money. Value added services will help the more 
innovative utilities survive and prosper in a cut-rate energy market.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Senate, House energy leaders disagree on 
need for full deregulation bill

     Sen. Frank Murkowski, R-Alaska, chairman of the Senate 
Energy and Natural Resources Committee, said congressional 
action to require states to open the electricity market to retail 
wheeling isn't appropriate.
     "I am a strong advocate of states' rights, and states' 
responsibilities," Murkowski said in a recent speech before the 
Edison Electric Institute (EEI). "States should take the lead on 
restructuring issues. Traditionally they have regulated the bulk of 
electric utility activities, and it should remain that way. For 
example, retail wheeling has been and should continue to be a state 
issue, not a federal matter."
     That puts key members of the House and Senate on opposing 
sides on the need for prompt congressional action in opening the 
electricity industry to full-scale competition.
     Rep. Dan Schaefer, R-Colo., chairman of the House Commerce 
Committee's subcommittee on energy and power, plans quick 
action on a comprehensive deregulation bill that he is still putting 
together.
     Schaefer told EEI that he will "resume hearings immediately 
and move legislation early this year.
     "I have one goal and only one goal in putting together the 
legislation that I assure you I will move out of my subcommittee 
this year," he said. "I want all the benefits of competition to go to 
all customers -- not just the largest users -- as soon as possible."
     However, he still has not decided what the bill should contain 
and is "open-minded" about "how best to achieve that goal."
     Schaefer disputed EEI claims that "the states are doing a fine 
job and there is no need for federal action."
     "If EEI is being honest about leaving this to the states to decide, 
then you must agree with me that -- at the very minimum -- federal 
legislation is needed this year to remove federal barriers to 
competition and to give the states the tools they need to pursue 
competition," he said.
     But Murkowski framed the debate in terms of restructuring and 
reducing the role of the federal government. "The result will 
determine whether Washington will continue to tax more, spend 
more, regulate more and control more ... or whether we will begin to 
reduce the size, scope and power of Washington."
     "Electricity is far too important to consumers, industry and our 
economy to toy with," Murkowski said. "In 1992 Congress [through 
the Energy Policy Act] made major legislative changes to promote 
competition," he continued.      "So far those changes appear to be 
working and working relatively well," Murkowski said. "There are 
some who are unhappy at the pace of change; they think it too slow. 
But the pace of change is not as important as the results of change."
     Murkowski said the marketplace, Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission and the states should be given an opportunity to move 
the industry toward competition. "Neither you nor I could stop the 
rush to competition even if we wanted to," he said.
     One industry source noted Schaefer has more jurisdiction over 
electricity issues than Murkowski. Schaefer's committee has 
jurisdiction over the Public Utility Holding Company Act 
(PUHCA), while Murkowski's committee does not.
      But Murkowski said he is on the side of the majority of 
Republicans who want to reduce the size and scope of the federal 
government.
     "I have heard there may be some in the House -- even the 
Republican side of the House -- that are interested in expanding 
FERC's authority over electric utilities. They seem to be interested 
in preempting state public utility commissions and moving that 
authority to FERC. ... Given the ongoing efforts of the FERC and the 
states, it is premature to initiate a major legislative overhaul."
     Schaefer told the Rocky Mountain Oil & Gas Assn. that "the 
days of the electric monopoly -- the last great monopoly of our 
times -- seem to be numbered."
     In that speech, Schaefer acknowledged the stranded cost issue is 
the trickiest Congress will have to deal with in coming months.
     "Fairness dictates that utilities be given an opportunity to 
recover appropriate costs that cannot be mitigated," Schaefer said.
     "Because we are in the middle of the hearing process, I am not 
yet prepared to talk about what approach to competition or stranded 
costs I prefer," he said. "I can tell you, however, that my 
subcommittee will be moving legislation this year and that 
legislation will seek to bring the benefits of competition to all 
customers in a reasonable time frame."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

FERC should get tougher on mergers; 
municipals and co-op groups say

      Associations representing 1,750 community owned electric 
utilities and 1,000 cooperatives filed a petition with the Federal 
Energy Regulatory Commission last week urging the regulators to 
apply stricter standards before approving mergers so utility 
combinations don't result in anti-competitive monopolies.
     Antitrust criteria must be applied to guard against market power, 
the National Rural Electric Cooperative Assn. and the American 
Public Power Assn. said in a joint petition to FERC.
     "Current regulatory standards for private power company 
mergers are obsolete and need to be rewritten to make competition 
the primary factor in a public interest review," the associations said 
in prepared remarks on the petition.
     The associations of community-owned electric utilities and non-
profit, consumer-owned cooperatives proposed a multi-part rule and 
a series of questions to evaluate proposed mergers of investor-owned 
utilities.

Conditions for mergers proposed

     The merger can be approved if anti-competitive effects are 
outweighed by efficiencies resulting from the merger in the form of 
savings and benefits, or if conditions can be imposed to mitigate 
anti-competition, the associations contended.
     But FERC should examine whether the claimed efficiencies can 
be achieved by means other than a merger.
     The regulators should codify that the merged companies must 
offer single-system transmission pricing unless there is a public 
interest reason for making an exception.
     FERC should evaluate whether functional unbundling is 
sufficient or whether operational or corporate unbundling as a 
standard condition for merger approval is necessary.
     The regulators also should consider standards to govern affiliate 
transactions.
     "FERC should reinterpret its standards in light of procompetitive 
legislation that has been passed by Congress ...," the associations 
said. "Mergers are a natural and frequently harmful method of 
forestalling competition."
     The filing expresses alarm at the accelerating pace of utility 
mergers, noting there have been 14 mergers proposed since the 
Energy Policy Act was enacted in 1992, including six proposed 
mergers in 1995.
     "Commission merger policy will determine whether its open 
access initiatives result in effective competition," the petition 
stated, "or whether these initiatives will be frustrated by utility 
combinations that echo domination by a few giant companies that 
prevailed during the holding company era of the late 1920s and 
early 1930s."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Southern tries to block TVA's move to sell 
power well outside its service area

     One of the nation's biggest investor-owned utilities holding 
companies has filed suit against the nation's largest government-
owned utility in an attempt to block it as a power marketing 
competitor.
     The Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) has entered into power 
sales agreements with LG&E Power Marketing to illegally sell 
power outside of the authority's service area, claims a complaint 
filed by The Southern Co. in the U.S. District Court for the Northern 
District of Alabama.
     Atlanta-based Southern has filed a complaint on behalf of 
affiliates Alabama Power, Georgia Power and Mississippi Power 
charging TVA with violations of U.S. law that prohibit it from 
entering into contracts to sell, or deliver, power outside its 
statutorily limited service area. The three utilities claim TVA has 
made such deals with LG&E Power Marketing, which was hired by 
TVA last fall to procure power for the federal agency. LG&E is one 
of the top five power marketers in the nation.
     "In 1959, H.R. 3460 was introduced in Congress. As offered, the 
bill proposed to limit TVA's service area to 'counties lying in whole 
or in part within either the Tennessee River drainage basin or the 
service area in which power generated by the corporation is being 
used on July 1, 1957,'" the Southern affiliates claim. "After Senate 
and House committee deliberation, the legislation was amended to 
prohibit TVA's sale or delivery of power outside its service are as it 
exists as of July 1, 1957."
     The utilities contend the legislation, passed as the TVA Bond 
Act, included a provision that allowed TVA to swap power with 
neighboring utilities to meet temporary needs. But the U.S. Senate 
later amended the legislation to "prohibit TVA from being a source 
of power supply, either 'directly or indirectly,' outside its statutorily 
defined service area" because it was abusing that provision by 
selling power to unauthorized users via other utility systems, the 
holding company claims.   
     Southern's affiliates are asking the court to declare that TVA 
has violated the TVA Act by entering into an interchange 
agreement with LG&E Power Marketing, that the transactions 
contemplated under the agreement are unlawful and that TVA is 
prohibited from directly or indirectly selling or delivering power to 
any marketer or broker of power. 
     TVA said that "due to the pending litigation" it has no 
comment.
     LG&E Power contends it has the right to market TVA's power 
because it is affiliated with Louisville Gas & Electric and the 1959 
law created an exception for TVA energy exchanges to some 
neighboring utilities including LG&E.
     Southern counters that this power market deal is an attempt to 
circumvent statutory limits on TVA power sales and would allow 
sales far beyond the bounds intended by that 1959 exemption.
     Southern would like to sell its own wholesale power and has 
asked FERC to allow affiliate, Southern Electric Marketing Inc., to 
do that.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Pa. utility pushes for competition

     Pennsylvania Power & Light executives called for giving all 
Pennsylvania consumers the opportunity to choose their electricity 
supplier.
      Society demands choice and the electric utility industry in 
Pennsylvania must move forward to meet the expectations of 
consumers, Bill Hecht, the company's chairman
told the state Public Utilities Commission (PUC). The dramatic 
difference in rates among utilities has created a perception that the 
current structure is unfair, Hecht said.
     State regulators are conducting an investigation into electric 
utility competition in Pennsylvania.
     Hecht said there are some principal issues that must be 
addressed in the transition to full customer choice: 
     ** The opportunity for all customers to be able to choose their 
electricity supplier.
     ** The ability for utilities to recover costs incurred because of 
the requirements of federal or state regulation.
     ** The development of a system to ensure the continuation of 
reliable electricity service.
     Fred Hafer, president of Metropolitan Edison and Pennsylvania 
Electric, has his own plan for competition that includes the creation 
of a power pool. However, utilities with high rates would be on their 
own and would not be permitted to sell or buy in the pool under his 
plan.
     William Mowatt, president of the Pennsylvania Rural Electric 
Assn., urged the commission to consider allowing utilities 100% 
recovery of their stranded costs, possibly by charging customers an 
exit fee for leaving a utility system. The PUC earlier considered 
such a fee illegal.    



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Coal industry study says EPA's NOx plan 
could cost utilities billions

     The National Mining Assn. (NMA) released last week a new 
study that represents the coal industry's latest assault on some NOx-
control rules being contemplated for utility power plants in 37 
states.
     The study was done by the consulting firm Energy Ventures 
Analysis (EVA), and looks at what it would cost to extend the rules 
already adopted in the 12-state Northeast Ozone Transport area to 
25 other states extending west to the Rockies. Mandated NOx 
reductions under the proposal would be up to 75% below current 
emissions levels, the study claims.
     The EVA study says utilities would have to spend up to $27 
billion in capital equipment costs to meet the new rules, and up to 
$5.5 billion per year in operating costs. Higher electricity prices that 
would result from those costs would hamper economic development 
in much of the country, the study points out. A lot of coal-fired 
capacity could be prematurely retired in order to meet these 
standards.
     "The bottom line of the EVA study is higher electric rates, 
reduced economic development, fewer jobs and an expanded 
environmental bureaucracy," said NMA President Richard Lawson.
     For a copy of the study, EPA Ozone Proposal to Cost Consumers $5 
billion Annually, contact the National Mining Assn. at 202-463-2625.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Oil's share of energy market drops to 30-
year low; 1995 imports decline

     Oil's share of the overall 1995 domestic energy market slipped 
under 40% for the first time in almost three decades with natural 
gas and nuclear power primarily claiming the loss.
     And for the first time in four years, total U.S. petroleum imports 
declined, though they still account for more than 50% of the 
country's demand, according to the American Petroleum Institute's 
(API) 1995 statistical report.
     While oil is still the largest source of energy used in the country 
at 39.7%, a drastic 17.1% drop in residual fuel -- heavy oil used to 
power utility boilers -- as a result of power suppliers switching to 
cheaper natural gas, erased any demand gains in other major oil 
products like gasoline, kerosene jet fuel, home heating oil and 
diesel fuel.
     Of that 17.1% drop in resid, the lowest since 1938, natural gas 
took a 40% share and nuclear power 25%, accounting for the 
greatest increases in energy use for the year. The highest share oil 
has ever claimed of total energy use was 48.7% in 1977.
     "It reflects a combination of reduced use of resid-fired peaking 
units and the availability of cheaper natural gas leading to a 
dramatic reduction in the use of this fuel in the electric utility and 
industrial sectors," said API's Ed Murphy.
     Domestic energy use reached a record high in 1995 at 87.6 
quadrillion Btus (quads), 2.2 quads BTU higher than it was in 1994, 
a 2.3% increase that is consistent with growth annually since 1992.

Natural Gas

     Natural gas accounted for just over one quarter of all energy 
used at 22.2 quads, according to API. Since its deregulation in 1986, 
natural gas has grown by 5.5 quads, or 33%. Of that amount, nearly 
2 quadrillion BTU has been supplied by new imports, primarily from 
Canada.
     Over one-half of the growth in natural gas consumption since 
deregulation has been in the industrial sector. But consumption of 
natural gas has yet to exceed 1972's 22.5 quads, which claimed 
over 30% of domestic energy use that year.

Nuclear Power

     Nuclear power production is estimated to have reached a record 
high in 1995 of 7.2 quads claiming an 8.3% share of total U.S. 
energy consumption. API said that higher utilization  of nuclear 
generating capacity pushed output since the number of operating 
plants has remained unchanged. Plants operated at 78% capacity 
last year compared to 70.5% in 1993.

Gasoline

     Despite slower growth in highway travel, gasoline deliveries 
were up 2.5% in 1995. But as states and localities opted out of the 
reformulated gasoline (RFG) program, RFG demand fell 20% below 
anticipated levels. API said that total gasoline demand for 1995 
appears to have increased to about 7.8 million b/d, nearly twice 
previous years amounts. But the industry association attributes this 
to enhanced reporting as a result of the RFG program.

Oil Production

     Domestic crude production declined at a significantly smaller 
rate than in recent years, API reported, but was still the lowest 
domestic production for any year since 1954. The reason for the 
modest decline is improved drilling efficiency and the lack of a 
significant jump in oil prices, which average between $16.50 and 
$20.00/barrel all year.
     Crude fell by 2.2%, or 140 thousand b/d, to less than 6.52 
million b/d for the year. The decline was evenly split between 
Alaska and the lower 48 states. Lower 48 production fell by 72 
thousand b/d, or 1.4%. For each of the previous three years, lower 
48 production has fallen by 3%. Increased offshore activity in the 
Gulf of Mexico was partially responsible for the reduced rate of 
decline since it grew by 80 to 100 thousand b/d over 1994 levels.
     Alaska production declined by 4.7%, to 1.49 million b/d, which 
is comparable to yearly decreases since 1991.

Drilling

     Oil, gas and dry hole well completions in 1995 declined 9.3% 
compared to 1994. A total of 19,756 wells were completed last year. 
In 1994, there were 21,793 completions. 
     The largest drop in completions occurred in natural gas wells. 
The 8,114 gas wells completed in 1995 was 14% less than the 9,439 
in 1994.
     Oil well completions fell 1.6% -- from 7,032 in 1994 to 6,917 in 
1995. Dry hole completions dropped 11.2% to 4,725 in 1995.
     Footage drilled decreased by 11.8% in 1995 to 113 million feet 
drilled in search of oil and gas.
     In 1995, 20.3% fewer exploratory wells were completed with gas 
wells declining the most at 32%, oil wells were down 20%

Hydropower

     API said that hydro-electrical power was the driving force 
behind increases in the "other" category. Hydro was up nearly 9% 
in 1995 over 1994 levels. API attributes the growth to higher levels 
of precipitation.

Imports

     Imported oil still claims more than 50% of the country's demand 
but fell for the first time in four years in 1995 by 1.3% because of 
weak demand and the more moderate decline in domestic crude 
production. Total imports of crude and oil products in 1995 averaged 
8.8 million b/d. But the decline came entirely in oil product imports, 
which fell 18%. Crude oil imports actually rose 3.2%.
Refinery
     Refinery utilization was 91.7% in 1995, compared with 92.6% in 
1994.

Stocks

     Total stocks (crude oil plus petroleum products) ended 1995 at 
their lowest level since 1972, falling almost 9% compared to 1994. 
Total stocks at the end of December stood at 968 million barrels.

Oil and Natural Gas

     While the percentage of the nation's energy supplied by liquid 
petroleum has fallen, the share of energy provided by oil and gas 
together has stayed roughly constant since 1985 at around 65%
     In 1973, oil and gas peaked at 57.3 quads -- more than three 
quarters of the energy consumer in the country. Consumption fell 
with the Arab oil embargo, recovered in the late 1970s, and fell 
again with higher oil prices in the early 1980s and the supply-
limiting effects of price controls on natural gas.
     The recent-year low for oil and natural gas consumption was 
1983 at 47.3 quads. In 1995, it was 57 quads. In the last 12 years, 
natural gas consumption has grown by 4.9 quads, slightly outpacing 
the 4.8 quads growth in oil consumption.
Coal
     API furnished no details on coal consumption. The U.S. doesn't 
import coal.
Energy Consumption by Fuel Group (Quadrillion Btus)
            Consumption            Market Share
             1994     1995     Change     1994     1995     Change
Coal         19.5     19.8     1.4%     22.8%     22.6%     -0.2
Natural Gas  21.3     22.2     4.1%     24.9%     25.4%     0.5
Petroleum    34.7     34.8     0.2%     40.6%     39.7%     -0.9
Nuclear       6.8     7.2     5.8%     8.0%     8.3%     0.3
Other         3.2     3.5     9.6%     3.7%     4.0%     0.3
Totals       85.5     87.6     2.3%     100%     100%

Chart does not include smaller energy categories such as wood, 
waste, wind, geothermal and solar, which are for the most part not 
measured with the timeliness and accuracy of the major energy 
sources. Source: API



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Exxon reaches partial settlement with 
underwriters in Valdez costs

     Exxon Corp. has reached a partial settlement of $300 million 
with Lloyds of London and other underwriters in what was originally 
a $1 billion claim to recover cleanup expenses from the 1989 Exxon 
Valdez oil tanker spill in Prince William Sound, Alaska.
     The insurance companies had contested the claim and refused to 
pay, saying the 11-million gallon spill was a result of Exxon's 
reckless negligence by "knowingly placing a known alcoholic in 
command" of the supertanker. Joseph Hazelwood was acquitted in 
1990 of operating the tanker while drunk.
     The settlement concludes only one of the several lawsuits 
between Exxon and underwriters over contested hundreds of millions 
of dollars of the nearly $3 billion the corporation has paid out to 
date in cleanup and liability costs.
     Exxon claims the underwriters are liable because of the 
catastrophic accident insurance it bought to protect it against a 
major accident.
     Another trial is scheduled to begin April 8 in a Texas state court 
to resolve a $250 million claim against the insurers.
     In a parallel lawsuit in New York, a federal appeals court last 
week ruled that Lloyds' action seeking a declaratory judgement 
denying coverage to Exxon under the "global corporate excess 
policy" is a "novel issue of federal admiralty law" that should be 
heard.
     None of these lawsuits are related to the civil case verdict that 
awarded $5 billion in punitive damages to commercial fishermen, 
Alaskan natives, property owners and others affected by the spill.
     But Exxon last week also settled the last in a series of civil 
suits, this one for $3.5 million. That will clear the way for the 
corporation to appeal the $5 billion award, which the courts said 
couldn't be appealed until all the other civil suits cleared the court 
dockets.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Wildlife group produces oil and gas at more 
than one wilderness preserve

     The National Audubon Society or its state affiliates are opposing 
oil and gas exploration and production in the Arctic National 
Wildlife Refuge (ANWR) at the same time it's producing minerals 
from three of its wilderness reserves.
     The Washington-based Competitive Enterprise Institute (CEI) 
reported the ironic situation is taking place in sanctuaries in 
Michigan and Florida as well as in the Paul J. Rainey Sanctuary in 
Louisiana. 
     The drilling activities are going on without harm to the wildlife 
or surroundings, CEI says.
     The Rainey story came to light last year as a complicated 
arrangement in which the society acquired rights to 37 wells, which 
operate under Audubon restrictions.
     The other two cases were revealed by Jonathan Adler, CEI 
director of environmental studies, in the institute's monthly 
newsletter. Adler wrote the drilling has not harmed nesting areas of 
the osprey and sandhill crane in the Bernard Baker Sanctuary in 
Calhoun County, Mich., managed by the Michigan Audubon 
Society. And he noted minimal environmental impact is reported 
from oil and gas exploration allowed by the national society in the 
Corkscrew Swamp Sanctuary near Naples, Fla.
     A spokeswoman at the society's headquarters in New York 
couldn't comment immediately about the Michigan affiliate's 
involvement but doubted the claims about the Florida sanctuary. 
She dismissed the comparison between Rainey and ANWR because 
of the natural "regenerative" advantages in Louisiana.
     But CEI's Adler views it differently, saying the Audubon 
experience suggests balancing environmental concerns and fossil 
fuel development is possible.
     "Indeed," he concluded, "Audubon accepted oil development on 
its own lands before the most advanced state-of-the-art technologies 
were available. Industry representatives claim that with these 
technologies ANWR oil development is ecologically sound."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

WTO makes it official: Clean Air Act RFG 
requirements ruled 'protectionist' 

     The World Trade Organization (WTO) has officially ruled that a 
U.S. Clean Air Act provision requiring foreign gasoline refiners to 
meet a different emissions standard than domestic refiners is 
discriminatory and therefore in violation of international trade 
agreements.
     The rule was challenged by Venezuela and Brazil and is the 
first ruling by the nascent WTO, which took the place of the 
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) last January (TER 
12/25/95, p. 1009).
     The ruling from the WTO drew sharp criticism from political 
wings that had fought bitterly against the United States signing on 
to the global trade treaty. And environmentalists were quick to 
denounce it as a threat to America's environmental policy.
     The WTO's judgement, while probably having little effect on 
the reformulated gasoline (RFG) market, is already promising to 
generate considerable political fallout during the coming months 
leading up to the Republican presidential primaries.
     However, the timing of the decision renders the practical terms 
of the decision moot since by the time the appeals process is 
finished, foreign and domestic refiners will be only months from 
having to meet identical standards.
     The administration, which earlier had supported a change in the 
law that would have satisfied Venezuela, said it would definitely 
appeal the ruling.
     In a statement just after the ruling, Trade Representative 
Mickey Kantor said the administration was "carefully reviewing" 
the legal options available. But after opponents to the WTO loudly 
and publicly criticized the ruling as a threat to domestic sovereignty 
and environmental protection, the administration said it would 
definitely appeal.
     "Obviously, we are disappointed that the panel did not accept 
our view," Kantor said. "At the same time, the results of this 
dispute cannot and will not compromise this administration's 
commitment to our environmental laws."

Administration will appeal

     If the United States appeals the ruling, it must then accept an 
appeals verdict as final, according to stipulations in the global trade 
accord. That process could take up to 18 months. If the United 
States does not appeal, the rule will be adopted within 60 days. 
Administration officials said the prospects for a successful appeal 
do not look good.
     If the United States loses the appeal, it would have to modify 
the rule or face WTO-imposed penalties. The process can only be 
stopped by a consensus of WTO members (120 nations), or if the 
disputing parties settle their differences.
     Also, a deal cut during the congressional debates over the WTO 
between lawmakers and the administration allows Congress to 
review all cases the United States loses. And the verdict will likely 
not sit well with GOP leaders. Kantor said he would consult with 
Congress on the issue soon.
     Venezuela, one of the largest exporters of gasoline through its 
Citgo Petroleum Corp. and state-owned oil company, Petroleos de 
Venezuela S.A. (PDVSA), complained that the Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) rule on RFG applied different baseline 
standards for foreign and domestic refiners as dictated by the Clean 
Air Act Amendments of 1990 (CAAA).
     The act defined two sets of requirements to be met by refiners: 
One set (benzene and oxygenate content and vapor pressure) was 
accompanied by strict measures to be met by all refiners, foreign or 
domestic; the second set (governing criteria for sulfur, aromatics 
and olefin content) allows domestic refiners of RFG to meet their 
own individual 1990 baseline average for 1995-1997.
     After 1997, the whole issue becomes moot. Then, domestic 
refiners must meet the 1990 domestic industry average for non-
attainment areas, the same set for foreign refiners last year that 
caused Venezuela to seek the WTO ruling.
     EPA proposed a rule change in 1994 that would have allowed 
foreign refiners to use their individual baselines to produce RFG 
after Venezuela threatened action under GATT. Some lawmakers 
then accused the White House of catering to Venezuela to avoid a 
potentially embarrassing GATT challenge at a time when the 
administration was pressing the Uruguay round of talks in Congress. 
In August of 1994, Congress denied EPA funds to implement the 
rule (TER 8/8/94, p. 528).
     Venezuela filed a complaint with GATT then, and transferred 
the complaint to the WTO in January 1995 claiming the law set a 
double standard and cost it $150 million per year. Brazil joined the 
petition and Norway and the European Union were listed as 
interested third parties (TER 4/17, p. 315).

Political fallout expected

     The consequences of the ruling will reverberate loudly during 
this election year especially with presidential aspirants who have 
been critical of the enhanced power of the WTO. Patrick Buchanan 
and Sen. Majority Leader Bob Dole of the Republican party have 
both been critical of the WTO's far-reaching power over trade and 
tariffs.
     And pro-environmental as well as petroleum industry groups will 
raise a hue and cry over the ruling since it could set a precedent for 
undercutting other environmental legislation and would allow an 
unfair competitive advantage to foreign refiners that did not have to 
invest the billions of dollars in upgrading plants to meet the stricter 
CAAA standards.
     Some economists are worried that it might cause protectionist 
and isolationist sentiments in the country to intensify and threaten 
freer international trade.
     Said one, "It's not good that this is an early issue for WTO. I 
think it is an isolated incident, but that's not the way it will be 
portrayed."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Federal appeals court upholds right of New 
York to adopt Calif. LEV rules

     A much anticipated federal appeals court ruling has affirmed 
New York state's right to adopt the California Low-Emission 
Vehicle (LEV) program without also imposing California's lower-
sulfur reformulated gasoline (RFG) plan.
     The verdict concludes three years of litigation and likely 
exhausts an important avenue automakers sought to overturn 
Northeast states' adoption of the strict California LEV. A similar 
appeal in Massachusetts will probably be abandoned, industry 
sources predict.
     New York and Massachusetts adopted the California LEV in 
1992. Last year, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
approved a modified version of the California LEV for all the states 
of the Northeast Ozone Transport Commission (OTC) made up of 
the 12 states of the Northeast and the District of Columbia.
     Automakers sued, arguing that by imposing the California LEV 
in New York without the special RFG, they would be required to 
build yet a "third vehicle" to meet New York standards along with 
two other vehicles: one to meet a national standard and one for a 
California standard.
     The industry claimed the move was illegal under the Clean Air 
Act Amendments of 1990 (CAAA), which forbids a "third vehicle," 
and that it could not guarantee a car built for use outside California 
could meet New York's higher standards because of the higher-
sulfur levels in Northeast RFG.
     Yet the Second Circuit Court of Appeals upheld a trial court's 
decision that the "third vehicle claim is not viable if it is based on 
a difference between California and federal fuels."
     Only alterations stemming from differences in emission 
standards, not fuel standards, can amount to a third vehicle, said the 
court, making plain that there is no linkage between the regulation 
of fuels and vehicles.
     "A state can never violate the third vehicle prohibition so long 
as it satisfies the identical requirement and does not administer or 
enforce the California emission standard in a more burdensome 
manner than what occurs in California," Judge Richard Cardamon 
said in his ruling.
     Automakers claim the higher-sulfur contents of Northeast RFG 
contaminate catalytic converters and decrease efficiency while 
increasing emissions.
     Under the CAAA, automakers must build a special California 
car that would operate on a modified, lower-sulfur content RFG.
     The case, Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Assn. v. New York, 
settles one of the disputes between the automotive industry and 
Northeast states. But since talks are continuing between the two -- 
moderated by the EPA -- to reach agreement on a National LEVthat 
would replace the OTC LEV, states and industry have squared off 
over another issue: electric vehicle mandates, also part of the 
California LEV.
     Now that it appears California regulators will alter the original 
program adopted by the Northeast states, the industry is expected to 
file more lawsuits against member states (see related story p. 36).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

O'Leary names Grumbly to under 
secretary spot

     Thomas Grumbly would become the third ranking official at the 
Energy Dept. upon Senate confirmation after Secretary Hazel 
O'Leary named him acting under secretary of the department last 
week.
     Grumbly, formerly assistant secretary of environmental 
management, would then oversee the civilian radioactive waste 
program and nuclear weapons and the weapons cleanup programs. 
Grumbly would replace Charles Curtis, who was appointed deputy 
secretary of Energy after Bill White resigned.
     Grumbly will continue as assistant secretary until confirmed. 
Alvin Alm has been nominated for that position. Alm is director and 
senior vice president for Science Application International Corp.'s 
(SAIC) Environmental business area. He also is co-chairman of 
DOE's Environmental Management Advisory Board.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Enron gets official offer from India to revive 
Dabhol Power project

     Dabhol Power Co. obtained a formal offer last week from the 
Indian state of Maharashtra to revive the largest power project  
backed by U.S. corporations in India.
     Enron, a Houston-based gas supplier that holds 80% in Dabhol 
Power said the company will reply to the state's formal offer shortly 
and hopes to resume construction on the project within 90 days.
     In any event, after a five-month hiatus, work on the $2.8 billion 
project should resume soon, Enron Corp. said.
     The power project was canceled by the Maharashtra government 
in August because of concerns over its high cost and environmental 
impact.
     Enron has since offered to reduce the capital cost of the project 
and lower the price of the electricity it sells to the state.
     Enron also is still trying to recover damages from the 
Maharashtra state government. The two sides have been meeting in 
London for arbitration, and finished two days of talks last Monday.
     The next full hearing was set for June 3. Enron said it plans to 
continue arbitration while it studies the government's new terms.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

IPPs accuse NiMo of trying to slip out of 
contracts with tax proposal

     Niagara Mohawk's (NiMo) petition for the Federal Energy 
Regulatory Commission (FERC) to relieve New York utilities from 
paying a tax on natural gas used by unregulated generators (UG) is 
"yet another backhanded attempt" by NiMo to get out of its 
contracts with independent suppliers," according to New York 
independent power producers (IPPs). 
     NiMo has asked FERC to supersede a New York state law that 
requires utility customers to pay the independent producers' natural 
gas import tax, saying the statute conflicts with FERC's 
requirements that utilities pay unregulated generators no more than 
avoided costs. 
     "The facts are pretty simple: the New York State Legislature 
passed a tax, and the New York State Legislature mandated that the 
tax be recovered from utility electric and gas customers," said 
Independent Power Producers of New York Executive Director Carol 
Murphy.
     "The fact that IPPs also act as tax collectors, just as the utilities 
do, has absolutely nothing to do with avoided costs and is certainly 
no reason for regulators in Washington, D.C., to begin second-
guessing state tax policies and legislative prerogatives." 
    Murphy questions how the gas tax reimbursement that utilities 
pay independents could have anything to do with avoided costs 
when every penny the generators get from utilities is a penny they 
have to pay the state.
     This petition "is just another fanciful fabrication that NiMo's 
lawyers have cooked up. It will not succeed at anything besides 
distracting everyone from negotiating real solutions," Murphy 
added. "What ratepayers probably don't know is that every time 
Niagara Mohawk files a lawsuit, however frivolous, they 
[ratepayers] pay for it."
     NiMo claims the requirement that utilities pay the independents' 
4.25% import tax places overall payment to unregulated generators 
above avoided costs and is a violation of federal law. The utility 
estimates that the tax will add $7.2 million to its customers bills in 
1996 and $13.5 million in 2006.   
     "Not only are we required to purchase electricity from UGs 
regardless of customer need and often at prices that exceed the 
electricity's market value, but we are compelled to reimburse the 
UGs for the tax they pay on the natural gas used to produce that 
electricity," said NiMo CEO William Davis. "We believe that state 
law is pre-empted by federal law."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Independents argue for case-by-case 
determination in FERC's OCS inquiry

     The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission's (FERC) inquiry 
into whether it should deregulate facilities in the Outer Continental 
Shelf (OCS) has drawn comments indicating a growing rift between 
independent and pipeline-affiliated offshore systems.
     FERC launched the notice of inquiry (NOI) to free up the 
billions of dollars in offshore development capital stuck in limbo 
due to uncertainty surrounding whether new projects will be 
classified as non-jurisdictional gathering or regulated as interstate 
transmission.
     A determination that an OCS facility performs a gathering 
function alters the customer protection equation far more than a 
similar decision for an onshore facility, FERC and the commenters 
acknowledge. That's because in the OCS there is no state authority 
to pick up the regulatory responsibility FERC would shed.
     Blue Dolphin Pipe Line, an independent OCS facility that won a 
change in status to jurisdictionally exempt gathering, argues in its 
comments that facilities' status should be determined on a case-by-
case basis. 
     Blue Dolphin expressed skepticism that any interstate or 
affiliated OCS facility could be safely deregulated and said any 
generic move to do so would violate the protections afforded by the 
Natural Gas Act.
     Enron, which owns interstate pipelines and OCS facilities, urged 
FERC to grant all OCS facilities the presumption that they are 
gathering systems -- shifting the burden of proof to those who oppose 
the exempt status.
     The primary function test should also be modified, eliminating 
reference to the diameter of pipes, the location of compression 
stations and requiring lower operating pressures than those found in 
onshore transmission facilities, Enron says.
     The Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (OCSLA) would fill the 
regulatory gap that states now must plug when FERC declares 
onshore facilities perform a gathering function, Enron contends.
     "The OCSLA and its requirement that pipelines provide open 
and nondiscriminatory access to both owner and non-owner shippers 
provides sufficient authority for regulation of offshore gathering and 
protects the public interest," Enron notes.
     Blue Dolphin disagrees.
     "Because the commission has rarely if ever engaged in active 
regulation under -- or even interpretation of -- the [OCSLA], it is not 
possible to conclude that reliance on the OCSLA is sufficient to 
protect the public interest," Blue Dolphin contends.
     "Wholesale change in the regulation of all OCS pipelines is 
unlawful, unwarranted and likely only to produce regulatory 
uncertainty devastating to offshore production and transportation," 
Blue Dolphin asserts."In the absence of compelling reasons for 
change, existing policies and precedent should be observed."
     Blue Dolphin suggests a series of safeguards FERC should 
impose before granting OCS facilities gathering status including:
     ** Banning interstate pipelines or their affiliates from owning 
any OCS gathering systems. Existing facilities reclassified as 
gathering would then "be sold to independent third parties that are 
neither interstate pipelines nor their affiliates."
     ** Performing market power studies as part of the modified 
primary function test FERC uses to determine the status of 
facilities. This is needed, Blue Dolphin contends, because OCS 
facilities can have market power in excess of that enjoyed by 
onshore interstates.
     ** Ensuring that customers receive just and reasonable rates by 
imposing light-handed regulation on OCS facilities that lack market 
power instead of exempting them entirely.
     "The commission's responsibility under the Natural Gas Act has 
been -- and remains -- to restrain pipelines' monopoly power," Blue 
Dolphin said in characterizing some of the NOI's suggestions as 
irresponsible and unlawful. "In an era of increasing competition in 
gas sales, this responsibility is even more important." (RM95-6)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Nuclear industry pushes for economies as 
new polls slam/praise its future

     The country's 109 operating nuclear power plants operated at a 
record 78.2% capacity from January through October of 1995 besting 
the 75.1% capacity achieved for all of 1994, according to the 
Nuclear Energy Institute (NEI).
     Also, nuclear power production is estimated to have reached a 
record high in percentage of total domestic energy consumption -- 
including transportation -- at 7.2 quadrillion Btus claiming an 8.3% 
share, the American Petroleum Institute (API) reported in its 1995 
statistical energy report.
     API said that higher utilization of nuclear generating capacity 
pushed output since the number of operating plants has remained 
unchanged (see related story, p. 44).
     In reporting that oil's share of the overall 1995 domestic energy 
market slipped under 40% for the first time in almost three decades, 
API found that nuclear energy was able to grab 25% of the market 
share lost by heavy residual oil -- used to power utility boilers -- as 
a result of fuel switching by electricity suppliers.
     NEI President Phillip Bayne said that increased production 
along with a coordinated industry-wide program to reduce operating 
and maintenance costs is part of an overall strategy to keep nuclear 
electricity competitive with coal-fired plants by lowering cost per 
kilowatt hour.
     Nuclear utilities, he said, have launched a number of initiatives 
-- individually and collectively -- to improve economic 
competitiveness.
     While competitiveness within the soon-to-be deregulated 
electric utility industry has forced nuclear plant operators to focus 
on efficiency and cost reductions, it has also cast a pall over the 
immediate future of nuclear generation domestically. Industry 
officials continually site the exorbitant capital costs of building 
nuclear power plants as the primary reason utilities will unlikely 
seek license applications for new plants anytime soon. Also, 
analysts predict a glut of electric power on the market within the 
coming years.
     But the lack of interest has not deterred the nuclear energy 
industry. NEI has been supporting efforts to develop advanced power 
plant designs, pre-approved by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 
that would be ready should the domestic power market change 
course.

Industry poll shows majority support

     In the meantime, the U.S. nuclear generation industry is looking 
abroad for business opportunities. Energy-hungry developing nations, 
especially in Asia, are very receptive to nuclear-generated 
electricity as a means of providing power within the coming 
decades. And the U.S. nuclear industry believes U.S. advanced 
designs and technology will provide the safest and most efficient 
plants for those countries.
     A new poll issued by NEI reports that three-fourths of Americans 
believe that also, responding that U.S. "peaceful" nuclear 
technology should continue to play a leading role in world markets.
     The opinion poll of 1,000 "nationally representative" U.S. 
adults, conducted by Bruskin/Goldring Research for NEI, found that 
57% of the public "care personally" about maintaining this leading 
role.
     The poll also reports that 72% surveyed said advanced-design 
reactors should be considered for their areas of the country when 
new generating capacity is needed. And two-thirds say today's 
nuclear power plants are clean and reliable. Fifty-five percent say 
they are safe.
Environmental group finds opposite results
     Yet, the poll conducted for NEI differs dramatically from another 
poll released last week showing two-thirds of Americans opposed to 
nuclear power.
     Commissioned by the Sustainable Energy Budget Coalition 
(SEBC) and conducted by Research/Strategy/Management Inc. 
(RSM), the poll found that an overwhelming majority of Americans 
believe that when cutting budgets, nuclear energy research and 
development should be the given the smallest allocation and 
renewable energy to largest
     The poll interviewed 1,000 registered voters nationwide who 
SEBC said were more "affluent, more politically aware and more 
active.
     "They probably would be more conservative than the whole 
population," said Ron Hinkley with RSM.
     Added Scott Denman with the Safe Energy Communication 
Council, "The survey reveals that negative opinions about nuclear 
power can generate vote behavior among a segment of the 
population, particularly Independents, who believe that nuclear 
power should be the program cut first.
     "These findings should not be lost on those members of 
Congress sympathetic to the nuclear industry's calls for additional 
funds to develop a new generation of commercial plants," he said. 
"Congress continues to ignore the people's will by spending our tax 
dollars on wasteful, out-moded, "junk-food" energy programs like 
nuclear power."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Dueling polls reach opposite results for 
pro-nuke, anti-nuke agendas

     The nuclear industry is calling "hypocritical" a claim by 
environmental groups that a majority of Americans support 
continued studies on nuclear waste disposal -- perhaps another two 
years -- before any congressional action is taken.
     The Safe Energy Communication Council (SECC) and 
Greenpeace released a poll last week reporting that "a lopsided 
70% to 27% of the U.S. electorate wants Congress to immediately 
form an independent commission to find new solutions to storing 
radioactive waste."
     What's lopsided, says the Nuclear Energy Institute (NEI), is the 
one-question poll SECC and Greenpeace used to produce their 
figures.
     "Their poll question is blatantly misleading by suggesting that 
no disposal solution exists, when scientists worldwide agree that an 
underground repository can best isolate used nuclear fuel from the 
environment," NEI said.
     The question: Congress is considering changing the nuclear 
waste law. Two plans are being proposed.
     Plan A would permit the transportation by rail and truck, in the 
near future, of radioactive waste from nuclear reactors around the 
country to a temporary, above-ground storage site in Nevada until a 
permanent solution can be found.
     Plan B calls for the immediate formation of an independent 
review commission to find new solutions to storing radioactive 
waste before any of it is transported around the country.
     Which of these plans do you support?
     The results: 26.6% support Plan A; 69.7% support Plan B; and 
3.7% don't know.
     SECC's Scott Denman said the poll results show that Americans 
overwhelmingly oppose current legislation in Congress that would 
create a temporary storage facility near Yucca Mountain, Nevada.
     "Members of Congress are so far out of touch with voters, they 
risk being out of a job if they continue to push this quick-fix scam 
for the serious problem of nuclear waste storage," said Denman.
     NEI retaliated that the poll did not give people all the facts they 
need to form an informed opinion about nuclear waste disposal.
     "SECC and Greenpeace won't give people all the facts they 
need to form an informed opinion about nuclear waste disposal," 
said NEI, "it's not surprising that their one-question poll produced a 
'finding' that supports their antinuclear agenda."
     NEI trotted out their own 1995 poll showing that 63% of 
Americans said that a temporary storage facility should be built in 
an unpopulated desert area where nuclear waste could be stored 
until a permanent facility is ready.
     The nuclear industry is supporting H.R. 1020, and a companion 
Senate bill, that would immediately initiate construction of a 
temporary facility near Yucca Mountain for nuclear waste disposal.
     SECC and Greenpeace are lining up behind S. 544, sponsored by 
Sen. Richard Bryan, D-Nev., that would place a two-year 
moratorium on the nuclear waste program and establish an 
independent, "blue-ribbon" commission to evaluate current efforts 
and recommend a solution.
     NEI said the proposed commission would add an additional $5 
billion onto nuclear electricity consumers' utility bills during the 
two-year moratorium, something SECC and Greenpeace failed to 
tell their respondents.
     "If [respondents] had all the facts ... the survey results would 
have been different, and honest," NEI said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Oil crisis likely within 10 years, Energy 
Dept. officials predict

     An Energy Dept. official said last week that he'd bet money 
there will be an oil crisis within the next 10 years.
     And he's not a lone alarmist at DOE who believes this.
     "This has been discussed in the highest ranks of the department. 
The likelihood of an oil crisis in the next decade is very plausible 
and prevalent through DOE," said Dr. Joseph Romm, the acting 
principal deputy assistant secretary for energy efficiency.
     Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary testified to that fact in a 
telephone interview: "I take this very seriously. I see a crisis as 
imminent and something we should take heed of."      
     Romm said there was also a consensus among many energy 
experts that the country is sleep walking into a disaster by not 
addressing the possibility now.
     Oil industry analysts argue that supplies are plentiful and the 
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) no longer 
exercises the crippling control over the spigot it once did in the 
1970s, so the possibility of a crisis or embargo is very far-fetched.
     But Romm pointed out that the United States is already 52% 
dependent on imports for its oil needs now at a cost of over $50 
billion a year to our trade deficit. That will grow to over 60% in the 
coming decade, DOE predicts. Coupled with the exponential 
demand for oil in developing countries, especially Asia, the 
politically unstable Persian Gulf countries could end up controlling 
nearly 80% of the global energy supply.
     "That trend is inescapable," Romm said.
     For the first time in four years, total U.S. petroleum imports, 
including refined products, declined, though they still account for 
more than 50% of the country's demand, and crude oil imports rose 
3.2%, according to the American Petroleum Institute's (API) 1995 
statistical report, (see story, p. 44). 
     O'Leary and Romm made their comments following the release 
of a new poll by the Sustainable Energy Budget Coalition (SEBC) 
supporting the country's need to seek alternative energy sources to 
lessen the dependence on foreign oil.

Environmentalists say renewables the answer

     The poll, conducted for the coalition of environmental and 
renewable energy supporters by Research/Strategy/Management 
(RSM) Inc. of Maryland, found that 75% of respondents want to 
reduce U.S. dependency on foreign oil with more than half favoring 
stronger support for government funding of energy efficiency and 
renewable energy sources.
     The survey found that 41% make a balanced budget their 
priority.
     An RSM researcher said the poll was conducted by telephone to 
1,000 registered voters nationwide who were older, more affluent 
and more politically aware and active. He said the sample probably 
reflects a slight conservative bias.
     According to the survey, a majority of respondents believed that 
funding priorities for energy research and development should be 
shifted from conventional energy sources such as fossil fuels and 
nuclear power to renewable and alternative energy sources that 
would lessen dependence on foreign oil and enhance national 
security.
      "Through its actions during the past year, Congress is sending a 
message that it apparently prefers to risk sending Americans to war 
again to protect foreign supplies of oil or to risk the environment by 
opening the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge rather than invest in 
sustainable energy technologies," said Scott Denman with the Safe 
Energy Communication Council, a SEBC member.
     O'Leary agreed that renewable energy and energy efficiency 
programs through DOE and the Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) were the answers to protecting the country's national 
security.
     "We need everything we've got going now that is reliable, 
affordable and sustainable," she said alluding to the 
administration's continued efforts to increase renewable energy 
R&D and efficiency programs before a Congress that shows very 
little tolerance for such in reduced budget times.
     The coalition released the poll on the fifth anniversary of the 
Gulf War to emphasize the seriousness of the country's growing oil 
import dependence and to demand that candidates in the 1996 
election year put the nation's energy policy at the top of their 
campaign agendas.

Spur domestic production, say producers

     Domestic petroleum producers used the occasion to point out 
that elected leaders promised five years ago when the country went 
to war to protect it's access to a plentiful supply of Middle Eastern 
oil that they would find ways to increase domestic production to 
lessen foreign oil dependence.
     Though they disagree on the means, the Independent Petroleum 
Assn. of America (IPAA) and the SEBC seem to agree on the 
outcome if some action is not taken.
     "Is the United States less vulnerable to a similar conflict or 
threat to a supply disruption," asked Lew Ward, IPAA chairman. 
"I'm afraid the answer is no."
     IPAA pointed out that domestic production is at its lowest level 
since 1954. As more imported oil floods the U.S. market, the group 
said, American producers are unable to compete and are forced to 
downsize casuing production to fall even more.
     While pointing out recent laws that lift the export of crude from 
Alaska's North Slope giving West Coast producers new drilling 
incentives and encouraging deep water production in the Gulf of 
Mexico, IPAA said. Lawmakers are still not focused on a cohesive 
energy policy that would result in even greater domestic production.
     IPAA said the budget negotiators proposal to sell 32 million 
barrels of oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) in order 
to raise $470 million over the next seven years to balance the 
budget and reduce the deficit is one example the country's resckless 
energy policy.
     "Dumping oil on the market only hurts domestic production, our 
last line of defense in the event of an emergency," Ward said. 
     The SPR holds nearly 600 million barrels of oil for use in the 
event of an oil disruption.
     The administration originally only agreed to sell 6 million 
barrels to pay for remediation at the Weeks Island SPR facility in 
Louisiana.
     But both Republican and Democratic proposals now under 
consideration would sell that amount plus the additional 32 million 
barrels.
     Ward called this an "irresponsible energy strategy," and said 
that energy policy should be made a top priority again for the 
country and especially with presidential candidates.
     His group believes that policy should focus on improving 
technologies for exploration and production and providing producers 
with incentives to drill and maintain marginal wells.
     "We can and we should be doing more to mobilize U.S. 
producers and increase domestic production as a way of backing out 
oil imports," he said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Exploration and production spending will 
jump, worldwide survey shows

     Oil and gas exploration and production expenditures (E&P) will 
increase by almost 8% in 1996, the greatest increase in six years, 
according to Salomon Brothers' worldwide survey of 275 oil and gas 
companies.
     The biggest E&P target is Latin America.
     The survey shows global E&P expenditures in 1996 of almost 
$64 billion, up from the $59 billion expected in 1995. U.S. spending 
is planned to increase 11.8% in 1996, after only a 4.7% advance in 
1995. That translates into raised spending amounts of $18.2 billion 
from $16.3 billion in 1995, Salomon said.
     "The results indicate that the recovery in international spending 
that began in 1995 will be sustained," said analyst Geoff Keiburtz.
     He attributes the increased spending plans to a firmer outlook for 
natural gas prices, good drilling success and improved cost 
efficiency. Deferral of projects during the period of weak gas prices 
in 1995 also may be playing a part in the spending boost.
     Latin America has displaced the Asia/Pacific region as having 
the greatest perceived E&P potential, the survey found, with over 
60% of the respondents citing Latin America as a target. Fifty-three 
percent cited Asia/Pacific and 30% the Gulf of Mexico.
     International E&P outside the United States and Canada are 
planned by British Petroleum, Arco, Texaco, Amoco, Unocal, 
Mobil and Exxon. Those reducing spending include British Gas and 
Phillips.
     Some of the largest planned spenders, according to the survey, 
will be the 15 U.S. majors that will spend $10.3 billion, 13.4% more 
than last year and the strongest planned increase since the survey 
began 14 years ago.
     U.S. independents, however, are planning to increase E&P 
spending at a more modest level of 9.3% over last year. Apache, 
Coastal, Cabot and Oryx Energy planned to spend the most in E&P, 
the survey said, while Kerr-McGee, KCS Energy and Burlington 
Resources plan to spend the least.

Canada E&P spending will drop

     Though total global E&P spending shows a rise, the survey 
found that Canadian companies will lower their E&P budgets this 
year. A 6.4% decline was reported by 96 companies there.
     Salomon Brothers' said that companies are determining 
spending levels based on a WTI crude price of $17.48/bbl. The 
average natural gas price (Henry Hub) for 1996 is predicted to be 
$1.75/Mcf.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Environmentalists applaud SDG&E 

     The Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) named the 
San Diego Gas & Electric Co. and its parent Enova Corp. the 
winners of its environmental award, making it the first time a 
private-sector utility has been given the honor.
     NRDC said the utility company won the award for its long-term 
commitment to energy efficiency programs, which saved its 
customers more than 10 billion kilowatt hours of electricity during 
the past 18 years. Their efforts have also diverted several million 
tons of pollutants from the atmosphere as a result of reduced 
electricity demand, said Ralph Cavanagh, co-director of NRDC's 
energy program.  
     "Today, the company's energy-efficiency strategies are among 
the best anywhere at delivering increased productivity, lower 
operating costs and improved environmental quality," Cavanagh 
said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

WEP wants 6.2% rate increase

     Wisconsin Electric Power Co. (WEP) is asking for an increase 
of 6.2% for electric customers, 1.4% for natural gas customers and 
6.4% for steam customers to make up for a projected $82.2 million 
revenue deficiency for its utility operations in 1997.
     "The proposed increase will help us deliver the service 
customers expect and keep us on solid financial footing as the 
competitive market arrives," said Richard Abdoo, the company's 
chairman and chief executive officer. WEP filed the rate increase 
request with the Public Service Commission of Wisconsin.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Gasoline prices increase

Ending a six-month trend of declining prices, the price of self-serve 
regular unleaded gasoline increased 2.1 cents since December, 
according to the American Automobile Association (AAA).
     The AAA monthly Fuel Gauge Survey found the national 
average price for self-serve unleaded is now $1.139 per gallon. Self-
serve premium also rose 2 cents to $1.315, while full-serve regular 
unleaded averages $1.403 per gallon, up 1.3 cents from last month.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Nuclear plants shut

     Two nuclear plants were shut last week while another was 
forced to operate on reduced power. 
     Commonwealth Edison Co. shut down its Zion 2 nuclear power 
plant Jan. 13 to inspect condensor box tubes on the non-nuclear side 
of the plant, said Gary Wald, a company spokesman. The 1,040-
MW pressurized water reactor in Zion, Ill., will be back online 
sometime this week.
     An electric cable malfunction caused Consumers Power Co.'s 
Palisades nuclear plant to go off line Jan. 17, said company 
spokesman Mark Savage. The 730-MW plant in South Haven, 
Mich., will not be restarted for a few days until repairs are made.  
     An inspection of Maine Yankee Atomic Power Co.'s  electric 
generation system required reduced power on Jan. 16. 
     The plant was restarted days earlier following an 11-month 
shutdown due to cracked generator tubes. Marshall Murphy, a plant 
spokesman, said the plant will likely be restored to about 30% of its 
capacity within a few days.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Westinghouse scores fuel cells

A generating plant powered by Westinghouse Electric Corp.'s solid-
oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) reached a record-
setting power output of 27 kilowatts during tests conducted by the 
Southern California Edison Company in Grand Terrace, Calif.
      The Westinghouse unit was modified to allow it to use JP-8 
military jet fuel similar to kerosene and DF-2 diesel fuel. The tests 
on logistic fuels are part of an effort to develop transportable power 
plants for military applications. 
      These fuels require a preprocessor to remove sulfur from the 
fuel and deliver methane to the SOFC. The unit also runs directly 
on natural gas and is designed to smoothly transfer from natural gas 
to logistic fuels and vice versa.
     Westinghouse has received funding from the Energy Dept. and 
other domestic and foreign utilities to develop SOFCs for the 
distributed power and cogeneration market.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Calendar

January 1996
     Energy Week '96 Conference and Exhibition, Jan. 29-Feb. 2, 
Houston. Petrochemical industries, plant management, engineering 
technology, wind energy, drilling, (American Petroleum Institute, 
202-682-8000).
     Unbundling Transmission and Managing Open Access, Jan. 
29-30, New Orleans, La. (The Center for Business Intelligence, 1-
800-767-6200 or fax: 617-270-6216).
     Texas Oil Marketers Assn. Winter Membership Meeting, 
Jan. 31-Feb. 2, Houston. (Jackie Browning Stocker, 512-476-9547).
     
February 1996
Capturing and Retaining Wholesale/Industrial Power Customers, 
Feb. 5-6, New Orleans, La. (The Center for Business Intelligence, 
800-767-9499 or fax 617-270-6216).
     The ABCs of Successful Competitive Bidding and Power 
Contracts In The New Electricity Market, Feb. 7-8, Houston 
(Pasha Publications, 713-460-9200 or fax 713-460-9150). 
     New Frontiers in Utilities-Based Telecommunications: 
Strategies for Increased Market Share, Feb. 14-15, Atlanta. 
(International Communications for Management, 312-540-3083).
     47th Annual Institute on Oil and Gas Law and Taxation, 
Feb. 15-16, Dallas. Offers law and tax presentations for the 
experienced oil and gas practitioner. (The Southwestern Legal 
Foundation, 214-883-2377 or fax 214-883-2458).
     EPM Mexico, Feb. 20-23, Mexico City, Mexico. A universal 
industrial fair for suppliers and buyers seeking new manufacturing 
solutions. (Hanover Fairs USA, 609-987-1202 or fax 609-987-0092).
     Restructuring the Electric Industry: What are the Costs and 
Benefits to Consumers?, Feb. 29-March 1, Washington, D.C. 
(NASUCA's 1995 Capitol Hill Conference, 202-727-3908).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 22, 1996

Joint venture formed in Shanghai  

     Shanghai Petrochemical Co. Limited and the Phillips Petroleum 
International Corp. have announced the formation of a joint venture 
company called Shanghai Golden Phillips Petroleum Co. Limited.
     The $100 million joint venture company will build a 100,000-ton 
rated capacity liner polyethylene plant and a 10,000-ton rated 
capacity raw material plant for the production of pipelines in 
Jinshanwei, Shanghai.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
