<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-1</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B010-337</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev21.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001449 text/html 42905
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:12:48 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:26 GMT
Content-length: 42716
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev21.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
January 5, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>FEATURES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>SUPERFUND STAFF JOINS OTHER EPA WORKERS ON FURLOUGH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1059 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>OCCIDENTAL AGREES TO PAY $129 MILLION FOR LOVE CANAL CLEANUP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1228 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>BRIEFS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>PUBLIC CITIZEN ACCUSES NAFTA OF FAILING TO IMPROVE THE ENVIRONMENT&nbsp;ALONG THE U.S.-MEXICO BORDER.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(378 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>M4 ENVIRONMENTAL STARTS OPERATIONS AT FIRST COMMERCIAL-SCALE&nbsp;QUANTUM-CEP FACILITY.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(296 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS, AND OFFERINGS.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1395 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>HMIR HOTLINE.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(464 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CONTRACT OPPORTUNITIES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>CONTRACT OPPORTUNITIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1075 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

SUPERFUND STAFF JOINS OTHER EPA WORKERS ON FURLOUGH

As the second federal government shutdown of FY 1996 entered its
third week, EPA Administrator Carol Browner announced on 2 January
that the Superfund monies for FY 1995 have been depleted, and that
about 2,400 EPA employees working under the Superfund program
nationwide will join 14,500 EPA workers who are already on
furlough. According to EPA, the furlough of the 2,400 Superfund
workers will result in the shutdown of operations at 450 to
650 hazardous waste sites nationwide--National Priorities List
(NPL) sites and non-NPL sites--and will leave a total of about
80 EPA employees to oversee any remaining operations. According to
EPA's initial estimates, the shutdown of operations at Superfund
sites also threatens the jobs of 10,000 private-sector workers, who
could be laid off because the government is not able to make timely
payments to their employers. The 10,000 private-sector workers
consist of 5,000 employees of cleanup companies working directly
under contract with EPA and another 5,000 employees working on
cleanups that, while led by potentially responsible parties (PRPs),
still require EPA oversight.

"If the program is dormant for long, private companies will be
forced to make permanent staff changes, which will seriously
undermine our work in restoring the environment," according to
Jonathan Curtis, president and chief executive officer of CDM
Federal Programs Corp. in Fairfax, Virginia. By the end of the week
of 1 January, "private companies will begin making these staffing
assessments if the shutdown is not concluded," said Curtis, who is
chairman of the Hazardous Waste Action Coalition's (HWAC's)
Government Affairs Committee. "Just as Superfund is beginning to
produce results, the plug is pulled," he added. William Epstein,
director of government affairs at Roy F. Weston, Inc. in West
Chester, Pennsylvania, lamented that the current government
shutdown will actually increase the overall costs of the Superfund
program. "We have been told by EPA officials that the mobilization
and demobilization by federal contractors will cost more than if we
continued work," Epstein noted. "This shutdown will achieve no
savings." According to an EPA source, implementing the shutdown of
the Superfund program--an operation that began on 2 January--is
expected to take at least five days.

In connection with the government shutdown, HWAC's legal counsel,
the law firm Morgan Lewis & Bockius in Washington, D.C., has issued
a white paper alerting cleanup contractors of the legal issues and
risks that they face, and their options for response, "in the event
of a lapse in the annual appropriations that fund their federal
agency customers." Contractors that do not receive payment for
their services "have the right to suspend their performance," the
white paper said, and depending on the clauses in their contracts
with EPA and other federal agencies, "they may or may not be
entitled to an equitable adjustment for the suspension period if
and when more funds are allotted to their contracts." Other
contractors that do not lose funding altogether but otherwise face
delays and disruptions because of the shutdown may not be entitled
to compensation "because the lapse in appropriations could be
deemed a sovereign, as opposed to a contractual, act of the
government," the white paper said. For a copy of the white paper,
contact: HWAC, No. 802, 1015 15th Street, N.W., Washington,
DC 20005; Tel: 202-347-7474.

The troubles of federal contractors will not end even if another
continuing resolution is approved soon. During FY 1996, which began
on 1 October 1995, two continuing resolutions have been required to
maintain operations at those federal agencies and departments,
including EPA and the Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State,
whose FY 1996 appropriations have not yet been approved. Those
continuing resolutions have funded operations at levels below
FY 1995 appropriations, thereby preventing agency and department
managers--many of whom are expecting dramatic cuts when their
FY 1996 appropriations are finally approved--from making reliable
spending plans for the current fiscal year. According to an HMIR
source, developing final FY 1996 budgets for as-yet-unfunded
agencies and departments could take up to two more months--
approaching the halfway point in the current fiscal year--leaving
only six or seven months for the agencies to spend their monies.
"Getting everything going again in an efficient way will be very
difficult" under those circumstances, the source told HMIR. "It's
not a good way to run a government."

The impact of the federal government shutdown on the environmental
industry is not limited to suspended EPA contracts. Key departments
involved in the promotion of environmental exports--including the
Department of Commerce (DOC), the Department of State, and the
Agency for International Development (AID)--remain unfunded, and
export-promotion projects involving those entities and private-
sector organizations are imperiled. The Environmental Export
Council (EEC) in Washington, D.C., currently has cooperative
agreements with AID and DOC to develop environmental export
programs, but without the federal funding for the programs, "we're
going to have to quit working on these projects reasonably soon,"
said John Mizroch, EEC's executive director. In addition, EEC may
have to lay off people who are working on a project with the U.S.-
Asia Environmental Partnership (USAEP) that would have involved
bringing officials of Asian nations to the United States to review
U.S. environmental technologies and products. "The government
shutdown comes at a very unfortunate time," Mizroch told HMIR,
"because it holds up these important initiatives that will help
U.S. business."

Congressional Republicans have linked the approval of any new
continuing resolution with the White House's concession on key
elements of a balanced-budget plan--notably on Congress's proposed
Medicare cuts and tax relief. On 2 January, however, Senate
Majority Leader Robert Dole (Republican-Kansas) expressed his
frustration with the impasse and, departing from other Republican
leaders, engineered passage of a continuing resolution in the
Senate. On 3 January, the House rejected the measure. At press
time, however, the House had softened its stance slightly and
indicated that it was prepared to approve a plan to put about
280,000 federal employees in several programs back to work, until
26 January in some cases and until 15 March in others. The affected
programs include Meals on Wheels, the administration of
unemployment insurance, visitor services at national parks, and Aid
to Families with Dependent Children. The House plan would not
provide money to run those federal agencies and departments whose
FY 1996 appropriations have not yet been approved, including EPA,
DOC, the Department of Interior, and the Securities and Exchange
Commission.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

OCCIDENTAL AGREES TO PAY $129 MILLION FOR LOVE CANAL CLEANUP

The story of the hazardous waste site that was largely responsible
for giving birth to the federal Superfund program neared conclusion
last month as the federal government and Occidental Chemical Corp.
reached an agreement resolving Occidental's cleanup liabilities at
the Love Canal site near Niagara Falls, New York. Under the terms
of a settlement that was filed on 21 December in the U.S. District
Court in Buffalo, New York, Occidental will pay the federal
government a total of $129 million, consisting of $101 million that
the government has spent on cleanup and $28 million in interest
accrued during 16 years of litigation. The settlement "should send
a message of federal persistence and tenacity," said Attorney
General Janet Reno in announcing the settlement. EPA Administrator
Carol Browner noted that "the Love Canal settlement underscores
this Administration's firm commitment to ensuring that polluters--
not the American people--pick up the tab for cleaning up toxic
waste dumps."

The settlement must still be approved by U.S. District Court Judge
John Curtin, who has presided over the 16-year-old case since the
federal government filed its initial lawsuit against Occidental in
December 1979. The lawsuit sought cleanup and related damages,
including punitive damages, under the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA), the River and Harbors Act, and other
environmental laws. The state of New York subsequently filed its
own lawsuit against Occidental. Both complaints were later joined
and amended to include cost-recovery claims under the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA),
which was enacted in December 1980 under the shadow of the Love
Canal incident and the increasingly controversial problem of
abandoned toxic waste sites. In a settlement approved by Judge
Curtin in July 1994, Occidental agreed to pay New York a total of
nearly $100 million and to perform long-term operation and
maintenance of the remediation systems at the Love Canal site.

Occidental Chemical became involved in the Love Canal saga as a
result of its acquisition of Hooker Chemical and Plastics Corp. In
the early 1940s, Hooker leased and then acquired an uncompleted
canal in the Niagara Falls area--the so-called Love Canal. Until
1953, the company dumped about 25,000 tons of chemical waste into
the canal and nearby pits. Hooker subsequently buried the wastes
and sold the property to the Niagara Falls School Board for $1,
with the stipulation that the board would not hold Hooker legally
responsible for any subsequent problems that the buried wastes
might cause. From the 1960s through the mid-1970s, complaints by
local residents about foul odors in the area evolved into
complaints about chemicals leaking into the basements of nearby
homes and surfacing in yards, and ultimately into complaints about
health problems. Responding to the complaints, the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) undertook the relocation of
239 families in the Love Canal area in 1978; President Jimmy Carter
ordered the evacuation of another 800 Love Canal families in
December 1980. FEMA--and later EPA--also took response actions at
the site, consisting of constructing a clay cap over the canal to
prevent air emissions and installing a leachate collection system
to prevent the migration of chemical wastes from the canal.

A local school and several homes were subsequently demolished, and
contaminated sewer systems and nearby creek sediments were removed
or cleaned up; the leachate collection system is still operating.
In June 1990, the Love Canal Revitalization Agency adopted a plan
for resettling homes in the area, and the first homes went up for
sale later that year. In 1992, the Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) agreed to provide mortgage insurance for the Love
Canal properties, thereby increasing the pace of home sales in the
area. To date, all but 32 of the 233 homes that were available have
been sold or are under contract for sale, according to the
Department of Justice (DOJ).

Under the settlement between Occidental and the federal government,
the company will pay EPA a total of $102 million covering the
agency's response costs plus interest, while the rest of the
$129 million will go to FEMA for its role in the response action.
The settlement also resolves Occidental's claims that, in addition
to Hooker, the U.S. Army dumped chemical wastes into Love Canal and
therefore should be held partially responsible for the cleanup
costs. Without admitting any guilt on behalf of the Army, the
federal government agreed to assume $8 million of the Love Canal
response costs.

In announcing the settlement, federal officials took specific aim
at Congressional proposals to provide liability relief to
potentially responsible parties (PRPs) through reimbursements or
tax credits amounting to as much as 50 percent of PRP costs
associated with the cleanup of wastes disposed of before 1980
(Senate proposal) or 1987 (House proposal). According to Lois
Schiffer, assistant attorney general for DOJ's Environment and
Natural Resources Division, such proposals could give Occidental a
tax credit for as much as $64.5 million in connection with the
company's Love Canal liabilities under CERCLA. A reimbursement
system of the type proposed by Congress "would destroy the
fundamental principle that a polluter should pay to clean up its
own mess," Schiffer noted. EPA's Browner declared that "elimination
of the retroactive liability provisions in the Superfund law--as
some have proposed--would have let this polluter off the hook."

Lois Gibbs, executive director of the Citizens Clearinghouse for
Hazardous Waste in Falls Church, Virginia, said that she was happy
with the settlement. "It has got to send a chill up the spine of
many others who pollute and pretend it is not a problem," said
Gibbs, the former Love Canal housewife whose organizing efforts
helped draw national attention to the area's contamination. A
strong proponent of the polluter-pays principal, Gibbs sharply
criticized Congressional attempts to reimburse PRPs for portions of
their cleanup liabilities. "The only way Occidental and others will
change their way of behaving will be if it costs them more to
pollute--to do harm than to do good," she told HMIR. "Instead of
cutting the costs for those who have not complied with the
Superfund law, Congress should reward those who did comply, and
those who have improved their environmental practices," she
suggested.

Beyond addressing the polluter-pays issue, the Love Canal case does
not provide much direction for efforts to reform the Superfund
program, according to Occidental attorney Steven Yablonsky, a
partner at Piper & Marbury in Baltimore, Maryland. Love Canal "is
not one of those sites that had hundreds of responsible parties,"
said Yablonsky, who noted that multi-PRP sites have presented the
most vexing liability problems under CERCLA. Yablonsky added that
a key development in the case was Judge Curtin's ruling in March
1994 that Hooker's waste disposal practices were consistent with
industry's practices at the time, and that Occidental therefore
should not be held liable for punitive damages in the Love Canal
case. "There couldn't have been a settlement without that ruling,"
Yablonsky told HMIR.

While Occidental has now settled the major CERCLA claims of the
federal government and the state of New York, the company is still
negotiating with the city of Niagara Falls and the Niagara Falls
School Board to determine the cleanup liabilities of those two
municipal entities. In addition, Occidental is still engaged in
personal-injury litigation with numerous Niagara County residents,
and it is seeking coverage of its cleanup liabilities at Love Canal
from its insurers.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

PUBLIC CITIZEN ACCUSES NAFTA OF FAILING TO IMPROVE THE ENVIRONMENT
ALONG THE U.S.-MEXICO BORDER.

Far from fulfilling proponents' assurances that the North American
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) would result in an improved
environment along the U.S.-Mexico border, trade between the U.S.
and Mexico under NAFTA has exacerbated border-area problems through
an increase in industrial activity, according to a recent report by
Public Citizen in Washington, D.C. The report concluded that
NAFTA's advocates--notably the Clinton Administration--inaccurately
predicted that NAFTA would lead to increased investment throughout
Mexico and, as a result, less concentration of "maquiladora"
facilities along the U.S.-Mexico border. Maquiladoras are Mexico-
based manufacturing facilities that are owned by foreign firms. The
Public Citizen report found that, largely as a result of the
devaluation of the Mexican peso one year ago, nationwide investment
in Mexico's infrastructure and industrial base has failed to
materialize. At the same time, the number of maquiladora facilities
in the border area has increased by 20 percent from more than
546,000 to nearly 690,000 facilities since NAFTA took effect in
January 1994, despite an economic crisis that has resulted in a net
loss of 1.6 million jobs throughout Mexico. The report noted that
the increased maquiladora activity along the U.S. Mexico border,
coupled with a lack of investment in pollution-control
infrastructure and the Mexican government's lack of support for
environmental enforcement, has resulted in increased illegal
dumping of hazardous wastes, increased air and water pollution, and
worsening health problems, including increased incidences of
hepatitis, cholera, and certain birth defects. According to the
report, the Commission on Environmental Cooperation--the panel
established under NAFTA to rule on any complaints that the NAFTA
nations are not meeting their environmental obligations--has not
yet heard a single case involving Mexico's failure to enforce its
environmental laws in the border area. "NAFTA begins its third year
sinking in a sea of broken promises relating to the environment,
public health, jobs, and wages," said Public Citizen President Joan
Claybrook in announcing the report on 2 January. "Not only is NAFTA
not meeting these promises, it has actually made conditions worse
than before it took effect two years ago," she said. For a copy of
the 110-page Public Citizen report, entitled NAFTA's Broken
Promises: The Border Betrayed, at a cost of $15, contact: Customer
Service Department, Public Citizen, 1600 20th Street, N.W.,
Washington, DC 20009; Tel: 202-588-1000.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

M4 ENVIRONMENTAL STARTS OPERATIONS AT FIRST COMMERCIAL-SCALE
QUANTUM-CEP FACILITY.

M4 Environmental L.P., a joint venture between Lockheed Martin and
Molten Metal Technology, Inc. (MMT) in Waltham, Massachusetts, has
begun operations at the first commercial-scale facility to use
MMT's Catalytic Extraction Process (CEP) for recycling hazardous
wastes. The M4 facility, which is located in Oak Ridge, Tennessee,
will use a variant of the CEP technology, known as Quantum-CEP,
that is designed to handle radioactive and mixed wastes. The
Quantum-CEP process uses a molten metal bath to break down
radioactive and mixed wastes into their constituents, recovers
various useful materials, such as metals and gases, and stabilizes
the radioactive materials for final disposal. Subsequent to the
start-up of operations at the M4 facility, MMT announced that it
has expanded its original technology license to M4 by allowing the
joint venture to process mixed wastes from commercial generators.
Previously, M4 held a license to process only mixed wastes
generated by the Department of Energy (DOE), the Department of
Defense (DOD), and U.S. Enrichment Corp. In a separate
announcement, MMT said that another commercial-scale Quantum-CEP
facility in Oak Ridge--this one jointly operated by MMT and
Westinghouse subsidiary Scientific Ecology Group, Inc. (SEG)--has
received all of its required regulatory permits and is ready to
begin operations. The MMT-SEG facility is expected to process its
first wastes this month and will handle up to 130,000 cubic feet of
low-level ion exchange resins per year. "I am happy to announce
that this facility is available on schedule, and we expect
tremendous success with volume reduction and recycling of this
difficult waste," said SEG President Bud Arrowsmith in a statement
on 19 December. William Haney III, MMT's president and chief
executive officer, noted that the MMT-SEG facility "is the largest
and most sophisticated system in the world for handling this
difficult radioactive material."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS, AND OFFERINGS.

Allstate GeoTek, a privately held environmental services firm based
in Linden, New Jersey, has acquired Zecco, Inc. from Metcalf & Eddy
Technologies, Inc. in Wakefield, Massachusetts, for an undisclosed
amount of cash. Privately held Allstate GeoTek is a $22-million
company that provides a variety of environmental services,
including remediation and sewer inspection and cleaning, in
Delaware, New Jersey, and southeastern Pennsylvania. Zecco, which
is operating at a run rate of about $6.5 million, provides
remediation and emergency response services and operates a
hazardous waste storage and transfer facility in Northborough,
Massachusetts.

Babcock & Wilcox Power Generation Group, a subsidiary of McDermott
International, Inc. in New Orleans, Louisiana, has acquired the
assets of Joy Environmental Technologies, Inc. from Harnischefeger
Industries, Inc. in Brookfield, Wisconsin. The terms of the
transaction were not disclosed. Houston-based Joy Environmental
manufactures air-pollution-control equipment--such as baghouses,
ash-handling systems, electrostatic precipitators, and flue-gas
desulfurization systems--for electric utilities and industrial
companies. According to Babcock & Wilcox, Joy Environmental's line
of ash-handling systems will be transferred to Diamond Power
Specialty Co., a Babcock & Wilcox unit that specializes in
manufacturing boiler cleaning and diagnostic equipment.

Barringer Laboratories, Inc. in Golden, Colorado, announced that it
has purchased 647,238 shares of its common stock from its sister
corporation Barringer Technologies, Inc. According to Barringer
Laboratories, the stock was acquired in exchange for $509,048 in
"intercompany obligations" and another $300,000 in cash. In
addition, 88,260 shares of Barringer Laboratories' common stock
were placed in an escrow account and will be returned to Barringer
Technologies if Barringer Laboratories achieves certain earnings
goals for 1996. "This transaction is the first step in a long-term
plan to grow and increase the stockholders' value in the
laboratory," said Robert Walker, chairman and chief executive
officer of Barringer Laboratories. As a result of the transaction,
"each current shareholder realizes an increase of 39.1 percent in
their stock ownership of the company," Walker noted.

Black & Veatch in Kansas City, Missouri, announced that it has
increased its revolving credit facility with a consortium of
international banks from $150 million to $175 million. According to
P.J. Adam, Black & Veatch's chairman and chief executive officer,
the expanding credit facility will allow the company to borrow
short-term funds and issue longer-term letters of credit to finance
its worldwide engineering and construction projects. "Our continued
success in obtaining international work depends on having the
necessary credit support," Adam noted. Black & Veatch's
international projects accounted for more than 50 percent of the
company's estimated $1.1 billion in revenues during 1995.

Brownfield Development Corp. (BDC) in Chicago, Illinois, and
LandBank in Denver, Colorado, have established a strategic alliance
to provide services related to the cleanup and redevelopment of so-
called "brownfields" sites--abandoned industrial properties that
face difficulties in redevelopment because of actual or perceived
contamination at the sites. Under the alliance, the two companies
will jointly identify and assess brownfields properties and make
the financing, insurance, and legal arrangements to remediate those
sites and return them to economic usefulness. BDC currently
provides those types of services in the Midwest, while LandBank
provides similar services from its offices in New York City,
Denver, and San Francisco. In addition to increasing BDC's
geographic coverage, the alliance with LandBank will "expand our
development capabilities, increase our capital reserves, and focus
on the acquisition of larger sites," according to BDC Manager
Robert Colangelo. LandBank President Bill Lynott noted that "we are
very excited about the opportunity to apply our environmental
underwriting and proprietary insurance products to BDC's focused
program in the metropolitan Chicago area," where the brownfields
redevelopment market is especially active.

Envirometrics, Inc. in Charleston, South Carolina, and Zellweger
Analytics, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of the Zellweger Luwa
Organization of Switzerland, have reached an agreement whereby
Zellweger Analytics will have the exclusive worldwide rights to
market Envirometrics' ACT Monitoring Card System. The ACT system
uses an electronic reader and "passive monitoring cards" to detect
the presence of hazardous chemicals in industrial environments and
to conduct analyses of air samples in real time. Zellweger
Analytics "is an international leader in safety, health, and
environmental products, and we look forward to new technology-
partnership developments and synergistic opportunities for the two
companies," said Richard Bennett, Envirometrics' president and
chief executive officer.

Environmental Technologies Corp., a provider of refrigerant
recovery and recycling services and equipment in Lakewood, New
Jersey, has acquired all of the outstanding stock of FulCircle
Recyclers, Inc. in New York, New York, a recycler of ballasts from
fluorescent lights, in exchange for 1.15-million shares of newly
issued Environmental Technologies common stock. As part of the
transaction, Brin McCagg and Mitchell Dong, two of FulCircle's
principals, have been appointed as chief executive officer and
president, respectively, of Environmental Technologies. The two men
take over those positions from George Cannan, who will remain
chairman of the company. FulCircle expects to report revenues
totaling $6 million during 1995, while Environmental Technologies
had revenues of $28.6 million during the fiscal year ending on
30 September 1995.

EnviroSource, Inc. in Stamford, Connecticut, has entered into a
new, $100-million credit agreement with NationsBank and Credit
Lyonnaise. According to EnviroSource, the new, five-year agreement
replaces an existing $60-million agreement with the two banks and
provides EnviroSource with the financing to redeem all of its
Class G, $7.25 Cumulative Preferred Stock. The Class G stock is due
15 July 1996. As a result of the new credit agreement,
"EnviroSource will have minimal debt maturities over the next six
years, which will allow us to reinvest our cash flows from
operations into the business," according to George Fuehrer,
EnviroSource's senior vice president of planning. The company plans
to focus that reinvestment on internal growth rather than on growth
through mergers and acquisitions, "although we are not ruling that
avenue out," Fuehrer told HMIR.

Heidemij NV in Arnhem, the Netherland, and Eptisa, a consulting and
engineering firm in Madrid, Spain, have agreed to merge in a
transaction under which Heidemij and Eptisa's management will each
acquire 50 percent of Eptisa's stock from the company's single
shareholder, Banco Central Hispano. As part of the transaction,
Eptisa will sell its non-core activities in the engineering and
maintenance of power stations. Eptisa, which specializes in water,
environmental, and infrastructure engineering, derived revenues
totaling $80 million from these core businesses during 1994. "We
have been working with Eptisa since 1992 in a joint venture,
Ecogest, aimed at providing environmental services to industry,"
said Heidemij chairman Frans Luttmer. "This successful venture is
now the starting point for a much larger cooperation between the
two companies." In a separate action, Heidemij's subsidiary
Geraghty & Miller has acquired Environmental Strategies Ltd., an
environmental consulting and engineering firm with offices in Leeds
and Chester, England, and has merged Environmental Standards with
G&M International, Inc. in Cambridge. According to G&M
International Manager Brian Cook, "by merging with Environmental
Strategies' staff, we will be able to expand our auditing and due-
diligence work and have a strong presence in the Northwest region
of the United Kingdom."

Philip Environmental, Inc. in Hamilton, Ontario, and Zenon
Environmental, Inc. in Burlington, Ontario, have reached an
agreement whereby Philip Environmental will acquire Zenon's
laboratory business. The terms of the transaction were not
disclosed. Zenon's laboratory operations generated an estimated
$12 million in revenues during 1995 and consist of facilities in
Burlington and in Montreal, Quebec, and Vancouver, British
Columbia. According to Philip Environmental, the addition of the
three Zenon laboratories to Philip's existing laboratory operation
in Mississauga, Ontario, will give Philip the largest network of
environmental laboratories in Canada. The acquisition of the Zenon
laboratory facilities is expected to be completed by 15 January.
Philip Environmental is currently engaged in an aggressive
acquisition campaign and recently acquired CyanoKEM and ThermalKEM
from REP Environmental Processes, which is the former American
NuKEM (HMIR, 8 Dec. 1995, p.2).

UTILX Corp., a drilling firm based in Kent, Washington, has
announced that FlowMole Environmental Services Corp., a joint
venture between UTILX and Unocal subsidiary CERT Environmental
Corp., has begun to "wind down" its remediation operations.
According to UTILX President Craig Davies, the decision to cease
the operations of FlowMole is based on Unocal's decision to
terminate all joint-venture relationships connected to
environmental work and exit the environmental business. FlowMole
was established in 1994 to market innovative remediation approaches
using CERT Environmental's remediation technologies and UTILX's
horizontal guided drilling technology.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

HMIR HOTLINE.

Fernald Environmental Restoration Management Co. (FERMCO), DOE's
Environmental Restoration Management Contractor at the former Feed
Materials Production Center near Fernald, Ohio, is requesting firms
to submit expressions of interest in supplying a vitrification
furnace to process radioactive wastes that are currently stored at
the Fernald facility. According to FERMCO, the furnace must be
capable of producing 20 to 30 tons of vitrified waste per day.
While FERMCO does not expect to issue the request for proposals
(RFP) for the vitrification project until April, it is requesting
that parties indicate by 15 January their interest in supplying the
vitrification furnace. For further information, contact: Bob May,
FERMCO, Mail Stop 52-4, P.O. Box 538704, Cincinnati, OH 45253-8704;
Tel: 513-648-4322; Fax: 513-648-4900.

VECTRA Technologies, Inc., a San Ramon, California-based provider
of radioactive waste management and other engineering services to
the energy industry, announced on 28 December that it is
temporarily suspending all construction and start-up activities
related to its EnviroGlass vitrification program. According to Ray
Fortney, VECTRA's president and chief executive officer, the
interruption in the company's progress towards developing the
EnviroGlass technology "was necessary because delays in placing our
Transportable Vitrification Unit at our lead client's site made it
impossible to meet the client's schedule to dispose of the low-
level waste that we are contracted to process." Fortney noted that
VECTRA is negotiating with the client to remove the low-level
wastes and dispose of them through a subcontractor, "but if we are
not successful in these negotiations, we may be forced to accept
contract cancellation." Fortney said that the company will continue
to pursue new projects involving the EnviroGlass technology.

CompuChem Environmental Corp. in Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina, has announced that it is seeking to acquire an analytical
laboratory to merge into its facility at Research Triangle Park
(RTP). CompuChem said that it plans to transfer the laboratory
equipment and technical personnel of the acquired laboratory to its
RTP facility while maintaining any existing sales offices that the
acquired company may operate. "Our philosophy is to keep it all
under one roof, so you can have all your certifications,
sophisticated equipment, and experienced staff in one place, and
thereby better serve your customers," according to CompuChem
President Kees Verkerk. He said that the primary purpose of the
acquisition is to expand the company's business, which is currently
concentrated in the federal sector, into the industrial market.
According to Verkerk, the 55,000-square-foot RTP facility is one of
the largest laboratories in the United States, employing up to
200 people during its peak seasons. For further information,
contact: CompuChem Environmental Corp., 3306 Chapel Hill/Nelson
Highway, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709; Tel: 919-406-1601.

For further information on these brief hotline items or any article
in this issue, call the HMIR Hotline at Tel: 617-491-5100.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996

CONTRACT OPPORTUNITIES

Key: * = Small business set-aside.

Sols. N47408-96-R-6305 and N47408-96-R-6309 to submit proposals to
the Navy for innovative assessment, cleanup, and pollution-control
technologies. For further information, call Rosalie Hammonds at
Tel: 805-982-5097, or contact: Commanding Officer, NAVFAC
Contracts, Naval Construction Battalion Center, Building 41, 1000
23rd Avenue, Port Hueneme, CA 93043-4301; Attn: Code 2711.
(Deadline: 2/2/96.)

Sol. DACA87-96-R-0008 to locate, identify, and dispose of ordnance
and explosives at current and former military installations
throughout the United States. For further information, call Anita
Prince at Tel: 205-895-1156, or contact: Army Engineering and
Support Center, 4820 University Square, Huntsville, AL 35816-1822;
Attn: CEHNC-CT-D. (Deadline: 2/23/96.)

Sol. F08650 to study the degradation of chemicals that the Army
must destroy under the Chemical Weapons Convention. For further
information, call John Hammerling at Tel: 407-494-7092, or contact:
45th Contracting Squadron/LGCXA, 1201 Minuteman Street, Patrick Air
Force Base, FL 32925-3237. (Deadline: 1/26/96.)

Sol. HCET009 to evaluate concrete-surface decontamination
technologies for the Hemispheric Center for Environmental
Technology at Florida International University in Miami, FL. For
further information, call M.A. Ebadian at Tel: 305-348-2569, or
contact: Hemispheric Center for Environmental Technology, Florida
International University, Room 458, ECS Building, University
Campus, Miami, FL 33199. (Deadline: 1/30/96.)

Sol. DAAL01-96-Q-3001 to provide environmental and safety
engineering services at the Army Research Laboratory located at
Fort Monmouth, NJ. For further information, call Mike Watershied at
Tel: 908-427-4936, or contact: Fort Monmouth Site Contracts Branch,
Operations Directorate, Army Research Laboratory, Fort Monmouth, NJ
07703-5601; Attn: AMSRL-OP-FM-PR(KAS). (Deadline: 1/17/96.)*

Sol. SP4400-96-R-0005 to remove hazardous materials from the
Defense Reutilization and Marketing Service (DRMS) offices in
Richmond, VA, and surrounding locations and dispose of the
materials. For further information, call Evon Boyer at Tel: 616-
961-4406, or contact: DRMS, 74 North Washington Avenue, Battle
Creek, MI 49017-3092; Attn: DRMS-PHS. (Deadline: 2/15/96.)*

Two solicitations to provide environmental services at U.S. Postal
Service facilities in Georgia, Tennessee, and other southeastern
states. Interested firms should submit SF 254 and 255. For further
information, call Quincie Naylor at Tel: 770-454-0632, or contact:
Facilities Service Office, U.S. Postal Service, Suite 300, 4000
DeKalb Technology Parkway, Atlanta, GA 30340-2799. (Deadline:
1/22/96.)

RFP 509-67-96 to pick up medical wastes at the Department of
Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Augusta, GA, and dispose of the
wastes. For further information, call Sylvia Henry at Tel: 706-731-
7175, or contact: Acquisition and Materiel Management Service
(90C), Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, One Freedom
Way, Augusta, GA 30904-6285. (Deadline: 2/9/96.)

Solicitation to provide environmental services at various locations
within the Louisville District of the Army Corps of Engineers.
Interested firms should submit SF 254 and 255. For further
information, call Sharon Evans at Tel: 502-582-6208, or contact:
Army Corps of Engineers, Louisville District, Room 821, 600 Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. Place, Louisville, KY 40202-2230. (Deadline:
1/19/96.)

Sol. DE-RP65-96WA13322 to provide architectural and engineering
services, including environmental engineering services, at Western
Area Power Administration facilities in AZ, CA, CO, IA, KS, MN, MT,
ND, NE, NM, NV, SD, UT, and WY. Interested firms should submit SF
254 and 255. For further information, Dorothy Paquet at Tel: 303-
275-1529, or contact: Western Area Power Administration, P.O. Box
3402, Golden, CO 80401; Attn: A1520. (Deadline: 1/10/96.)

Sol. 554-27-96 to provide emergency response services to the
Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Denver, CO. For
further information, call Jack Gregorio at Tel: 303-393-4690, or
contact: Acquisition and Materiel Management Service (90C),
Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 1055 Clermont
Street, Denver, CO 80220. (Deadline: 2/7/96.)

Sol. F05611-96-R-0211 to provide environmental engineering services
at the U.S. Air Force Academy in Colorado. Interested firms should
submit SF 254 and 255. For further information, call Shirley McCoy
at Tel: 719-472-2734, or contact: Operational Contracting Office,
Lobby Area, 8110 Industrial Drive, U.S. Air Force Academy, CO
80840-2315. (Deadline: 2/1/96.)

Sol. N68711-96-C-2079 to prepare an environmental impact statement
in connection with base-closure activities at the Naval Shipyard
Complex in Long Beach, CA. Interested firms should submit SF 254
and 255. For further information, call Kathy Luhmann at Tel: 619-
532-2721, or contact: Naval Facilities Engineering Command,
Southwest Division, 1220 Pacific Highway, San Diego, CA 92132-5187;
Attn: Code 0211. (Deadline: 1/22/96.)

Solicitations to prepare environmental impact statements for
various military preparedness activities at the Naval Air Weapons
Station in China Lake, CA (N68711-96-C-2089), and at the Naval Air
Warfare Center in Point Mugu, CA (N68711-96-C-20-90). For further
information, call Nancy Trent at Tel: 619-532-2853, or contact:
Naval Facilities Engineering Command, Southwest Division, 1220
Pacific Highway, San Diego, CA 92132-5187; Attn: Code 0211.
(Deadlines: N68711-96-C-2089, 1/30/96; N68711-96-C-2090, 1/25/96.)

Sol. F04700-96-B-0014 to perform laboratory analyses of wastewater
at Edwards Air Force Base, CA. For further information, call Tamia
True at Tel: 805-277-3900, or contact: Directorate of Contracting,
Air Force Flight Test Center/PKAB, 5 South Wolfe Avenue, Edwards
Air Force Base, CA 93524-1185. (Deadline: Not specified; analytical
laboratory must be located within 100 miles of Edwards Air Force
Base.)

Sol. DTCG88-96-B-6AL262 to install and operate a bioventing system
at a Coast Guard facility in San Diego, CA. For further
information, call William Obershaw at Tel: 510-535-7236, or
contact: Contracting Officer, Civil Engineering Unit, U.S. Coast
Guard, Suite 200, 2000 Embarcadero Road, Oakland, CA 94606-5337.
(Deadline: 2/8/96.)

Solicitation to provide environmental well drilling services at
DOE's Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in Livermore, CA. For
further information, call Robert Baker at Tel: 510-422-8449, or
contact: Procurement Department, Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory, L-626, P.O. Box 5012, Livermore, CA 94551. (Deadline:
1/12/96.)*

Sol. N44255-96-D-0056 to provide environmental compliance services
at various Navy locations in the Pacific Northwest. Interested
firms should submit SF 254 and 255. For further information, call
Patricia Talbot at Tel: 360-396-0249, or contact: Engineering Field
Activity-Northwest, Naval Facilities Engineering Command, 19917
Seventh Avenue, N.E., Poulsbo, WA 98370. (Deadline: 1/25/96.)

Sol. DACW21-96-B-0014 to remove PCB-contaminated oil and equipment
from the J. Strom Thurmond Power Plant near Augusta, GA, and
dispose of the materials. For further information, call Sharon
Godbee at Tel: 912-652-5400, or contact: Army Corps of Engineers,
Savannah District, P.O. Box 899, Savannah, GA 31402-0889.
(Deadline: 2/1/96.)

Sol. DACA27-96-B-0015 to remove PCB-contaminated transformers from
a location in Columbus, OH, and dispose of the transformers for the
Army Corps of Engineers. For further information, call Diana Lewis
at Tel: 502-582-5706, or contact: Army Corps of Engineers,
Louisville District, Room 821, 600 Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
Place, Louisville, KY 40202-2230. (Deadline: 1/18/96.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-2</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B010-367</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev35.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001525 text/html 33123
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:13:33 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:33 GMT
Content-length: 32934
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev35.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet <BR>
January 3, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>*NEWS & ANALYSIS*</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>UNION SEEKS COURT-ORDERED BAN OF MEXICAN TRUCKS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(204 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>CDL ENFORCEMENT GETS BOOST VIA HIGHWAY BILL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(287 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>RAILROAD INCIDENT REPORTING CHANGES DELAYED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(217 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>PRIOR NOTICE TIME CUT FOR DOCK-SIDE GAS TRANSFERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(150 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>TRUCK SIZE DEBATE ADDS TO NAFTA IMPLEMENTATION WOES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(247 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>PORTABLE TANKS BANNED FOR PEROXIDE SHIPMENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(142 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>AIR CARGO DEREGULATION NEARS FOR U.S./CANADA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(163 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>ESCORT TUG BOAT REQUIREMENTS TO TIGHTEN IN 1996</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(136 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>*DOT INTERPRETATIONS*</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>A bag with four plies or more must be waterproof to qualify as a UN 5M2</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(157 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>Initial and recurrent hazardous materials training requirements for federal</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(290 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>Some asphalts in international transport are described differently than in</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(275 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>A cap seal must withstand internal pressure of 100 kPa without the drum</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(130 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>Adhesives shipped in containers weighing no more 66 pounds and marked in</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(206 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>A material subject to EPA uniform hazardous waste manifest rules would be</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(252 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>There are no restrictions on the number of inner receptacles in an outer</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(173 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>A commercial invoice and packing list for export/import need not repeat</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(131 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>Rules requiring manholes on cargo tank trucks apply to date of tank</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(201 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>*BRIEFS*</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>Air traffic control privatization plans not to affect current 6.23%</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(30 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>RSPA and Ohio conducting pilot test of alternative procedure for filing</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(29 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>DOT proposed hazardous materials pipeline facilities conduct emergency</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(18 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>New consolidated docket management system, combining nine separate docket</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(33 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>Coast Guard amended 127.1407(b) to reduce hydrostatic test pressure from</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(34 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>RSPA denied requests to revise 173.35(b) to allow reuse of flexible</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(35 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>DOT denied industry requests to drop 127.1325 requirements that hazardous</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(35 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>Certain chlorine users granted DOT exemption from 49 CFR 174.67(i)(j) tank</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(29 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>DOT Transportation Safety Institute, Oklahoma City, hazardous materials</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(21 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

UNION SEEKS COURT-ORDERED BAN OF MEXICAN TRUCKS

The Teamsters Union is seeking a court order banning Mexican trucks from
entering the U.S. unless drivers show evidence that DOT safety rules are met.
A ruling favoring the union would require Mexican truckers to show custom
officials proof of insurance and other documents demonstrating compliance
with hazardous materials and rules.

Under North American Free Trade Agreement provisions effective in Decem-ber,
Mexican trucks gained access to U.S. roads in Arizona, California, New Mexico
and Texas.  While the treaty requires them to comply with DOT rules when in
the U.S., the Teamsters allege drivers are being waved through after signing
compliance check-off forms rather than undergoing safety inspections.  On
Dec. 15, the union asked the D.C. circuit appeals court for an emergency stay
halting Mexican cross-border trucking.

The Teamsters allege DOT knows Mexican truckers often fail to maintain
adequate insurance, are not licensed or properly qualified, operate unsafe
vehicles and fail to assure safety when carrying dangerous materials.  It
noted a one-day inspection in October by the Texas Railroad Commission found
evidence of fraudulent insurance coverage by trucks entering the state.  The
union asked that trucks be barred until DOT sets up a centralized enforcement
system.  A court ruling is expected by February.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

CDL ENFORCEMENT GETS BOOST VIA HIGHWAY BILL

State transportation agencies will receive $5.4 billion in federal funds
during 1996 with significant increases in aid to administer the national
commercial driver's license (CDL) program.  The money, authorized by National
Highway System (NHS) legislation enacted in December, includes a nearly 15%
boost in federal funds to enforce CDL rules for trucks carrying hazardous
materials.  The measure also calls for additional increases of up to 10% in
1997 and 1998 to assist states in CDL compliance.

To qualify, states must show DOT they will use funding to meet CDL
inspections and enforcement program standards.  Aid will go only to states
that maintain record-keeping systems and participate in a national DOT data
base program to track records on drivers, truck and equipment inspections and
traffic accidents involving commercial vehicles.  An intended benefit of the
plan is to help DOT gather data on number of licensed hazardous materials
drivers and quantities of hazardous materials transported.

Some 1.1 million roadside inspections now are done annually and higher
allocations will allow those to increase, DOT said.  The program also
includes funding for drug and alcohol enforcement.  DOT noted that in 1992,
federal aid helped several states set up drug-free zones within 1,000 feet of
truck stops, doubling penalties for selling of drugs there.

In addition to hailing increased CDL funding, DOT Secretary Federico Pena
called the National Highway System the "backbone of America's transportation
network."  The 165,000-mile road system includes the current Interstate
system as well as other major state and federal highways.  Although it
comprises only 4% of the nation's roads, NHS carries about 40% of all traffic
and some 75% of truck traffic.  NHS roads also represent over 90% of the
approved hazardous materials routing network.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

RAILROAD INCIDENT REPORTING CHANGES DELAYED

The new incident reporting rules have been delayed at least until April to
let the Federal Railroad Administration consider questions from railroads on
company-managed control programs.  FRA is considering industry proposals to
omit a provision that railroads maintain in-house controls to ensure that
reports are filed for each incident.

Arguing that in-house programs would be burdensome, railroads urged FRA to
adopt a "99% performance standard."  By dividing the number of reported
accidents by the number of actual accidents, companies say they could compare
reporting rates against a 99% standard to determine whether reporting
performance is satisfactory.

While agreeing that a 99% performance rate would be acceptable, FRA said that
before adopting such an approach it would consider adding penalties for
companies falling short of the standard.  It asked for industry input on a
plan where fines increased for each percentage point below 99%.  The agency
suggested $1,000 for 98%; $3,000 for 97%; $9,000 for 96%, and so on.

FRA noted that changes in accident reporting standards would not alter
corrective action reporting required when non-compliance citations involve
assessment of civil penalties.  Such reporting is limited to physical defects
in rail equipment, such as cracks in hazardous material cargo tanks;
insufficient record keeping, such as tracking engineer time-on-duty; and
failure to file safety violation reports.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

PRIOR NOTICE TIME CUT FOR DOCK-SIDE GAS TRANSFERS

Liquefied gas transfer operators at shipping ports have been granted relief
from section 127.131(a) "prior notification" rules.  Despite overall Coast
Guard tightening of gas unloading standards, beginning Jan. 1 liquefied gas
facilities may give port authorities only four hours notice before cargo
transfers.

Facility operators had argued against the 24-hour notice saying frequent
changes in weather or tides made arrival schedules uncertain.  The Coast
Guard agreed after company logs showed facilities often cannot know 24 hours
in advance when ships will arrive.

Though willing to relax notification time, the Coast Guard said other rules
tightening liquefied hazardous gas transfers would go forward in 1996.  These
include more rigid procedures for monitoring unloading operations and
requirements that automatic transfer shutdown equipment be installed.  Data
collected since 1985 on deaths and property damage resulting from accidents
during liquefied gas transfers indicate current rules are "unjustifiably
lax," the Coast Guard said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

TRUCK SIZE DEBATE ADDS TO NAFTA IMPLEMENTATION WOES

U.S. and Mexican transportation officials will meet in January to try to iron
out differences regarding size of trucks allowed into Mexico under the North
American Free Trade Agreement.  While U.S. truckers are protesting entrance
of Mexican trucks into border states [see story p. 1], Mexico is attempting
to ban on its roads 53-foot-long trailers, the dominant size used by U.S.
companies.

Three days before the Dec. 18 border opening, Mexican custom officials said
the trailers would not be let into the country for equipment "safety rea-
sons" related to truck length and hazardous cargoes that could be hauled.

After strong protests from U.S. transportation and trade representatives,
Mexico agreed to permit the trailers as long as the entire vehicle did not
exceed 68 feet.  Carriers claim this would effectively halt U.S. trailer
entry into Mexico because few 53-foot trailer rigs are less than 68 feet
long.

The issue appears to have stemmed from internal conflicts between Mexican
transportation officials and border-area custom houses, private businesses
that enforce rules at crossings.  According to Dave Berry, VP at Swift
Transportation of Phoenix, the Mexican transportation agency would like
differences resolved so transborder shipments can proceed, but customhouses
are being responsive to Mexican domestic trucking problems.

U.S. Trade representative Mickey Cantor expressed hope that the January talks
would resolve the problem.  In the interim, certain trailers may cross only
if interline arrangements are made so that U.S. trailers are towed into
Mexico by Mexican drivers.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

PORTABLE TANKS BANNED FOR PEROXIDE SHIPMENTS

Shippers have until Oct. 1 to line up new packaging to replace non-
specification portable tanks now used to transport certain hydrogen
peroxides.  Under HM-181E provisions effective on that date, portable tanks
no longer will be approved packaging.  Instead, shippers will be subject to
intermediate bulk container (IBC) rules which ban non-specification packaging
for bulk peroxide shipments.

Final rule HM-181E, which specifies intermediate bulk containers as the DOT-
approved packaging for bulk peroxide shipments, defines IBCs as "packaging
other than a portable tank" used for hazardous cargo shipments.

However, the rule allows hazardous materials, except for those poisonous by
inhala-tion, to be packaged until Oct. 1, 1996, according to rules in effect
on Sept. 30, 1991.  Because the HMR in 1991 allowed hydrogen peroxide to be
transported in non-specification portable tanks, IBCs are not mandatory until
Oct. 1, DOT explained.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

AIR CARGO DEREGULATION NEARS FOR U.S./CANADA

Deregulation of air cargo between the U.S. and Canada could be implemented by
March under an agreement expected to spur more than $1 billion in economic
activity between the two countries.  A bilateral plan to lift restrictions on
shipments of hazardous and other cargoes was proposed in 1995 and
negotiations are scheduled for completion by March.  U.S.-Canada arrangements
now limit aircraft size, package weight and size and force some aircraft to
make return trips empty.

The new agreement would ease these constraints, unify certain hazardous cargo
rules and allow competitive pricing, Transportation Secretary Federico Pena
said.  Air transportation analysts estimate the air cargo market in both
countries could expand by close to 50% in two years under a more open treaty.

Air shippers say restrictions are an aberration of freer hemispheric trade in
the 1988 U.S.-Canada Free Trade Agreement and the 1994 North American Free
Trade Agreement.  Deregulation talks began in 1991, but had been stalled
until this plan was announced.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

ESCORT TUG BOAT REQUIREMENTS TO TIGHTEN IN 1996

Tanker escort rule expansion is ahead for single-hulled ships carrying
hazardous cargoes in U.S. waters, the Coast Guard said in December.  Several
ports and waterways are slated for inclusion on a February list designating
areas where tug and tow boat assistance will be required.  The action follows
1995 implementation of a rule requiring at least two escort vessels to
accompany hazardous cargo-carrying, single-hulled tankers in Prince William
Sound, Alaska, and Puget Sound, Wash.

Tug boat rules apply to single-hulled tankers over 5,000 gross tons.
Companion vessels could reduce the possibility of grounding or collision when
a tanker loses propulsion or steering, Coast Guard project manager Tom Jordan
explained.  Escort rules are mandated by the 1990 Oil Pollution Act, and are
to be in force until single-hulled ships carrying hazardous cargoes are
phased out in 2015.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

A bag with four plies or more must be waterproof to qualify as a UN 5M2

A bag with four plies or more must be waterproof to qualify as a UN 5M2 paper
bag for hazardous materials use, DOT told Southern Bag, Yazoo City, Miss.
The package maker said its bags are made using four plies: the two innermost
are kraft paper, the third is a 3-mil linear low-density plastic laminated to
paper, the outermost is paper.  Plant manager Jimmy Druey explained that the
plastic side of the third ply faces in toward the packaged material and asked
if the construction meets UN 5M2 standards.

DOT cited 178.521(b)(2) requiring that bags be waterproof by the use of a
water-resistant ply as one of the two outermost plies or a water-resistant
barrier of a "suitable protective material" between the two outermost plies.
It said bags of four plies or more that meet all requirements of 178.521 and
tested per subpart M of Part 178 may be marked as a UN 5M2 paper bag.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

Initial and recurrent hazardous materials training requirements for federal

Initial and recurrent hazardous materials training requirements for federal
employees were spelled out by DOT in response to inquiries from various
government agencies.  Questioners asked if it is acceptable, under initial
training rules, for a new hire to take an exam without receiving some type of
instruction from the hiring agency.  Noting that a major purpose of training
rules is to ensure that employers provide training for each hazmat employee,
DOT said the rules specify that workers whose jobs involve the transportation
of hazardous materials receive familiarization training covering the HMR.
For initial training, section 172.704(c) specifies training must occur within
90 days of hire and that each new employee must be trained before being
tested.

Questioners also asked if, under recurrent training rules, an employee with
initial training can take a recurrent exam without additional instruction
prior to the exam.  DOT replied that recurrent training must be completed and
documented at least once every two years, and that employees should receive
recurrent hazmat training before being tested .

Regarding questions about use of computer-based training to meet training
requirements, DOT said each agency must determine the most suitable source of
training for its employees.  Computer-based training is acceptable and may be
used provided the general awareness, function specific, safety training, and
testing requirements are fulfilled.

DOT added that a record of each hazmat employee's training over the preceding
two years must be maintained by the employer for the duration of employment
in each hazardous material job and for 90 days thereafter.  A current record
of relevant training is not required to be received from a previous employer,
but may be used to eliminate the need for the new employer to retrain as
required in 172.704 (c)(1)(iii).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

Some asphalts in international transport are described differently than in

Some asphalts in international transport are described differently than in
domestic shipment, DOT informed Seneca Petroleum, Crestwood, Ill.  The
company asked about "cutback asphalts," which it said can be subdivided into
rapid curing, medium curing and slow curing.  It noted that the faster the
curing rate, the more volatile the material.

Seneca said its rapid curing asphalt has a flash point of 70 to 90 degrees
Fahrenheit.  Because it is transported at 150 degrees Fahrenheit, it believed
the product does not meet the definition of an elevated temperature material.
The company said it understood that elevated temperature materials are
defined in the HMR as liquids shipped above 212 degrees Fahrenheit or
materials shipped in a liquid phase with a flash point at or above 100
degrees Fahrenheit.

However, company safety director Jim Sniegowski said Illinois transportation
officials interpret the definition to mean any material transported at or
above its flash point.  Thus the state requires Seneca to prepare rapid
curing asphalt for shipment with elevated temperature shipping paper, marking
and placarding rules.  The firm asked for clarification of the elevated
temperature rule and for a proper shipping name.

DOT replied that a material with a flash point below 37.8 degrees Celsius
(100 degrees Fahrenheit) and offered for transportation or transported below
100 degrees Celsius (212 degrees Fahrenheit) does not meet the section 171.8
definition of an elevated temperature material.

Therefore, the shipping description for rapid curing asphalt would be
"Asphalt, cut-back, 3, UN1999, PG III," and elevated temperature rules would
not apply.  However, the agency added, for international transportation the
material must be described as "Elevated temperature liquid, flammable, n.o.s.
(Asphalt)."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

A cap seal must withstand internal pressure of 100 kPa without the drum

A cap seal must withstand internal pressure of 100 kPa without the drum
closure in place, DOT advised Kelly Air Force Base, Texas.  The agency
covered sections 173.226 and 173.227 rules concerning closures on packagings
used to ship materials poisonous by inhalation.  The Air Force asked what
testing must be done to determine if a cap seal meets the internal pressure
requirements of the HMR.

DOT said no specific test (for example, hydrostatic testing) is required.
Whatever test is used, it must apply the pressure for enough time to
determine if the cap seal can withstand 100 kPa.  That period depends on the
test method used, the agency said.  It added that if a hydrostatic test is
used, for example, a five-minute application of the test pressure is
appropriate.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

Adhesives shipped in containers weighing no more 66 pounds and marked in

Adhesives shipped in containers weighing no more 66 pounds and marked in
accordance with HMR part 172 may be transported as a consumer commodity, DOT
told Grand Circuit, Freehold, N.J.  It sells an adhesive called Grand Circuit
Hoof Repair to blacksmiths for gluing on horseshoes and repairing damaged
hoof walls.

The product is sold "as is," ready for use off the shelf, explained general
manager Rita Newell.  Grand Circuit describes the material for shipping as a
flammable liquid, UN1133, class 3 in packing group III.  The adhesive is sold
in 1-, 2- and 3-ounce bot-tles, as well as in 40- and 380-mL plastic tubes.
The veterinary supply company asked for clarification of the ORM-D rating
when transporting its product.

DOT responded an "Adhesive, 3, UN1133, PG II," may be renamed and reclassed
as "Consumer commodity, ORM-D" if it meets criteria in 173.150.  That section
requires the materials not meet the definition of any other hazard class and
not be a hazardous substance, hazardous waste, or marine pollutant.

The agency advised that the inner packagings must be placed in a strong outer
packaging, the completed package must weigh no more than 66 pounds, and the
outer packaging must be marked in accordance with 172.316.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

A material subject to EPA uniform hazardous waste manifest rules would be

A material subject to EPA uniform hazardous waste manifest rules would be
described as an "environmentally hazardous substance," DOT advised a Downers
Grove, Ill., firm.  Castrol Industrial described its product as a petroleum
oil, with a flash point of 400 degrees Fahrenheit and containing less than 5%
barium salt.  This material is packaged in 55-gallon (non-bulk) drums or 330-
gallon intermediate bulk containers.

The petroleum product maker noted that the material does not meet the
definition of a marine pollutant, but when tested as a waste, it does meet
EPA's definition of a toxic hazardous waste.  Company regulatory specialist
Marcia Montgomery asked whether a class 9 hazard warning label is appropriate
for shipping.

DOT replied that if the product is not a Division 6.1 poisonous material, a
marine pollutant, or a hazardous substance, then it does not meet the criter-
ia of any hazard class contained in 49 CFR Part 173 and, therefore, is not
subject to regulation.

However, if it is transported as a waste subject to EPA uniform hazardous
waste manifest rules, it would be described as "Waste, environmentally
hazardous substances, liquid, n.o.s., 9, UN 3082, PG III."  Packagings of 119
gallons or less (non-bulk) au-thorized for this material are in 173.203, DOT
said.  Packagings of greater than 119 gallons (bulk) are in 173.241.  In
addition, each bulk and non-bulk packaging must be marked in accordance with
sections 172.301 or 172.302, as applicable, and must be labeled with a Class
9 label as prescribed in section 172.400.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

There are no restrictions on the number of inner receptacles in an outer

There are no restrictions on the number of inner receptacles in an outer
packaging as long as the complete package passes the prescribed tests and is
certified, DOT told Mallinckrodt Chemical, Paris, Ky.  Packaging engineer
Greg Smart asked the agency to clarify 173.158 pertaining to the number of
inner receptacles per outer package to ship nitric acid.  Subparagraph (b)(2)
limits the number of inner receptacles to four.  However, subparagraph (f)(2)
does not place a limit on the number of inner receptacles.

DOT advised that 173.158(f)(2) applies to nitric acid of 70% or less con-
centration.  When packaged in 4H1 expanded plastic boxes, the HMR does not
limit the number of inner glass packagings, only that each not exceed 2.5 L.

Paragraph (b)(2), which specifies a limit of four inner receptacles per outer
packaging applies to nitric acid in higher concentrations as long as it does
not contain sulfuric or hydrochloric acid as impurities.  In both cases, DOT
noted, outer packagings constructed of plastic also must conform to
compatibility requirements in 173.24(e).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

A commercial invoice and packing list for export/import need not repeat

A commercial invoice and packing list for export/import need not repeat
hazardous materials information on the ocean bill of lading, DOT told Lusk
Shipping, Baltimore.  The firm explained its commercial invoice includes a
description of goods, address of the shipper and seller and payment terms.
Lusk asked if emergency response information and phone numbers, as required
by the Hazardous Materials Regulations, needed to be included on the invoice
or material packing list.

DOT replied no.  The HMR specifies the shipping paper is the document that
contains the hazardous materials data required by sections 172.203 and 204
and emergency phone number required by 172.604(a)(3).  The agency added that
compliance with shipping paper data was met by the ocean bill of lading
containing all data required by sections 172.203, 172.204 and 172.604(a)(3).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

Rules requiring manholes on cargo tank trucks apply to date of tank

Rules requiring manholes on cargo tank trucks apply to date of tank
manufacture, not vehicle manufacture, DOT said responding to carrier
inquiries on section 178.337-6, manhole closure requirements.  Several
companies noted manholes or inspection openings were mandated on cargo tanks
made after April 21, 1994, and that tanks made before that date but later
installed on trucks were not required to comply with the manhole rule.

DOT said the April 21 date applies to manufacture of the cargo tank, not its
installation on a motor vehicle.  It added that a cargo tank refers to the
tank fitted with all appurtenances, reinforcements, fittings and closures af-
fecting lading retention installed by the cargo tank manufacturer.

DOT said under the definition of cargo tank in 178.320, appurtenances,
fittings, closures and valves added by truck and tank assemblers or owners
are not part of a cargo tank.  Therefore, a tank marked with an original test
date on or before April 21, 1994, is not required to be fitted with manhole
or inspection openings.  The certificate stating the completed cargo tank
motor vehicle conforms to all DOT specifications and the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers code may be dated after April 21, 1994.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

Air traffic control privatization plans not to affect current 6.23%

Air traffic control privatization plans not to affect current 6.23% hazardous
materials air waybill tax, DOT said.  Agency is targeting Oct. 1, 1997, to
begin non-government air traffic control corporation.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

RSPA and Ohio conducting pilot test of alternative procedure for filing

RSPA and Ohio conducting pilot test of alternative procedure for filing 1996
carrier federal registration statement.  RSPA looking at possible rulemaking
to allow state registration to satisfy federal rules.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

DOT proposed hazardous materials pipeline facilities conduct emergency

DOT proposed hazardous materials pipeline facilities conduct emergency
response activities at plants handling gas, hazardous liquids, carbon
dioxide.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

New consolidated docket management system, combining nine separate docket

New consolidated docket management system, combining nine separate docket
facilities into one central office, announced by DOT.  New office replaces
paper-based system with electronic imaging system.  Access information
available from Lorie Dankers, 202/366-5565.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

Coast Guard amended 127.1407(b) to reduce hydrostatic test pressure from

Coast Guard amended 127.1407(b) to reduce hydrostatic test pressure from 1.5
to 1.1 times maximum allowable working pressure.  Also will permit captain of
the port to authorize alternatives to hydrostatic testing, including
pneumatic tests.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

RSPA denied requests to revise 173.35(b) to allow reuse of flexible

RSPA denied requests to revise 173.35(b) to allow reuse of flexible
intermediate bulk containers.  Also denied shipper petitions for continued
use of intermediate bulk containers now holding DOT exemptions.  Packaging
must meet standards in HM-181E.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

DOT denied industry requests to drop 127.1325 requirements that hazardous

DOT denied industry requests to drop 127.1325 requirements that hazardous gas
transfer sites maintain security guards, or apply rule only during transfers.
Agency said explosion risk from vandalism/sabotage exists even when transfers
not in progress.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

Certain chlorine users granted DOT exemption from 49 CFR 174.67(i)(j) tank

Certain chlorine users granted DOT exemption from 49 CFR 174.67(i)(j) tank
car unloading rules.  Exemption authorizes chlorine-filled rail cars to
remain attached to connectors without physical presence of unloader.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

DOT Transportation Safety Institute, Oklahoma City, hazardous materials

DOT Transportation Safety Institute, Oklahoma City, hazardous materials
training schedule available for 1996.  Contact Virginia Litres, 202/366-4488.







<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-3</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B011-3</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev54.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001557 text/html 44253
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:14:07 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:39 GMT
Content-length: 44064
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev54.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
HAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet <BR>
January 3, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>FEDERAL COURTS' EQUITABLE&nbsp;JURISDICTION IS LIMITED,&nbsp;RCRA DEFENDANTS REPLY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(763 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>VERTAC RECEIVER LOSES&nbsp;BID TO SUE THIRD PARTIES&nbsp;FOR DIOXIN CLEANUP COSTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(468 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>6TH CIR.'S $1.5M FINE&nbsp;AFFIRMANCE, CORP. OFFICER&nbsp;LIABILITY FINDING APPEALED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(670 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>OCCIDENTAL PAYS $129M&nbsp;TO CLOSE A CHAPTER&nbsp;ON LOVE CANAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(541 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>WD KY WON'T RECONSIDER&nbsp;ORDER ALLOWING RP&nbsp;SECTION 107(a) COST RECOVERY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(289 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>ED WA: CERCLA'S SOVEREIGN&nbsp;IMMUNITY WAIVER EXTENDS&nbsp;TO STATE CLAIMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(656 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>3RD CIR.: NEIGHBORS,&nbsp;VISITORS TO WASTE SITE&nbsp;ARE NOT KNOWN CREDITORS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(894 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>IL APP. CT. AFFIRMS&nbsp;CARRRIER WIN ON LATE&nbsp;NOTICE GROUNDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(345 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>AZ APP. CT. REVERSES&nbsp;INSURER WIN ON TCE&nbsp;COVERAGE BAD FAITH SUIT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(601 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>SD NY DENIES CARRIERS&nbsp;JUDGMENT ON TRIGGER OF&nbsp;COVERAGE, LOST POLICY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(951 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

FEDERAL COURTS' EQUITABLE
JURISDICTION IS LIMITED,
RCRA DEFENDANTS REPLY

     The Resource Conservation Recovery Act citizen suit
defendants who are seeking reversal of the Ninth Circuit U.S.
Court of Appeals' determination of their liability for
restitutionary damages, on Dec. 28 submitted their reply to the
plaintiffs' arguments to the U.S. Supreme Court.  Meghrig et al.
v. KFC Western Inc., No. 95-83 (U.S.); see Hazardous Waste
Litigation Reporter, Dec. 20, 1995.

     Alan and Margaret Meghrig rejoined that KFC Western Inc.'s
position "is seriously flawed because it proceeds from a series
of false assumptions," including a "misapprehension of the
limited jurisdiction of federal courts to render equitable relief
in the face of a statute such as [RCRA]."

     KFC Western's response, the petitioners contended, "largely
ignores the thorough statutory construction analysis advanced by
Petitioners in favor of a more generalized series of assumptions
tied to Respondent's view of fairness."  RCRA's jurisdictional
statement, argued the Meghrigs, "do[es] not authorize the
district courts to broadly 'take such action as may be
necessary,' but authorize[s] those courts to restrain a person or
to order a person to take other necessary action, or both, and
nothing more."

     The Meghrigs noted the panoply of federal environmental
statutes that contain citizen suit provisions, and stated that
their respective legislative histories, "beginning with the 1970
Clean Air Act and flowing through subsequently enacted federal
environmental statutes, [confirm] congressional intent to limit
the remedies available to citizen plaintiffs by excluding
jurisdiction to award damages."

     The petitioners argued that to accept the respondents'
contention that recognition of restitution under RCRA would not
unduly interfere with CERCLA "would be to accept the proposition
that the massive legislative effort and epic compromise necessary
to enact CERCLA [was] simply swept away by Congress four years
later" with the passage of the 1984 RCRA amendments.

               The Meghrigs challenged KFC Western's assertion that the
trial court possessed jurisdiction to grant equitable relief.
"RCRA's citizen suit provision contains no grant of authority to
the district courts to formulate general federal common law,"
they contended, "and the claims of Respondent KFC, as a private
party, do not fall within any of the four narrow areas in which
federal courts have general common law jurisdiction."

     The petitioners asserted that the Supreme Court's 1992
opinion in Franklin v. Gwinnett County Public Schools, upon which
KFC Western relied extensively in arguing for a federal court's
jurisdiction to fashion relief, "has no bearing on the RCRA
statute.  In Franklin, the statute was absolutely silent on the
subject of remedies available to an aggrieved plaintiff....  By
contrast, RCRA provides particularized citizen remedies, and its
legislative history and that of related statutes reaffirm the
limitations on those remedies."

     The Meghrigs averred that the relief sought by KFC Western
does not constitute equitable restitution.  "What Respondent
seeks here is compensation for an injury to its property," they
argued, "and that certainly is distinguished from an equitable
action for specific relief such as restitutionary awards of back-
pay, or return of specific property".

     In 1963, the petitioners inherited a commercial parcel in
Los Angeles from their father.  Gasoline stations had been
previously operated on the site for decades; all underground
storage tanks had been removed well before the Meghrigs took
title.

     In 1975, the petitioners sold the land to the respondent,
who established a Kentucky Fried Chicken franchise on the site.
In the course of renovations in 1988, petroleum contamination was
discovered, and KFC Western spent some $211,000 in complying with
a cleanup order from the Los Angeles Department of Health.

     When the Meghrigs refused KFC Western's reimbursement
demands, the respondent started the present litigation in the
U.S. District Court for the Central District of California.  The
trial court granted the Meghrigs' dismissal motion in March 1992,
holding that no "imminent and substantial endangerment" existed
to support a RCRA claim, and stating that RCRA's citizen suit
provision solely made injunctive relief available.

     In March 1995, the Ninth Circuit reversed by a 2-1 margin.
The appellate court concluded that RCRA's "imminent and
substantial endangerment" language did not act as a time-bar, and
a RCRA citizen suit plaintiff could make demand for money
damages.  The Meghrigs lodged their certiorari petition the
following July, and the Supreme Court agreed to review the matter
last October.  Oral argument in the matter is scheduled for
Jan. 10, at 10:00 a.m.

               John P. Zaimes and Clifton J. McFarland of McClintock,
Weston, Benshoof, Rochefort, Rubalcava & MacCuish, Los Angeles,
represent Alan and Margaret Meghrig.

     Daniel Romano and Sharon Corda of the Law Office of Daniel
Romano, Santa Monica, CA, represent KFC Western Inc.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

VERTAC RECEIVER LOSES
BID TO SUE THIRD PARTIES
FOR DIOXIN CLEANUP COSTS

     A federal judge in Little Rock on Dec. 11 denied a motion by
the court-appointed receiver for the bankrupt Vertac Chemical
Corp. to sue other parties to recover cleanup costs that could be
used to pay Vertac's environmental debts to the federal and state
governments for the cleanup of a bayou polluted by runoff from
the plant.  United States v. Vertac Chemical Corp., No. LR-C-80-
109 (ED AR).

     U.S. District Judge George Howard Jr. of the Eastern
District of Arkansas noted that the State of Arkansas is already
seeking to remedy environmental damage to the bayou and he said
he was not persuaded that the receiver's limited resources should
be used to fund an action that the state intends to pursue.

     Vertac's Jacksonville, AR, plant was acquired by Hercules
Inc. in 1961.  Hercules had manufactured the defoliant Agent
Orange at the plant from 1964 to 1968, pursuant to a government
contract.  Thousands of barrels of dioxin, one of the byproducts
of Agent Orange, and other hazardous wastes contaminated the soil
at the plant site and polluted Rocky Branch Creek, which runs
through the site and empties into Bayou Meto.  The government had
commenced a CERCLA action in 1987 to recoup the costs of
remediating the site.

     Court-appointed bankruptcy receiver Lee S. Thalheimer of the
Little Rock firm of Arnold, Grobmyer & Haley, had asked the
court's permission to file a citizen's suit under the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act against others who may be liable
for polluting Bayou Meto.

     Judge Howard observed that Furrer v. Brown, a recent Eighth
Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals case, held that plaintiffs may only
seek injunctive relief, not a monetary judgment, under RCRA and,
therefore, the receiver would not be able to recover any monies
from an RCRA suit.  (Furrer v. Brown, 62 F.3d 1092 (8th Cir.
1995).

     He took note of the fact that the Ninth Circuit has decided
the same issue differently in KFC Western v. Meghrig, 49 F.3d 518
(9th Cir. 1995) and that the U.S. Supreme Court has granted a
petition for writ of certiorari in that case to decide the issue
of whether recovery of cleanup costs is available in a private
action under RCRA.

     Judge Howard also denied Thalheimer's request to be granted
the authority to place restrictions on the future use of the
Vertac plant.  The receiver wanted to authorize Hercules to
clean, salvage and sell plant equipment to help pay off
creditors.  Hercules had supported the request but the government
opposed it.

     Judge Howard agreed with the United States that the
receiver's request was overly broad and vague.  However, to
encourage the parties to work together, the judge dismissed the
request without prejudice to renew to give the parties a chance
to work out their differences.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

6TH CIR.'S $1.5M FINE
AFFIRMANCE, CORP. OFFICER
LIABILITY FINDING APPEALED

     The Michigan RCRA defendants whose $1.5 million penalty for
noncompliance with closure deadlines was upheld by the Sixth
Circuit last July, on Dec. 1 petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court
for writ of certiorari.  Production Plated Plastics Inc. et al.
v. United States et al., Nos. 95-878 (U.S.); see Hazardous Waste
Litigation Reporter, Sept. 6, 1995.

     In addition to challenging the fine as unconstitutionally
excessive, the petitioners exhorted the High Court to "determine,
once and for all, whether Congress intended corporate officer
liability under RCRA and CERCLA, and if so, under what standard."

     The litigation stems from the operation of a chrome plating
facility in Richland, MI, which opened in 1966 and was acquired
three years later by petitioner Production Plated Plastics Inc.
("PPP").  PPP, as did the prior owner, stored sludge and process
water in on-site surface inpoundments.

     In 1977, Michigan sued PPP under the state Water Resources
Conservation Act after hexavelent chrome was discovered in the
groundwater in the plant's vicinity.  PPP closed the impoundments
in the course of the remediation plan it had agreed to with the
Michigan Department of Natural Resources.

     PPP applied for RCRA interim status for its impoundments in
1980.  PPP was unable thereafter to obtain insurance or a closure
bond, and it lost its interim status in 1985.  The federal and
state governments brought the present litigation in 1987,
alleging failure to submit a closure plan within 15 days of
losing RCRA interim status, and failure to complete closure
activities within 180 days of the state's approval of closure
plan.  Also named to the suit were the affiliated Michigan City
Plastics Co. Inc. (MCP) and Michael Ladney, the controlling
officer of both entities.
               The U.S. District Court for the Western District of Michigan
determined in 1990 that Ladney may be held jointly and severally
liable.  The trial court granted the government's demand for
permanent, mandatory injunctive mandatory relief in 1991, and the
Sixth Circuit affirmed the following year.

     After a trial on penalties, Judge Benjamin F. Gibson in 1992
imposed a $1.5 million penalty on the defendants, and ordered the
implementation of a $2.4 million trust fund to pay for
groundwater monitoring over 30 years.  The trial court also
appointed a third-party trustee to marshall the defendants'
assets to comply with the injunction.

     The Sixth Circuit affirmed in an unpublished per curiam
opinion last July 19.  The panel found no violation of the
defendants' due process rights in that Ladney operated his
businesses without regard for corporate form, and concluded that
the fine imposed was well below the $90 million potential
maximum.

     In their petition, the defendants assert that while "courts
have found joint and several liability for RCRA compliance,
penalties should be assessed separately and not jointly and
severally... [B]y clear implication, cases explaining the
requirements of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments (Due Process
Analysis) and Eighth Amendment (Excessive Punishment Analysis)
require that a court analyze behavior individually when assessing
a penalty sought by the government that amounts to punishment."

     The petitioners asserted that "[s]ince fines under RCRA are
exclusively punitive, they are fully subject to the Eighth
Amendment's prohibition against excessive fines.... [N]either the
District Court nor Sixth Circuit gave anything but cursory
consideration to the possibility that the $1.5 million fine, the
largest penalty in the Western District of Michigan's history,
could be excessive."

     As to the issue of owner/operator liability under both
CERCLA and RCRA, the petitioners argued that those federal courts
that have extended such liability to corporate officers have
ignored Supreme Court precedent concerning statutory
construction.  "RCRA does not define 'owner' or 'operator' to
include corporate officers, employees or shareholders," the
defendants contended.  "Likewise, nothing in RCRA's legislative
history suggests that Congress intended the joint and several
liability of corporate officers for the violations of a
corporation."

     Douglas W. Van Essen of Law, Weathers & Richardson, Grand
Rapids, MI, submitted the petition on behalf of Production Plated
Plastics Inc., Michigan City Plastics Co. Inc. and Michael
Ladney.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

OCCIDENTAL PAYS $129M
TO CLOSE A CHAPTER
ON LOVE CANAL

     Occidental Chemical Corp. has agreed to pay the U.S.
government $129 million in cleanup costs and interest to settle a
16-year-old lawsuit resulting from decades of pollution at Love
Canal, the case that spurred Congress to enact the Superfund Law
of 1980.  United States et al. v. Hooker Chemical Corp. et al.,
No. 79-CV-990C (WD NY); see Hazardous Waste Litigation Reporter,
June 3, 1991.

     Under the proposed consent decree, announced Dec. 21,
Occidental Chemical Corp. (Oxychem) will pay $102 million to the
Environmental Protection Agency and $28 million to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).  FEMA handled the initial
cleanup and relocation of Love Canal residents.

     From 1942 to 1953, Oxychem's corporate predecessor, Hooker
Chemical, dumped an estimated 22,000 tons of toxic chemicals and
hazardous wastes at Love Canal from its Niagara Falls
manufacturing plant.  The site was eventually covered over and
deeded to the City of Niagara Falls.  Homes and a school were
later built on and near Love Canal.  Chemicals began seeping into
the houses in the 1970s sickening residents; one resident, Lois
Gibbs, led a crusade to expose Hooker's actions and clean up the
site.

     In 1979, the federal government and New York State brought
suit against Hooker.  The federal government initially sought
compensation of more than $200 million in cleanup costs under
CERCLA and the state sought $250 million in punitive damages.
Oxychem was held liable in the liability phase of the trial, but
the state's claims for punitive damages were denied.

     In June 1994, Oxychem agreed to pay the state $98 million to
settle the remaining state claims.  The U.S. Army has also agreed
to pay the government $8 million for its share of the costs for
cleaning up hazardous waste that it dumped at the site during
World War II.

     The consent decree, which is expected to receive final
approval in 30 days, eliminates the need for a second trial on
damages.  Under its terms, Oxychem will pay the $129 million in
four installments over three years, beginning three months after
the court grants final approval.

     While the proposed settlement closes out the federal and
state cleanup claims, it does not end the litigation over Love
Canal.  The City of Niagara Falls is seeking $4 million in costs
and interest and 900 former residents have personal injury
lawsuits still pending.  In the wake of the federal and state
settlements, Niagara Falls expects that it will soon reach a
settlement with the company to end its suit as well.
               In announcing the settlement, U.S. Attorney General Janet
Reno called it "the transformation of an environmental disaster
called Love Canal into a success story.  It stands for the
principle that when people make a mess, they should clean it up."

     A spokesman for Oxychem said that the company has never
denied liability, but that the settlement represents a compromise
among the parties on the amount of compensation, rather than
fines or penalties.  The agreement, he said avoids having to go
through a protracted trial on damages.

     Oxychem is represented by Steven K. Yablonski of Piper &
Marbury, Washington, DC.  The federal government is represented
by Steven Novick and Steven R. Baer of the U.S. Justice
Department, Washington, DC.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

WD KY WON'T RECONSIDER
ORDER ALLOWING RP
SECTION 107(a) COST RECOVERY

     U.S. District Judge Joseph H. McKinley Jr. of the Western
District of Kentucky on Dec. 27 refused a defense bid to
reconsider his November ruling finding a responsible party CERCLA
plaintiff capable of suing for cost recovery under Section
107(a).  Barmet Aluminum Corp. v. Doug Brantley & Sons Inc. et
al., No. 4:95-CV-93-M (WD KY); see Hazardous Waste Litigation
Reporter, Dec. 6, 1995.

     The judge also refused the defendants request for
certification for interlocutory appeal to the Sixth Circuit U.S.
Court of Appeals.

     In March 1995, plaintiff Barmet Aluminum Corp. entered into
a consent order with the EPA to clean up the Brantley Landfill
site; Barmet was first named as a potentially responsible party
regarding the site in 1989.

     Barmet thereafter lodged a CERCLA Section Section 107/113
complaint against excavator Doug Brantley & Sons Inc. and its
corporate principals.  The defendants argued for the dismissal of
the allegations under Section 107, contending that Barmet's
status as a responsible party limited it to seeking Section
113(f) contribution.

     Judge McKinley held last Nov. 22 that Section 107(a)(4)(B)
imposes liability for "any other necessary costs of response
incurred by any other person consistent with the national
liability plan," and refuse to exclude responsible parties from
the defined "any other person."   He stated that the only
district court within the circuit to have addressed the issue has
twice allowed responsible parties and potentially responsible
parties to sue for Section 107 cost recovery.

               Kim K. Burke, Robert A. Bilott and Charles H. Pangburn III
of Taft, Stettinius & Hollister, Cincinnati, represent the
plaintiff.

     J. Anthony Goebel, Joseph J. Zaluski, George L. Seay Jr. and
Clinton J. Elliot of Wyatt, Tarrant & Combs, Louisville, KY,
represent the defendants.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

ED WA: CERCLA'S SOVEREIGN
IMMUNITY WAIVER EXTENDS
TO STATE CLAIMS

     U.S. District Judge Justin B. Quackenbush of the Eastern
District of Washington on Dec. 11 clarified his October order in
an environmental cost recovery action against the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers.  Crowley Marine Services Inc. et al. v. Fednav Ltd.
et al., No. CS-94-178-JLQ; see Hazardous Waste Litigation
Reporter, Nov. 1, 1995.

     The judge stated that CERCLA's waiver of sovereign immunity,
which he had previously held to override the Corps' assertion of
immunity under the Flood Control Act of 1928, applied to the
plaintiffs' state statutory claims as well.

     Plaintiffs Crowley Marine Services Inc. and others, along
with the Corps, were sued in 1991-1992 by the Washington
Department of Ecology over soil and groundwater contamination in
the vicinity of a levee and drainage system owned and operated by
the Corps.  The levee and drainage system, situated on the bank
of the Columbia River, is part of a federal flood control
project.  The plaintiffs performed remediation in satisfaction of
the state suit, and brought the present action against some 20
parties who refused to participate in the cleanup.

     In his Oct. 10 order addressing the Corps' dismissal motion,
Judge Quackenbush agreed that the Flood Act barred the
plaintiffs' count under the Federal Tort Claims Act (FTCA).  He
refused to find the Corps immunized on the CERCLA claims, finding
that the defendant asserted none of the enumerated defenses to
the sovereign immunity waiver, and determining that CERCLA
contains no express exception regarding Flood Act immunity.

     The Corps sought clarification of the order, seeking a
determination that the FTCA ruling carried over to the
plaintiffs' common-law tort claims, and that CERCLA's sovereign
immunity did not apply to the claims under Washington's hazardous
materials statutes.  The plaintiffs responded that CERCLA's
sovereign immunity unequivocally applies to state environmental
statutes.

     Judge Quackenbush primarily agreed that the plaintiffs'
claims for negligence/negligence per se, strict liability,
trespass, and nuisance "were applicable to the Corps only through
the FTCA," and thus were dismissed.

     In considering the claims under Washington's state Superfund
law, the Model Toxics Control Act (MTCA), the court wrote that
CERCLA Section 9620(a)(4) "provides, in pertinent part, that
'State laws concerning removal and remedial action, including
State laws regarding enforcement, shall apply' to facilities of
the United States...

     "The MTCA is similar in language to CERCLA," the judge
continued.  "The court finds that CERCLA's waiver of immunity, in
conjunction with the form and substance of the MTCA, require the
conclusion that the MTCA is applicable to the site owned and
operated by the Corps."  The court agreed with the Corps that the
waiver solely extends to sites currently owned or operated by the
United States.

     Judge Quackenbush then addressed the plaintiffs' claims
under the Washington Hazardous Waste Management Act (HWMA), the
state RCRA equivalent.  The court looked to the 1992 amendment to
RCRA Section 6961, which restated and emphasized the waiver of
sovereign immunity in the statute.  "The 1992 amendment was a
clear effort on behalf of Congress to equally apply environmental
standards to private citizens and the federal government," the
judge wrote.

     The judge rejected the Corps' assertion that the claim for
relief under the Declaratory Judgment Act should be dismissed for
lack of an independent basis of federal jurisdiction.
"Plaintiffs' CERCLA claims were not dismissed, and these claims
provide an independent jurisdictional basis, the court stated.

     Judge Quackenbush lastly rejected the Corps' bid to dismiss
the claim for the reasonable costs of negotiation with the
Washington state authorities, including attorneys' fees.  The
Corps asserted that such recovery was barred under the U.S.
Supreme Court's 1994 ruling in Key Tronic v. U.S.; the court
rejoined that the plaintiffs "seek recovery of attorneys' fees
under several statutes, including CERCLA, the RCRA, the MTCA, and
the HWMA.  Each of those statutes provides for potential recovery
of attorneys' fees."

     Gillis E. Reavis of Morrison & Foerster, Seattle, represents
Crowley Marine Services Inc.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

3RD CIR.: NEIGHBORS,
VISITORS TO WASTE SITE
ARE NOT KNOWN CREDITORS

     Neighbors of a dump site contaminated by low-level radiation
were not known creditors and, therefore, the corporate owner of
the sites had no obligation to provide them with actual notice
when it went into bankruptcy, the Third Circuit U.S. Court of
Appeals ruled on Dec. 18.  Chemetron Corp. v. Jones et al.,
No. 94-3371 (3rd Cir.).

     From 1965 to 1975, Chemetron Corp. owned and operated a
manufacturing facility that made an antimony oxide catalyst
utilizing depleted plutonium and a nearby landfill where it
dumped waste products from that manufacturing process in Cuyahoga
Heights, OH.  Chemetron sold the sites in 1975, but became
involved in cleanup efforts between 1980 and 1988 after it was
discovered that the sites were contaminated with radioactive
waste.

     In 1988, Chemetron filed for Chapter 11 reorganization in
the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Western District of
Pennsylvania.  The court issued a claims bar date order fixing
the last day for creditors to file claims as May 31, 1988.
Chemetron sent the required actual notice to all of its known
creditors and also voluntarily placed advertisements in the New
York Times and Wall Street Journal in an effort to reach any
unknown creditors.

     In 1992, 15 individuals filed suit against Chemetron and its
successors in interest in the Cuyahoga County Court of Common
Pleas claiming to have been injured from exposure to radioactive
and toxic chemicals at the dump site.  Eventually the list of
plaintiffs grew to 21.  Two of the plaintiffs had lived in houses
near the site and the rest were periodic visitors to the houses.

     Chemetron moved to dismiss the suit, arguing that any such
claim had been discharged in the bankruptcy proceedings which had
ended in 1990.  The plaintiffs then petitioned the bankruptcy
court to be allowed to file late claims.   In August 1993, the
bankruptcy court granted the petition, finding that the
plaintiffs were known creditors who had been entitled to actual
notice of the proceedings and the claims bar date.  The
bankruptcy court then reserved ruling on the issue of whether the
plaintiffs' claims were dischargeable.

     Chemetron appealed the bankruptcy court ruling to U.S.
District Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania, which
reversed the bankruptcy court's grant of the motion to file late
claims.  The district court held that the plaintiffs were not
known creditors and that the notice published in the two national
newspapers were sufficient to alert them to the bankruptcy
proceedings.  The district court also ruled, without explanation,
that the plaintiffs' claims were dischargeable as a result of the
bankruptcy action.

     The plaintiffs appealed to the Third Circuit, which affirmed
the district court finding that the plaintiffs are unknown
creditors.  In Tulsa Professional Collection Service Inc. v.
Roper, 485 U.S. 478, 490 (1988), the U.S. Supreme Court
characterized a known creditor as one whose identity is either
known or "reasonably ascertainable by the debtor" Circuit Judge
Jane R. Roth wrote.  Generally, debtors are expected to identify
known creditors through a careful search of their own books and
records and further efforts are not required, she explained.

     In this case, she said, the bankruptcy court replaced the
"reasonably ascertainable" standard with a "reasonably
foreseeable" standard.  Under that test, the bankruptcy court
said Chemetron knew or should have known that it was reasonably
foreseeable that it would suffer claims from individuals living
near the sites making them known creditors.

     This "reasonably foreseeable" standard is an incorrect rule
of law that imposes an impossible burden on debtors, the Third
Circuit found.  None of the claimants currently live near the
site and some have moved as far away as Texas.  "We are hard
pressed to conceive of any way the debtor could identify, locate,
and provide actual notice to these claimants," Judge Roth said.

     Having affirmed the district court's ruling that the
plaintiffs were unknown claimants in the bankruptcy action and
that the newspaper notices, therefore, were sufficient to inform
them of the proceedings, the circuit court found that the
district court erred in failing to consider whether the
plaintiffs' failure to file their claims in a timely manner was
due to "excusable neglect."  The appellate panel remanded that
issue to the district court with instructions to consider the
totality of the circumstances and the potential impact on
Chemetron.

     The Third Circuit also vacated the district court's ruling
that the plaintiffs' claims were discharged by the bankruptcy
action and remanded that issue to the bankruptcy court.  Because
the bankruptcy court had postponed ruling on the issue of
discharge, it was not an appealable order and, therefore, was not
properly before the district court, the Third Circuit said.

     Circuit Judge H. Lee Sarokin concurred in the judgment but
said that the Third Circuit went to far in discarding the
"reasonably ascertainable" test entirely.  "These tests are not
mutually exclusive, or even at odds.  They address separate
issues," Judge Sarokin wrote.  One has to do with whether a
debtor knew or should have known a claim would be brought while
the other has to do with the debtor's ability to identify a
potential claimant, he said.

     The Jones plaintiffs were represented by William Mitchell
and Deborah J. Papushak of Armstrong, Mitchell & Damiani,
Cleveland.  Chemetron was represented Dennis G. Terez of Squire,
Sanders & Dempsey, Cleveland and George L. Cass of Buchanan,
Ingersoll, Pittsburgh.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

IL APP. CT. AFFIRMS
CARRRIER WIN ON LATE
NOTICE GROUNDS

     A company that waited 14 months to notify its insurers that
it might be partly liable for cleaning a hazardous waste site
cannot claim insurance coverage, the Illinois Appellate Court,
First District stated in an opinion published Dec. 14.
Industrial Coatings Group Inc. v. American Motorists Insurance
Co. et al., No. 1-94-1491 (IL App. Ct., 1st Dist.).

     Industrial Coatings Group Inc. learned in February 1986 that
it faced potential liability for hazardous waste contamination at
a site in Griffith, IN, where Industrial's predecessor had sent
used machinery solvent for processing and return.  The appellate
panel wrote that the policyholder should have notified its
carriers at that time.

     The predecessor Joanna Western Mills Co. had sent dirty
solvent to the American Chemical Services site from 1959 to 1985.
In operating the site for more than 25 years, American Chemical
buried more than 20,000 drums containing hazardous materials at
the site.  Many of the drums leaked or were punctured while other
hazardous materials were pumped into retention ponds on the site.

     After testing by the EPA, the American Chemical site was
designated as a Superfund site.  Industrial Coatings' insurance
policies provided that in the event of an occurrence, written
notice to the insurers giving the particulars was required "as
soon as practicable."  The insured, however, did not give written
notice to the insurers until more than 14 months after it had
received the EPA's letter requesting voluntary participation in
the site cleanup.

     The Cook County Circuit Court found that Industrial Coatings
gave its insurance companies late notice, that it thereby
breached a condition precedent to coverage under its insurance
policies and that the company, therefore, had no right to obtain
coverage for the pollution claim which had been asserted against
it.

     The state appellate panel affirmed, finding that the delay
in notice precluded coverage.  "Under Illinois law, a delay of
even a few months in giving notice breaches the policy as a
matter of law, defeats coverage and justifies the entry of
summary judgment for the insurance company," the court said.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

AZ APP. CT. REVERSES
INSURER WIN ON TCE
COVERAGE BAD FAITH SUIT

     The Arizona Court of Appeals on Nov. 30 overturned a trial
court's dismissal of a bad faith claim lodged by an environmental
tort defendant against its insurers.  Tucson Airport Authority v.
Certain Underwriters at Lloyd's, London et al., No. CV-95-0052
(AZ Ct. App.).

     The panel found that the policyholder adequately pleaded a
claim for the carriers' threat to drop a defense of a related
action in order to ensure the insured's cooperation in another
suit, and then withdrawing coverage because of the policyholder's
cooperation.

     The Tucson Airport Authority (TAA) had been named to two
class actions in the 1980s stemming from the disposal of TCE on
airport property.  The TAA settled with the class claimants for
$35 million in the understanding that recovery would be sought
only from the TAA's insurers.  Those class plaintiffs, in turn,
intervened in the declaratory judgment action brought against TAA
by its carriers.  The insurers contended that coverage was
unavailable to the intervenors, as the TAA was not liable for TCE
disposal by TAA's lessees.

     TAA was subsequently named to a third class suit (the Bahrs
suit); it tendered the Bahrs suit to its carriers, who agreed to
defend under a reservation of rights.  At this juncture, TAA
contended, the insurers threatened to drop the defense of the
Bahrs suit if TAA did anything to impede the insurers' attempts
to contest coverage in the declaratory judgment action.

     TAA complied, and the insurers obtained summary judgments
against the intervenors in the declaratory judgment action.  The
carriers then sought to have these judgments declared res
judicata in TAA's pending cross-action for declaratory judgment.
When TAA contested the insurers' res judicata motion, TAA was
allegedly informed that such response action cost TAA "all
defense coverage and indemnity coverage for any and all
third-party tort liability claims arising from groundwater
contamination, including insurance coverage for the third-party
liability claims presented against TAA in the Bahrs (putative)
class action."

     TAA then amended its declaratory judgment suit to include a
bad faith count, arguing that the carriers breached their duty to
reasonably balance their interests against the interests of the
policyholder.  The Pima County Circuit Court dismissed the bad
faith count.

     In its reversal, the state appellate panel cited to Arizona
Supreme Court precedent stating that "one of the benefits that
flow[s] from the insurance contract is the insured's expectation
that his insurance company will not wrongfully deprive him of the
very security for which he bargained or expose him to the
catastrophe from which he sought protection....  Conduct by the
insurer which does destroy the security or impair the protection
purchased breaches the implied covenant of good faith and fair
dealing implied in the contract."

     After finding the bad faith allegations adequately plead,
the court considered the insurers' contention that the claim was
based on privileged communications made during pending coverage
actions by the insurers' counsel.  The panel was persuaded by the
California Supreme Court's 1985 ruling in White v. Western Title,
which drew a distinction between a bad faith claim "based
squarely on a privileged communication, such as an action for
defamation, and one based upon an underlying course of conduct
evidenced by the communication."

     The court found that the "gravamen of TAA's bad faith claim
is not a communication, but a course of 'wrongful and tortious'
conduct evidenced by the insurers' actions and communications
during the coverage actions. Furthermore, TAA's claim does not
assail a pleading but instead alleges that its insurers followed
a course of conduct in which they failed to perform their duties
fairly and in good faith."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
HAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

SD NY DENIES CARRIERS
JUDGMENT ON TRIGGER OF
COVERAGE, LOST POLICY

     U.S. District Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy of the Southern
District of New York on Nov. 22 denied summary judgment to
Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Co. and Liberty Mutual Insurance Co.
on a policyholder's coverage demands stemming from environmental
liabilities at a North Carolina site.  Unimax Corp. et al. v.
Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Co. et al., No. 92 Civ. 6115 (KTD) (SD
NY).

     The judge rejected the carriers' contention that North
Carolina law should be construed so as to find that no
occurrences triggering coverage happened during their policy
periods.

     In 1968, the insured Unimax Corp. purchased for its
subsidiary, JFD Electronics Corp., a television antenna
production facility located in Oxford, NC.  JFD leased the site
and operated the facility over the ensuing 11 years.  In 1979,
JFD sublet the site to an affiliate of Ventura Electronics Corp.,
which also assumed the facility's operations.  The following
year, JFD purchased the remaining interest from Unimax and
conveyed the site to Ventura.

     In 1986, volatile organic compounds were discovered in the
site's groundwater; the state and the EPA commenced a cleanup the
following year.  In 1988, Ventura's successor brought a CERCLA
cost recovery action against Unimax and JFD.  The EPA notified
the insureds that they were regarded as potentially responsible
parties with respect to the site in the fall of 1989; the
policyholders asserted they first learned of the contamination in
August 1988.

     That same month, the insureds tendered notice to both
Lumbermens and Liberty Mutual; both carriers refused coverage.
Lumbermens had written Unimax and JFD umbrella comprehensive
catastrophe liability coverage from 1969 through 1971; the
insureds asserted that Lumbermens had also issued them primary
policies covering 1968 through 1972.  Liberty Mutual issued the
policyholders primary CGL coverage from 1975 through 1979.

     Judge Duffy first considered the insurers' bid for summary
judgment on the ground that under North Carolina law, an
occurrence does not take place until discovery of contamination,
and that such discovery did not occur within the policy period.
The insureds rejoined that New York law should be applied, and
that an injury-in-fact trigger should be recognized.

     The court preliminarily concluded that no conflict existed
between the laws of the interested states.  "This case," the
judge wrote, "is centered on insurance policies " i.e. contracts
" and the appropriate conflicts analysis begins with each State's
contract laws.  New York and North Carolina apply the same rules
for contract interpretation."

     In looking to the policy language, the court found that it
"clearly states that an occurrence takes place if physical injury
results during the policy period."  The judge further noted that
under either state's precedents, "contamination is deemed to be
physical injury."  The court further rejected Liberty Mutual's
contention that the insureds never responded to its summary
judgment with evidence demonstrating that contamination occurred
within the policy period.  "The focus of Liberty Mutual's motion
was that contamination was not considered under the law to be
property damage until the discovery of the damage," Judge Duffy
stated.

     The court then considered the policyholder's cross-motion
for summary judgment on the issue of the carriers' duty to
defend.  The judge granted the motion as to Lumbermens, finding
the insurer to have made no argument beyond the trigger issue.
Liberty Mutual's policy contained a pollution exclusion clause,
which the insurer argued would void coverage if New York law were
applicable to the dispute.

     On the present facts, however, the court noted that "an
endorsement to the contract specifically deleted the pollution
exclusion clause with regards to operations in North Carolina.
If New York law governs these policies, that endorsement was
misleading and created, at least, an ambiguity [that] must be
construed in favor of the insured."

     The court ultimately refused the insureds judgment against
Liberty Mutual, finding the insurer had raised a genuine of
material fact as to the plaintiffs' knowledge of their claims.
JFD had knowledge of its potential liabilities as early as 1972,
Liberty Mutual had argued and, therefore, its notice was
untimely.
               The policyholders claimed that Liberty Mutual waived its
late notice defense by not raising the defense in its 1990
disclaimer of coverage; the carrier responded that it had
insufficient knowledge of the underlying facts until discovery
had commenced.  Judge Duffy denied the insureds summary judgment
on the waiver issue.

     The court lastly denied Lumbermens summary judgment with
respect to the two CGL policies it asserted were lost.  With
respect to the 1968 through 1971 policy ("1ZL policy"), the court
noted that the insureds proffered some 100 pages bearing the 1ZL
number that was turned over by Lumbermens during discovery.  "The
only pages known to be missing are two endorsements and the
policy jacket," the court wrote.  "I find it incredible that
Lumbermens would retain this file, which imposes liability, but
lose the documents that may have relieved Lumbermens of
liability."  Judge Duffy stated that liability would be measured
according to the terms of the policy as discovered in the
insurer's files.

     As to the 1971 through 1972 policy ("8ZL policy"), the judge
found that the plaintiffs had demonstrated its existence, due to
a reference to it in Lumbermens' umbrella policy.  The court
denied  the insureds summary judgment, however, finding that
material issues of fact remained concerning the 8ZL policy's
content.

     Bruce Bienboim and Aidan Synnott of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind,
Wharton & Garrison, New York, represent the insureds.

     Frank Torres of Evans, Orr, Pacelli, Norton & Laffan, P.C.,
New York, and Judith Fournie Helms, Catherine M. Connelly-Warren
and Katherine E. Tammaro of Tressler, Soderstrom, Maloney &
Preiss, Chicago, represent Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Co.  Robert
L. Joyce of Wilson, Elser, Moskowitz, Edelman & Dicker, New York,
represent Liberty Mutual Insurance Co.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-4</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B011-36</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev17.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001637 text/html 38246
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:14:27 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:25 GMT
Content-length: 38057
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev17.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>WASHINGTON UPDATE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>CONGRESSIONAL OUTLOOK FOR 1996 in the environmental and workplace health</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(224 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>LEGISLATION IN PROGRESS, previously introduced by the U.S. House of</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(86 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS BRIEFS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>BREAST IMPLANT SETTLEMENT, revised recently, is underway.  A federal</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(104 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>DIOXIN REASSESSMENT is being examined by the House of Representatives</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(106 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INDUSTRY TALK</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>WHITE PAPER REPORT ON U.S. INDUSTRY SAFETY & HEALTH PRACTICES assesses the</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(92 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>TOXICOLOGY REPORT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>LEAD (CAS RN 7439-92-1) as a teratogen is reviewed.  Recent evidence is</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(56 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE, the sixth plot, the results of animal</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(94 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>REPRODUCTIVE TOXICOLOGY is reviewed and discussed in three articles.  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(75 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>ARMY CHEMICALS thought to be hazards were evaluated.  Chemistry, toxicity,</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(35 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INTERNATIONAL FORUM</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>DEVELOPING NATIONS have various diseases and disorders, many caused by</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(91 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>CARCINOGEN INFORMATION SOURCES AND DATABASES available to Polish</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(89 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ENVIRONMENTAL REPORT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>AIR POLLUTION review of epidemiological evidence of health effects of</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(129 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>TRIHALOMETHANE PRECURSORS in surface drinking water in Egypt resulting from</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(57 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>RADON (CAS RN 10043-92-2) indoors is reviewed in a risk-based approach to</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(79 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>ENDOCRINE DISRUPTORS, pollutants ubiquitous in the environment, may disrupt</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(152 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>INDOOR AIR REVIEW, a newspaper on indoor air quality, carries articles on</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(66 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>INDOOR AIR QUALITY POLICY OPTIONS are examined for reducing human</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(89 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>METAL CONTAMINATION in water at varying concentrations may cause fish</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(65 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>OCCUPATIONAL ALERT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>RESPIRATOR choices and industrial responsibilities in their administration</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(61 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>FOUNDRY INDUSTRY in South Africa was studied to estimate the extent of</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(110 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>DOMESTIC WASTE COLLECTION was reviewed in the light of occupational health</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(148 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>LEAD (CAS RN 7439-92-1) may cause postural stability problems in exposed</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(56 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>OCCUPATIONAL DISEASE information notices provided on diagnosis of such</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(40 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>COOLING LUBRICANTS require skin protective measures in handling. </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(48 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>COAL MINE DUST hydroxyl radical generation and possible implications for</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(125 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>MANGANESE PARKINSONISM, HAZARDOUS WASTES AT YALE UNIVERSITY, and other news</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(91 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>CARBON DISULFIDE (CAS RN 75-15-0) occupational exposure mortality of Dutch</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(85 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CRYSTALLINE SILICA HEALTH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(53 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>ELECTROPLATING TOXIC CHEMICALS formation, health effects, and detection are</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(54 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>CENTER FOR SAFETY IN THE ARTS services will continue to be provided by the</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(90 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>MANGANESE (CAS RN 7439-96-5) TOXICITY information is available in a</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(96 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>ALPHA AMYLASE may be an occupational allergen in the baking industry.  In a</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(140 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>COTTON-caused ocular and nasal irritation in workers in Lancashire cotton</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(86 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>HAZCHEM REFERENCE SHELF</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#34"><LI>EXPOSURE FACTORS HANDBOOK from EPA (1995, ISBN 0-86587-509-X, 866 pp.,</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(44 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#35"><LI>BRETHERICK'S HANDBOOK OF REACTIVE CHEMICAL HAZARDS, 5th ed., ed. by P.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(79 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#36"><LI>1996 OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH & SAFETY BUYERS GUIDE (1996; print, $99.00;</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(57 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>HAZCHEM ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS AND SERVICES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#37"><LI>HEALTH AND SAFETY SOFTWARE product focus covers compliance and regulations</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(61 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MEETING NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#38"><LI>OSHA 29 CFR 1910.120(e) TRAINING COURSES from Field Safety Consulting will</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(67 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#39"><LI>FUNDAMENTALS OF INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE continuing education short course will</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(39 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#40"><LI>INDOOR AIR QUALITY continuing education course will be offered Feb. 22-23,</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(53 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

CONGRESSIONAL OUTLOOK FOR 1996 in the environmental and workplace health

CONGRESSIONAL OUTLOOK FOR 1996 in the environmental and workplace health and
safety areas is reviewed.  1996 begins with uncertainty over the future of
many bills, among them Superfund, clean water, regulatory reform, RCRA reform;
the 104th Congress is seen as extremely anti-environment by many environmental
leaders.  Many predict that there will be continued attacks on environmental
legislation by use of indirect methods, such as riders on appropriations
bills.  Superfund sites will cost $2.5 billion annually for cleanup; some
method must be used to raise more money, because Superfund itself only
provides $1 billion a year.  Environmental groups want groundwater cleanup
separate from industry cleanup responsibilities.  Tax authority for Superfund
expired on Dec. 31, 1995; the corporate environmental income tax and chemical
and petroleum excise taxes that raised Superfund monies must be reauthorized.
      A number of bills have bipartisan support:  H.R. 2036 would reform
land-disposal restrictions under RCRA; safe drinking water (S. 1316) requires
risk assessment and cost-benefit analyses to set standards, but exempts
by-products of chlorination (trihalomethanes).
      Legislation to reform OSHA failed to move in 1995, and prospects are dim
for 1996.  Bills under consideration would move OSHA away from strict
enforcement and more toward technical support and assistance to firms.  These
changes are not well supported by industry and are vigorously opposed by
labor.  (Chemical & Engineering News, pp. 14-20, Jan. 8, 1996)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

LEGISLATION IN PROGRESS, previously introduced by the U.S. House of

LEGISLATION IN PROGRESS, previously introduced by the U.S. House of
Representatives and the Senate in the environmental, occupational health, and
transportation areas, is listed below; bill number(s), committee(s) to which
bills were referred, floor action, and conference action are as follows:
      H.R. 2601, S. 1316: Overhauls procedures used to set drinking water
contaminant standards, and give states more flexibility to protect drinking
water sources.  Senate Environment & Public Works committee reported, amended
11-7-95; Senate amended, passed 11-29-95.
(Chemical & Engineering News, pp. 18-19, Jan. 22, 1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

BREAST IMPLANT SETTLEMENT, revised recently, is underway.  A federal

BREAST IMPLANT SETTLEMENT, revised recently, is underway.  A federal district
court judge ordered the printing and mailing of a revised offer to silicone
gel breast implant recipients, which promises to speed payments to them from
three major manufacturers--Bristol-Myers Squibb, Baxter Health Care, and
3M--but excludes Dow Corning.  Overwhelming costs of litigation forced Dow
Corning, the maker of about half of the implants, into bankruptcy.  The
revised settlement seeks to avoid thousands of court cases that would
otherwise clog the judicial system for years.  The total value of the revised
settlement is nearly impossible to assess.  (Chemical & Engineering News, pp.
15-16, Jan. 22, 1996)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

DIOXIN REASSESSMENT is being examined by the House of Representatives

DIOXIN REASSESSMENT is being examined by the House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Energy & Environment in an attempt to see how science is used
by EPA.  Several hearings looked into EPA's long-running reassessment of the
health effects of dioxins and dioxin-like compounds.  The goal of the hearings
was not to determine if EPA were right or wrong but to find out if the agency
is making appropriate use of the resources available.  The implication is that
EPA has used these resources selectively to support public policy objectives
that may not stand up to more rigorous scientific scrutiny.  (Chemical &
Engineering News, p. 22, Jan. 1, 1996)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

WHITE PAPER REPORT ON U.S. INDUSTRY SAFETY & HEALTH PRACTICES assesses the

WHITE PAPER REPORT ON U.S. INDUSTRY SAFETY & HEALTH PRACTICES assesses the
impact of the anti-regulatory era in Washington, with budget, staff, and
spending plans for the coming year.  The White Paper helps safety, industrial
hygiene, and environmental professionals plan for 1996.  Data generated for
this report comes from questionnaires.  Subjects include the outlook for 1996,
industry benchmarks, plant-size benchmarks, and the regulatory outlook.  The
36-page report was prepared by Industrial Safety & Hygiene News and was issued
as a supplement to the December 1995 issue of American Industrial Hygiene
Association Journal.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

LEAD (CAS RN 7439-92-1) as a teratogen is reviewed.  Recent evidence is

LEAD (CAS RN 7439-92-1) as a teratogen is reviewed.  Recent evidence is
presented on the following issues: lead is a human teratogen, impact of
pregnancy and lactation on lead toxicokinetics, and the contribution of
paternal lead exposure to adverse reproductive outcome.  Human studies data
are the primary focus.  (Teratology 50(5), 367-373 (1994); Chemical Abstracts
122:98868z, 1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE, the sixth plot, the results of animal

CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE, the sixth plot, the results of animal bioassays
published in the general literature, 1989-1990, and by the National Toxicology
Program from 1990-1993, is presented in this volume.  A companion publication
in the same volume is the PRESIDENT'S CANCER PANEL CONFERENCE ON AVOIDABLE
CAUSES OF CANCER, which contains papers on tobacco use; alcohol; diet and
nutrition; hormones and medication; occupational exposures; general
environmental exposures; radiation; infectious agents; gender, ethnicity, and
environment; genetic susceptibility and environmental interactions; and a
program summary and recommendations.  (Environmental Health Perspectives, Vol.
103, Supplement 8, 320 pp., 1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

REPRODUCTIVE TOXICOLOGY is reviewed and discussed in three articles.  

REPRODUCTIVE TOXICOLOGY is reviewed and discussed in three articles.   Effects
of occupational chemicals on reproductive functions (scientific reviews of
Soviet literature on toxicity and hazards of chemicals); adverse effects of
environmental chemicals on the outcome of human pregnancy, including
transplacental poisoning, spontaneous abortions, and birth defects; and
reproductive risks of heavy metals and pesticides in women are discussed.
(Reprod Toxicol, ed. by Mervyn Richardson, pp. 45-62, 73-97, 167-83 (1993);
Chemical Abstracts 122:98847s, 98849u, 98853r, 1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

ARMY CHEMICALS thought to be hazards were evaluated.  Chemistry, toxicity,

ARMY CHEMICALS thought to be hazards were evaluated.  Chemistry, toxicity,
environmental pollution, and pollutants of such materials are discussed;
drinking water health advisories are offered.  (Drug Metab Review 26(4),
649-662 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:98834k, 1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

DEVELOPING NATIONS have various diseases and disorders, many caused by

DEVELOPING NATIONS have various diseases and disorders, many caused by
environmental problems.  Environmental health problems are particularly acute
in Ghana, where there is heavy metal pollution and aflatoxins, natural
carcinogens, in the diet.  LEAD (CAS RN 7439-92-1) exposure is prevalent among
artisans who smelt metal retrieved from old batteries, and effluents from
heavy industry bring MERCURY (CAS RN 7439-97-6), ARSENIC (CAS RN 7440-38-2),
ALUMINUM (CAS RN 7429-90-5), and lead into the environment.  These issues and
many others are discussed in the article.  (Chemical & Engineering News, pp.
27-28, Jan. 1, 1996)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

CARCINOGEN INFORMATION SOURCES AND DATABASES available to Polish

CARCINOGEN INFORMATION SOURCES AND DATABASES available to Polish researchers
are discussed.  These sources include the series "IARC Monographs on the
Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk to Humans"; official lists of carcinogens from
individual countries; a periodical that surveys compounds tested for
carcinogenic activity; the Annual Report on Carcinogens, a series on chemicals
in the workplace; a guide on carcinogens; and computer databases, including
the INCAR, IRIS, IRPTC, RTECS CHEMINFO factual databases and the CANCER-CD,
MEDLINE, TOXLINE, NIOSHTIC and MEDIP bibliographic databases.  In Polish.
(Med Pr 46(3), 289-300 (1995); Medline 96-045331)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

AIR POLLUTION review of epidemiological evidence of health effects of

AIR POLLUTION review of epidemiological evidence of health effects of
particulates is summarized.  Acute exposure to elevated levels of particulates
has been associated with increased cardiopulmonary mortality, hospitalization
for respiratory disease, and increased incidence and duration of respiratory
symptoms, as well as exacerbation of asthma, declines in lung function, and
restricted activity.  Small deficits in lung function, higher risk of chronic
respiratory disease and symptoms, and increased mortality have also been
associated with chronic exposure to respirable particulates.  Health effects
have been observed at levels below current U.S. National Ambient Air Quality
Standards.  Although the biological mechanisms involved are poorly understood,
recent evidence supports the hypothesis that such air pollutants are a risk
factor for respiratory disease and cardiopulmonary mortality.  (Inhalation
Toxicol 7(1), 1-18 (1995); Chemical Abstracts 122:98861s, 1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

TRIHALOMETHANE PRECURSORS in surface drinking water in Egypt resulting from

TRIHALOMETHANE PRECURSORS in surface drinking water in Egypt resulting from
chlorinated pesticides, could not be removed efficiently by traditional
treatments.  Reuse of agricultural drainage increases the level of
trihalomethane precursors; chloramination is the recommended drinking water
disinfectant to minimize the level of exposure to these potential
carcinogens.  (Water Treat 9(3), 209-214 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:
114100a, 1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

RADON (CAS RN 10043-92-2) indoors is reviewed in a risk-based approach to

RADON (CAS RN 10043-92-2) indoors is reviewed in a risk-based approach to
health protection criteria.  A WHO/EURO working group met in Israel early in
1993 to assess the significance of health risks from indoor radon, to develop
a unified approach to the control of radon exposure, and to advise on the
communication of associated health risks.  This article summarizes the
deliberations of this working group and its conclusions and recommendations.
(Indoor Air 4(3), 197-201 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:1410079, 1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

ENDOCRINE DISRUPTORS, pollutants ubiquitous in the environment, may disrupt

ENDOCRINE DISRUPTORS, pollutants ubiquitous in the environment, may disrupt
human fertility and possibly the ability to reproduce.  Both male and female
reproductive health are being disturbed by environmentally occurring chemicals
that change fertility by causing, among numerous effects, low sperm counts,
testicular abnormalities, and altered sexual development of both male and
female fetuses, as well as cancers and other diseases of both sexes.  Among
the chemicals cited as endocrine disruptors are PHTHALATES, ingredients in
various plastics, paints, inks, and varnishes; ALKYL PHENOLS, produced by
microbial degradation of detergent, paint, herbicide, and cosmetic chemicals;
and ORGANOCHLORINE PESTICIDES, including DDT (CAS RN 50-29-3), ALDRIN CAS RN
309-00-2), and DIELDRIN (CAS RN 60-57-1).  Studies on these chemicals began
because certain wildlife, exposed to these substances, had suffered changes in
reproductive ability.  The implications for human reproduction are discussed
and reviewed.  (The Sciences, Vol. 36, No. 1, pp. 12-15, Jan.-Feb. 1996;
Health, pp. 52-56, Oct. 1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

INDOOR AIR REVIEW, a newspaper on indoor air quality, carries articles on

INDOOR AIR REVIEW, a newspaper on indoor air quality, carries articles on
public awareness of air quality as federal funding declines; ASTM-developed
carbon dioxide indoor standard; environmental tobacco smoke issues less
important; radon standards; indoor air quality training; building management;
and the year's review in Congress, NIOSH, EPA, OSHA, and other organizations;
and filtration news.  (Indoor Air Review, Vol. 5, No. 10, 24 pp., Dec. 1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

INDOOR AIR QUALITY POLICY OPTIONS are examined for reducing human

INDOOR AIR QUALITY POLICY OPTIONS are examined for reducing human exposures.
There are different policy approaches available for reducing human exposures
to indoor pollutants, an exceptionally complex task.  Options range from
waiting for more definitive information to enacting regulatory standards, with
many variations in between.  This article presents some of the factors
policy-makers must consider in establishing indoor air quality policies and
the role researchers should play in ensuring that such policies are based on
the best, available scientific information.  (Indoor Air 4(3), 202-211 (1994);
Chemical Abstracts 122:140873z, 1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

METAL CONTAMINATION in water at varying concentrations may cause fish

METAL CONTAMINATION in water at varying concentrations may cause fish tissue
responses to stress differently, according to recent studies.  Tissues of fish
living in metal-contaminated waters show signs of chronic stress; the fish
responded poorly to additional pollution and to stresses of confinement.  The
study expands the range at which pollutants exert deleterious effects on
organisms.  (Science News, Vol. 149, p. 21, Jan. 13, 1996)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

RESPIRATOR choices and industrial responsibilities in their administration

RESPIRATOR choices and industrial responsibilities in their administration are
reviewed in a multi-part article.  Administering a program and OSHA
requirements are discussed, and tabulations of self-contained breathing
apparatus, supplied-air respirators, air-purifying respirators, and powered
air-purifying respirators are presented.  For each type of respirator,
company, brand, model, mask material, and other features are noted.
(Environmental Protection, pp. 15-18, 20-22, 24-26, Nov. 1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

FOUNDRY INDUSTRY in South Africa was studied to estimate the extent of

FOUNDRY INDUSTRY in South Africa was studied to estimate the extent of
occupational health monitoring for dust and pneumoconiosis and to assess dust
levels and the prevalence of pneumoconiosis.  In only 13 (16%) of the 82
foundries responding were regular periodic full-sized chest radiographs done.
Dust levels were measured every 3 years or more frequently in 20 foundries
(24%).  Uncontrolled dust hazard was evident in nine foundries surveyed
between 1983 and 1992.  The prevalence of silicosis ranged from 0% to 10.3%
and increased with duration of service.  The study provided convincing
evidence of neglect of occupational health by the foundry industry.  (S Afr
Med J 84(12), 851-855, 1994; Medline 96-012992)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

DOMESTIC WASTE COLLECTION was reviewed in the light of occupational health

DOMESTIC WASTE COLLECTION was reviewed in the light of occupational health
problems.  The last decade has seen a growing interest in recycling  domestic
wastes, and action plans to increase such recycling have been adopted by many
governments.  In 1975, an excess risk for chronic bronchitis was reported for
waste collectors in Switzerland and data from the Danish Registry of
Occupational Accidents and Diseases also indicate an excess risk for pulmonary
problems among waste collectors compared with the total work force.  High
incidence rates of gastrointestinal problems, irritation of the eye and skin,
and symptoms of organic dust toxic syndrome (influenza-like symptoms, cough,
muscle pains, fever, fatigue, headache) have been reported among workers
collecting the biodegradable fraction of domestic waste.  They may be exposed
to multiple agents such as dust-containing bacteria, endotoxins, mold spores,
glucans, volatile organic compounds, and diesel exhaust. (Sci Total Environ
170(1-2), 1-19, 1995; Medline 96-007153)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

LEAD (CAS RN 7439-92-1) may cause postural stability problems in exposed

LEAD (CAS RN 7439-92-1) may cause postural stability problems in exposed
workers.  Workers so exposed had significantly poorer postural stability than
did the control group.  Lead may affect certain parts of the whole sensory
neural axis resulting in postural instability when visual input is cut off.
(Occup Environ Med 51(11), 768-771 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:1113559v,
1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

OCCUPATIONAL DISEASE information notices provided on diagnosis of such

OCCUPATIONAL DISEASE information notices provided on diagnosis of such
diseases are discussed.  Occupational exposures and diagnosis include the
causal agent toxic effects and exposure criteria.  (Report of the Comm Eur
Communities EUR 14768, 212 pp. (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:1136702, 1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

COOLING LUBRICANTS require skin protective measures in handling. 

COOLING LUBRICANTS require skin protective measures in handling.  Occupational
skin diseases in the metalworking industry are attributed to cooling
lubricants in 30-40% of all cases.  Medical and technical protection measures
and the diagnosis of diseases are discussed.  In German.  (Tribol
Schmierungstech 41(1), 30-33 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:141154c, 1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

COAL MINE DUST hydroxyl radical generation and possible implications for

COAL MINE DUST hydroxyl radical generation and possible implications for coal
workers'pneumoconiosis (CWP) are reviewed and discussed.  Occupational
exposure to coal mine dust causes CWP and other pulmonary diseases by
mechanisms that remain unclear.  Because the hydroxyl radicals (-OH) may play
an important role in the pathogenesis of CWP, the potential role of bituminous
coal mine dust samples for catalyzing the generation of -OH from hydrogen
peroxide were studied.  Based on the results, it was proposed that higher
concentrations of surface iron in coal mine dust may be involved in the
generation of increased levels of -OH radicals and may play an important role
in the development of CWP in different coal mining areas.  (Free Radical Biol
Med 18(1), 11-20 (1995); Chemical Abstracts 122:141142x, 1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

MANGANESE PARKINSONISM, HAZARDOUS WASTES AT YALE UNIVERSITY, and other news

MANGANESE PARKINSONISM, HAZARDOUS WASTES AT YALE UNIVERSITY, and other news
items are featured in the December 1995 issue of ACTS Facts (Arts, Crafts and
Theater Safety).  MULTIPLE CHEMICAL SENSITIVITY, RESINS AND GLUES AND
PARKINSONISM, YELLOW DYE AND CANCER, MOLYBDENUM TRIOXIDE CANCER STUDY, CERAMIC
FIBERS AND PLEURAL PLAQUE, and MANGANESE PARKINSONISM LAW SUIT and other items
are featured in the January 1996 issue of ACTS Facts.  ACTS cites material
from various sources important to occupational health in the fine arts.  ACTS
Facts, 181 Thompson St., #23, New York, NY 10012-2586; telephone 212-777-0062.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

CARBON DISULFIDE (CAS RN 75-15-0) occupational exposure mortality of Dutch

CARBON DISULFIDE (CAS RN 75-15-0) occupational exposure mortality of Dutch
workers is reviewed and discussed.  Epidemiological studies carried out in
Great Britain, Scandinavia, and the United States indicate that workers
exposed to carbon disulfide are at increased risk for cardiovascular disease
(CVD) mortality, and in particular for ischemic heart disease mortality.  The
results of the Dutch study show that exposure to relatively low levels of
carbon disulfide increases the risk of CVD mortality.  (Int Arch Occup Environ
Health 66(2), 103-110 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:1135655u, 1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CRYSTALLINE SILICA HEALTH

PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CRYSTALLINE SILICA HEALTH
EFFECTS: CURRENT STATE OF THE ART contains papers on exposure assessment,
epidemiology, in vivo toxicology, in vitro toxicology, and public policy.  The
proceedings are in a single issue of the journal Applied Occupational and
Environmental Hygiene, Vol. 10, No. 12, pp. 977-1156 (Dec. 1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

ELECTROPLATING TOXIC CHEMICALS formation, health effects, and detection are

ELECTROPLATING TOXIC CHEMICALS formation, health effects, and detection are
reviewed and discussed.  German legislation, technical regulations, the
process of toxics monitoring, definition and classification of hazardous
materials (threshold limit values), methods of detection, and measurement of
occupational exposure to hazardous compounds are presented.  In German.
(Metalloberflaeche 48(2), 72-74, 76-78 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:113281y,
1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

CENTER FOR SAFETY IN THE ARTS services will continue to be provided by the

CENTER FOR SAFETY IN THE ARTS services will continue to be provided by the New
York Foundation for the Arts.  CSA lost funding due to governmental funding
cutbacks, but the newsletter, Art Hazards News, will be continued under the
auspices of NYFA.  This issue's main article is devoted to pyrotechnics,
fire, and explosion effects.  Other articles and abstracts from the literature
cover potentially hazardous chemicals used in the arts and the health
implications of these materials for artists and performers.  (Art Hazards
News, Vol. 18, No. 5,  8 pp., 1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

MANGANESE (CAS RN 7439-96-5) TOXICITY information is available in a

MANGANESE (CAS RN 7439-96-5) TOXICITY information is available in a pamphlet,
Potter's Manganese Toxicity", a reprint of an article published in the journal
Contact. The pamphlet discussed the experiences of a raku potter who developed
Parkinson-like symptoms of manganese poisoning and metal fume fever.
Manganese fumes emitted during raku firing are more dangerous than breathing
or ingesting the dusts; symptoms are flu-like, and range from fatigue,
insomnia, confusion, forgetfulness, blackouts, vision changes, loss of
three-dimensional perception, slow reflexes, and headaches, to loss of bladder
control, motor skills, and more.  (The Crafts Report, p. 4, Jan. 1996)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

ALPHA AMYLASE may be an occupational allergen in the baking industry.  In a

ALPHA AMYLASE may be an occupational allergen in the baking industry.  In a
group of 226 bakers and pastry makers and in 88 students of a training school
for bakers, skin sensitivity to the common allergens wheat and alpha amylase
were evaluated.  Findings confirm that bakers are at risk of sensitization not
only to wheat allergen but also to amylase from Aspergillus oryzae.  The
enzyme should be included in the list of substances to be tested among bakers
in whom an occupational allergy is suspected, but particular care should be
taken in evaluating the cutaneous response.  Further investigations are also
needed to identify the source of risk and to better define the characteristics
of the enzyme and the relationship between skin reaction to amylase,
sensitization to wheat, and atopy.  In Italian.  (Med Lav 85(2), 142-148
(1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:141148d, 1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

COTTON-caused ocular and nasal irritation in workers in Lancashire cotton

COTTON-caused ocular and nasal irritation in workers in Lancashire cotton and
synthetic fiber mills was studied.  A cross-sectional study of 1048 cotton
workers and 404 synthetic fiber workers showed that work-related ocular and
nasal irritation are the most common symptoms experienced by cotton textile
workers.  There was no relation between these symptoms and atopy, byssinosis,
or dust concentration.  It is likely that they relate to as yet unidentified
agents unrelated to concentration of cotton dust.  (Occup Environ Med 51(11),
744-748 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122: 113657t, 1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

EXPOSURE FACTORS HANDBOOK from EPA (1995, ISBN 0-86587-509-X, 866 pp.,

EXPOSURE FACTORS HANDBOOK from EPA (1995, ISBN 0-86587-509-X, 866 pp., $125)
includes more than 350 tables of data on standard factors needed to calculate
human exposure to toxic chemicals.  Available from Government Institutes,
Inc., 4 Research place, Suite 200, Rockville, MD 20850; telephone
301-921-2355.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

BRETHERICK'S HANDBOOK OF REACTIVE CHEMICAL HAZARDS, 5th ed., ed. by P.

BRETHERICK'S HANDBOOK OF REACTIVE CHEMICAL HAZARDS, 5th ed., ed. by P. Urben
(1995, 2 vol., ISBN 0-7506-1557-5, $225), also available in CD-ROM and
computer software ($595 each), provides a single source of logically arranged,
readily accessible data on chemical hazards arranged by specific chemical by
formula; fire-related data; indexes to chemical names and Chemical Abstracts
Service Registry Numbers; and by class, group, and topic.  Available from
Butterworth-Heinemann, 225 Wildwood Avenue, Woburn, MA 01801; telephone
800-366-2665; 617-928-2613; FAX 800-446-6520; 617-933-6333.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "36"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

1996 OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH & SAFETY BUYERS GUIDE (1996; print, $99.00;

1996 OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH & SAFETY BUYERS GUIDE (1996; print, $99.00; CD-ROM,
$149; both, $248) contains information on products and services.  More than
15,000 firms are listed in 13 major sections.  Geographic, product and
services, and alphabetic firm listing indexes are available.  For information
contact Stevens Publishing Corp., Directory Division, P.O. Box 2573, Waco, TX
76702-2573; telephone 800-727-7573.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "37"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

HEALTH AND SAFETY SOFTWARE product focus covers compliance and regulations

HEALTH AND SAFETY SOFTWARE product focus covers compliance and regulations
tracking, ergonomics and human factors, and safety training administration and
safety training electronic products.  For each product, as appropriate, are
listed company, product name, platform, operating system, hardware, database,
format, type of product, updates, local support, management tasks, personnel,
training, and other factors.  (Occupational Health & Safety, pp. 67-98, Oct.
1995)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "38"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

OSHA 29 CFR 1910.120(e) TRAINING COURSES from Field Safety Consulting will

OSHA 29 CFR 1910.120(e) TRAINING COURSES from Field Safety Consulting will be
presented according to the following schedule:  8-HOUR REFRESHER, Feb. 8,
1996, in North Haven, CT; 24-HOUR HEALTH AND SAFETY, Feb. 5-7, 1996, in North
Haven, CT; and 40-HOUR HEALTH AND SAFETY, Feb. 5-9, 1996, in North Haven, CT.
For information contact Field Safety Consulting, Inc., 28 Magee Avenue,
Stamford, CT 06902; telephone 203-964-9199; FAX 203-969-1325.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "39"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

FUNDAMENTALS OF INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE continuing education short course will

FUNDAMENTALS OF INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE continuing education short course will be
held in New Orleans, LA, on Feb. 26-Mar. 1, 1996.  For information contact
American Industrial Hygiene Association, 2700 Prosperity Avenue, Suite 250,
Fairfax, VA 22031; telephone 703-849-888; FAX 703-207-3561.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "40"></A>Copyright
HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet
January 1996

INDOOR AIR QUALITY continuing education course will be offered Feb. 22-23,

INDOOR AIR QUALITY continuing education course will be offered Feb. 22-23,
1996, in Chicago, IL.  Fee is $250.  For information contact Great Lakes
Center for Occupational and Environmental Safety and Health (M/C 922), School
of Public Health, University of Illinois at Chicago, 2121 West Taylor St.,
Chicago, IL 60612-7260; telephone 312-996-8842; FAX 312-413-7369.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-5</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B018-414</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev38.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001719 text/html 21864
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:15:07 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:34 GMT
Content-length: 21675
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev38.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
INDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNet <BR>
January 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>PSC PUBLIC HEARINGS ON WISCONSIN'S ELECTRIC INDUSTRY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(309 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>MURPHY OIL SUBSIDIARY AND TEMPLE-INLAND&nbsp;FOREST PRODUCTS FORM FIBERBOARD COMPANY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(269 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>INDONESIA'S DURI FIELD PRODUCES BILLIONTH BARREL OF OIL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(171 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>PARACELSIAN FILES PATENT APPLICATION&nbsp;OF IMPROVED AH-IMMUNOASSAY TECHNOLOGY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(215 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>GENETIC ENGINEERING PROMISES NEW&nbsp;BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES IN AGRICULTURE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(306 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>EPA APPROVES MONSANTO'S INSECT-PROTECTED COTTON</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(218 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>CHIRON AWARDS CONTRACT TO SEPRAGEN&nbsp;FOR LARGE-SCALE PURIFICATION SYSTEMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(366 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>CPUC IS WATCHFUL REGARDING RF/EMF FROM CELLULAR TOWERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(217 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>APHIS GEARING UP TO EVALUATE TRANSGENIC INSECT RELEASES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(570 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
INDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

PSC PUBLIC HEARINGS ON WISCONSIN'S ELECTRIC INDUSTRY

The Public Service Commission of Wisconsin (PSC) has prepared
an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) as part of its
investigation into changing the structure and regulation of
the electric utility industry in Wisconsin
(PSC Docket 05-EI-114). This EIS is now available for public
review. A separate report by a special Advisory Committee to
the Commission lists recommendations for changes in electric
generation, transmission and distribution.

The PSC held public information meetings and hearings on
the future of Wisconsin's electric industry in six cities,
November 27 through December 5. The hearings were required in
order to obtain public comment on the EIS, but comments and
testimony were also encouraged on the investigation itself,
including the upcoming Commission Advisory Committee Report.
The Commission decisions (based on the comments and
testimony, EIS, and Advisory Committee Report) may affect
customer electricity costs, customer electric services, and
the choices available for each.

The EIS has been prepared because this investigation could
result in the adoption of principles and policies that
significantly alter the regulatory responsibilities of the
Commission. Changes in how the Commission regulates electric
utilities could, in turn, have environmental and economic
consequences. The EIS explores the economic, environmental and
social costs

The PSC encourages members of the public and organizations to
attend the hearings or write and send comments on the EIS.
Comments and testimony on the EIS must be submitted to the
Public Service Commission offices in Madison by 4:30 p.m. on
Wednesday, December 6, 1995. Comments and testimony will be
considered by the three-member Commission as it determines
what recommendations it will make to the Legislature on
December 12.

For more information, or to request a copy of the
Environmental Impact Statement or the Advisory Committee
Report, please write to the Public Service Commission of
Wisconsin, Electric Division, P.O. Box 7854, Madison, WI,
53707-7854, or call 608/267-2896.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
INDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

MURPHY OIL SUBSIDIARY AND TEMPLE-INLAND
FOREST PRODUCTS FORM FIBERBOARD COMPANY

Deltic Farm & Timber Co., Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of
Murphy oil Corporation (NYSE:MUR), and Temple-Inland Forest
Products Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Temple-
Inland, Inc. (NYSE:TIN), have formed Del-Tin Fiber, L.L.C.
and plan for the entity to construct and operate a medium
density fiberboard plant at a site near El Dorado, Arkansas.

The plant will cost an estimated $90 million, will have an
annual production capacity of 150 million square feet and will
have more than 100 employees when it begins production in late
1997. The site selection and project design are subject to
regulatory approvals, completion of final engineering and
resolution of other site-related issues. Construction is
scheduled to commence in the summer of 1996.

Del-Tin's Chairman, Ron Pearce, stated, "We are pleased to
announce our selection of the El Dorado/Union County area for
this exciting new venture. We deeply appreciate the efforts of
the El Dorado chamber of Commerce and its local team, city and
county officials, the Arkansas Highway & Transportation
Department and the Arkansas Industrial Development Commission,
all of whom worked together to provide us with a site having
the necessary infrastructure for a project of this magnitude.
Del-Tin looks forward to a long and prosperous future in Union
County."

Medium density fiberboard (MDF) is used as a substitute for
lumber in the furniture, flooring and molding industries
throughout the world. MDF is an engineered wood product
composed of wood residuals (chips, shavings and sawdust) held
together by an adhesive bond. unlike most other lumber
substitutes, MDF possesses many of the same machining and
strength characteristics of solid wood.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
INDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

INDONESIA'S DURI FIELD PRODUCES BILLIONTH BARREL OF OIL

Indonesia's giant Duri oil field, currently producing at a
record 300,000 barrels daily (b/d), yielded its billionth
barrel in September, Chevron and Texaco reported.

Duri is operated by PT Caltex Pacific Indonesia (CPI), a 50/50
Chevron/Texaco affiliate working under a long-term production
sharing agreement with Pertamina, Indonesia's state oil
company.

Located in Sumatra, Duri was discovered in 1941 and began
producing in 1958. Output peaked at 65,000 b/d in 1963, and
then declined steadily until 1984. At that time, CPI engineers
determined that Duri's large reserves, shallow depth, thick
oil and tight reservoir rocks made it an ideal prospect for
"steamflood" technology, which injects steam to heat the oil
so that more of it flows to the production wells.

In 1985, CPI began a major steamflood at Duri, launching a
new era of production growth. Plans call for continued
expansion of the steamflood, already the world's largest.
Meanwhile, advanced seismic imaging is helping to maximize oil
recovery. Duri currently represents about 40 percent of CPI's
total oil output.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
INDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

PARACELSIAN FILES PATENT APPLICATION
OF IMPROVED AH-IMMUNOASSAY TECHNOLOGY

Paracelsian, Inc. (NASDAQ: PRLN), of Ithaca, NY, has filed a
U.S. patent application that describes improvements in its Ah-
Immunoassay technology.  Paracelsian anticipates that
enhancements over its currently licensed technology will
provide markets for the assay in Asia and Eastern Europe.

"The simplicity and speed of the new formats are ideal for
countries with enormous environmental problems and little
financial support for high-cost instrumental analysis," said
inventor Geoffrey Wheelock, Ph. D., Director of Analytical
Research at Paracelsian. "Much of Asia and Eastern Europe are
rebounding from decades of environmental neglect."

Ah-Immunoassay technology is a biologically-based diagnostic
test designed to detect and determine the level of dioxin-like
compounds found in the environment. The disclosure filed at
the U.S. Patent and Trademarks Office in Washington, D.C.
describes methods for increasing sensitivity, reducing
background interference, increasing sample throughput,
reducing the time required to perform the assay, and reducing
reagent use.

Paracelsian is a biotechnology company engaged in the
discovery of pharmaceuticals and the development and marketing
of assays for Unproved cancer diagnosis. The Company's
technologies are based on a biochemical process known as
signal transduction -- a form of information processing within
the cell. The Company has in effect several licensing deals,
including an agreement with Dow Chemical for Paracelsian's
Ah-Immunoassay signed in January 1995.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
INDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

GENETIC ENGINEERING PROMISES NEW
BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES IN AGRICULTURE

Sales of genetically engineered products to the agriculture
and food industries will rise from a few hundred million
dollars in 1995 to $3 billion by 2000 and nearly $10 billion
by 2005.  The growing role of these products will provide
substantial productivity gain in agriculture, contribute to
ongoing changes in industry structure, provide novel products
with consumer benefits, and create new business opportunities
in agricultural inputs, agricultural processing, and chemical
production.

Decision Resources, one of the industry leaders in
biotechnology market analysis, has published "Biotechnology in
Agriculture: Impacts on Products and Markets."

This study predicts that over the next decade, the
biotechnological impacts in several industry sectors will be
dramatic, with major shifts in market share and sales of new
products. These sections include herbicides, insecticides,
animal health, seeds, downstream processes and products,
diagnostic and detection technology, and production of high-
value compounds in animals and plants.

"Biotechnology in Agriculture: Impacts on Products and
Markets" is derived from interviews with industry participants
and a combination of proprietary and publicly available
information. It analyzes the global regulatory environment and
intellectual property issues relevant to the commercialization
of agricultural biotechnology, profiles the 20 major
agricultural biotech companies, and tracks the activities of
the numerous players in the market.

The report is available for $2,600 for the first copy and $350
for each additional copy. For more detailed information or to
place an order, contact Jean Carbone, Decision Resources, Bay
Colony Corporate Center, 1100 Winter Street, Waltham, MA
02154.  Phone: 617.487.3737 Fax: 617.487.5750

Decision Resources is an international consulting and
publishing firm that evaluates world markets, emerging
technologies and competitive forces in growth industries
worldwide. DR Reports are research publications providing
cost-effective, timely business intelligence to help decision
makers in the life sciences stay abreast of today's
innovations and remain successful in volatile climates.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
INDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

EPA APPROVES MONSANTO'S INSECT-PROTECTED COTTON

The EPA has granted regulatory approval for Monsanto's
Bollgard(TM) gene, which provides cotton plants with season-long,
in-plant protection from such major lepidopteran insect pests as
the cotton bollworm, tobacco budworm and pink bollworm. EPA's
registration of the Bollgard gene, the first insect-protection
gene to be approved for cotton and only the third for any crop,
follows the successful completion earlier this year of regulatory
reviews by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA). The notification marks
Monsanto's fourth allowing full commercialization of a
genetically engineered crop in the past six months.

The insect control protein introduced into cotton plants was
originally isolated from a specific strain of a natural soil
bacterium, Bacillus thuringiensis. The genetically-engineered
seeds containing the Bollgard gene are covered by Monsanto
patents, some of which have been issued, while others are
pending.

According to James Tobin, Monsanto Cotton Business Director, the
Bollgard gene will be widely available to America's cotton
farmers for the 1996 planting season. The gene has already been
incorporated into a number of popular cotton varieties.

The technology will be commercially introduced by Delta and
Pine Land Company, the leading U.S. cotton seed company.
Additional programs to commercialize Bollgard cotton are
underway at the Jacob Hartz Seed Company and Stoneville
Pedigreed Seed Company, Inc.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
INDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

CHIRON AWARDS CONTRACT TO SEPRAGEN
FOR LARGE-SCALE PURIFICATION SYSTEMS

Sepragen Corporation (NASDAQ: SPGNU, SPGNZ, SPGNA, SPGNW), of
San Leandro, CA, has signed a contract to build multiple
QuantaSep LS (large-scale) systems for Chiron Corporation. The
contract, valued at approximately $400,000, includes hardware,
software, documentation and validation. The systems have been
designed to meet the specific needs of Chiron's drug
manufacturing efforts.  Delivery is scheduled for January
1996.

"The interactive team efforts between Sepragen and Chiron
engineers resulted in the custom design of the process
purification systems. These will enable the rapid purification
of large quantities of two new potential Chiron drugs for
their clinical trial needs," said Vinit Saxena, president and
chairman.

"This is part of our overall strategic plan to provide
state-of-the-art, large-scale purification systems to
biopharmaceutical companies to enhance and optimize their
manufacturing processes.

"We selected Sepragen for this purchase based on the
exceptional service that they have provided to us in the
past," said Mark Pemberton, director of Bulk Pharmaceutical
Manufacturing at Chiron Corporation.

The QuantaSep LS is a large-scale, computer-controlled
chromatography workstation consisting of hardware,
electronics, software, sensors and detectors.

"Sepragen's advanced technologies have added significant
economic value to the manufacturing processes of many FDA
approved pharmaceutical drugs worldwide," Saxena said.

Sepragen Corporation is a pioneer in the field of large-scale
chromatography - the next generation technology in the
separations field. The company markets a patented radial flow
chromatography (RFC) technology that utilizes a novel
hydrodynamic column design in which the flow is directed
radially from the outside to the center of the column. The
surface areas are larger and the radial flow path (bed depth)
is shorter. The combination of these features results in
higher flow rates, lower back pressures, and increased
volumetric productivity over traditional axial columns. This
is further magnified in large-volume chromatography
applications.

Sepragen also markets computer-controlled process
chromatography workstations and process technology to the
biotechnology, food and environmental industries. The
company's products are being used by leading biotech
companies to reduce manufacturing costs and commercial
production time to market, as well as by food and
environmental companies to produce new value-added products
and processes. Based in San Leandro, California, the company
markets its proprietary RFC technology and services worldwide.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
INDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

CPUC IS WATCHFUL REGARDING RF/EMF FROM CELLULAR TOWERS

The California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) today
ordered cellular utilities to identify and address public
concerns- potential health problems from electromagnetic field
(ENF) and radio-frequency (RF) exposure in siting and building
new cellular towers. It urged cellular companies to site
facilities away from schools and hospitals, and to restrict
access to sites with warning signs and barriers.

The Commission's jurisdiction is limited to cellular towers
and related facilities - it does not regulate cellular phones.
The federal Food and Drug Administration regulates RF
emissions from consumer/industrial devices and is looking into
RF emissions from hand-held cellular phones.

Due to public concern and scientific uncertainty regarding the
potential health effects of EMF exposure, the Commission
examined what steps should be taken to mitigate the-health
effects, if any, of RF and EMFs from the 1,000 cellular
facilities in California. It found no scientific link between
EMFs and adverse health effects on humans from cellular
facilities.

A steering committee composed of one representative each from
the CPUC Commission Advisory and Compliance Division, CPUC
Division of Ratepayer Advocates, state Department of Health
Services, Cellular Carriers Association of California, and
citizens concerned About Telecommunications EMF held an EMF
informational workshop on July 21, 1993 for interested
individuals and organizations. The workshop was videotaped for
those who could not attend.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
INDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNet
January 1996

APHIS GEARING UP TO EVALUATE TRANSGENIC INSECT RELEASES

Now that the first application to field test a genetically
engineered insect has been submitted to USDA/APHIS, a
Transgenic Arthropod Team has been formed in the Biotechnology
Permits Unit of Biotechnology, Biologics, and Environmental
Protection (BBEP), the agency that oversees introductions of
transgenic organisms and products for USDA. The Team will be
responsible for the development of guidance for the release of
genetically modified arthropods into the environment, and the
preparation of environmental documents associated with those
releases.

APHIS/BBEP already provides this sort of guidance to
prospective applicants seeking to field test genetically
engineered plants and microorganisms under permit or
notification. The agency distributes USDA-APHIS Technical
Bulletin 1783, "User's Guide for Introducing Genetically
Engineered Plants and Microorganisms" to help investigators
identify potential risks to the environment, and advises
applicants concerning the data that must be available for
agency review.

With more insect release proposals expected, the Transgenic
Arthropod Team is compiling a Bibliography Associated With the
Introduction of Transgenic Arthropods, which is publicly
available in database format. It currently contains 32 general
citations and reviews, 32 references on field evaluations,
and 58 titles on laboratory methods. The Team will continue
adding relevant publications and expand the database, and
encourages others to suggest additional publications that
should be included. In addition to the bibliography, the
following information on how proposed releases will be
reviewed is available on the BBEP homepage
(http://www.aphis.usda.gov/bbep/bp).

The evaluation process first considers what the risks would
be if the introduced organism was not transgenic. The analysis
at this point would be the same as for the introduction of a
classical biological control organism and would require such
information as: (1) phylogenetic position of the organism and
characteristics of near relatives, (2) geographic origin and
range, to include temperature and relative humidity tolerances
and diapause attributes, (3) host and habitat preferences, (4)
dispersal characteristics, (5) life table attributes, (6)
interactions with other species, and (7) the relationship
between the organism and currently employed pest management
strategies.

The evaluation process would next consider whether the genetic
alterations have altered the risks associated with the
unmodified organism. The fundamental risk assessment issue to
be addressed is: Will the genetic alteration modify
ecologically or environmentally relevant properties of the
organism? To properly address this issue, APHIS would need to
consider such information as: (1) how the recipient organism
was transformed through recombinant DNA technology, to include
characteristics of the donor, vector, and recipient organisms
and a description of the methods employed, (2) the
characteristics of the modified organism, to include the
stability of the new genotype and the probability of gene
transfer to other organisms, (3) potential impact of the
transgenic arthropod on native populations, communities, and
ecosystems, and (4) methods for evaluation of the safety of
the transgenic organism in field trials before unrestricted
release.

In summary, the APHIS evaluation process would basically
consider the attributes of the unmodified organism, the
attributes of the genetic alteration, the phenotype of the
modified organism compared to the unmodified organism, and the
attributes of the accessible environment. Only after
sufficient information is provided in these four areas of
concern will APHIS be able to determine the appropriateness of
a release into the environment.

APHIS welcomes comments at any time concerning the present and
future regulation of transgenic arthropods. These comments
can be directed to Dr. Orrey P. Young at oyoung@aphis.usda.gov
or at 301-734-8565 (voice) or 301-734-5992 (fax)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-6</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B019-37</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev40.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001754 text/html 39960
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:16:07 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:35 GMT
Content-length: 39771
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev40.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNet <BR>
September 18, 1991<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>INDUSTRY, GOVERNMENT REPS SPAR WITH ENVIROS OVER WASTE-ENERGY MORATORIUM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(518 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>EPA'S NEW LANDFILL REGS APPLAUDED BY NSWMA, CRITICIZED BY ENVIROS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(617 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>BFI STOCK FALLS AFTER COMPANY LOWERS 4TH-QUARTER EARNINGS PROJECTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(519 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>DELAWARE AUTHORITY PICKS ABB RESOURCE RECOVERY FOR WASTE-ENERGY PLANT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(596 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>MIFA CLOSES $342-MILLION REFINANCING FOR SEMASS ROCHESTER EXPANSION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(992 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>MECKLENBURG COUNTY, N.C., TO ISSUE RFP FOR 600 T/D MASS-BURN PLANT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(219 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>EPA SEEKS COMMENTS ON USED OIL OPTIONS; STRESSES SUPPORT FOR RECYCLING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(623 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>DENVER SELECTS CAMP DRESSER & MCKEE TO STUDY LOWRY LANDFILL SITE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(132 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>WHEELABRATOR, REF-FUEL AND ENERGY ANSWERS REVISE GREEN ISLAND PLANS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(432 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>KEEP AMERICA BEAUTIFUL (KAB) LAUNCHES SOLID WASTE WORKSHOP SERIES in</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(161 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>SWANA RFQ DRAWS 49 PROSPECTIVE CONTRACTORS FOR EPA'S MITE PROGRAM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(199 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>MID-AMERICA WASTE SEEN MAINTAINING 25%-30% ANNUAL EARNINGS GROWTH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(387 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
September 18, 1991

INDUSTRY, GOVERNMENT REPS SPAR WITH ENVIROS OVER WASTE-ENERGY MORATORIUM

   At the latest round of Senate hearings over Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act reauthorization, representatives of industry and local
government officials strongly opposed a proposal by the environmental group
Clean Water Action that there be a moratorium on the construction of new
waste-to-energy plants until the year 2000, and that incinerator ash be
managed as a hazardous waste.
   The moratorium and incinerator ash proposals have been endorsed by a
broad coalition of national environmental groups, and legislation to
achieve those goals introduced by Rep. Peter Kostmayer (D-Pa.) has won the
endorsement of 24 House co-sponsors. However, the main Senate RCRA bill,
S. 976, sponsored by Sen. Max Baucus (D-Mont.) contains no such provisions,
and Baucus' skeptical questioning last week of the Clean Water Action
representative suggested that it is unlikely to be amended to do so.
   Dr. Henry Cole, director of science and policy for Clean Water Action,
argued that the moratorium was needed in part to confront the ''mercury
crisis in this country.'' As well, he said, waste-to-energy competes
directly with recycling for materials, and for scarce capital.
   Asked Baucus: ''Why would a moratorium be necessary if the Clean Air
Act (mercury emissions) reduction provisions'' were implemented and
enforced as called for under that law? Cole replied that he did not have
confidence EPA would effectively implement the provisions, and that,
anyway, this was not his sole reason for supporting a moratorium.
   Under questioning from Baucus, Randall Franke, representing the National
Association of Counties, the National League of Cities, and the Solid Waste
Association of North America, stated this his groups ''are equally adamant
and opposed'' to a moratorium on waste-to-energy, and the designation of
incinerator ash as hazardous. Said Franke: ''We need more options (for
solid waste management), not less.''
   AllenMoore, president of the National Solid Wastes Management
Association, said that while there had been ''temporary disruptions'' at a
few waste-to-energy facilities due to materials diversion caused by
recycling, in general there was no conflict between resource recovery and
recycling. ''You can accommodate any level of recycling,'' said Moore, as
long as waste-to-energy plants are built at the outset as part of an
integrated waste management solution.
   In his testimony, Paul Varello, deputy chair of NSWMA's Institute of
Resource Recovery, said that several recent field tests ''make clear that
municipal waste combustor ash is not a 'hazardous waste.' '' Based on
findings that incinerator ash disposed in a landfill meeting the relevant
technical standards ''presents no significant risk to human health and the
environment,'' Varello said that several provisions in S. 976 ''could be
improved.''
   Added Varello: ''Specifically, several provisions in S. 976 would
impose more stringent requirements on landfills where ash and municipal
solid waste is disposed than for landfills where only municipal solid waste
is disposed. These provisions reflect the old view that the disposal of
combined ash (bottom and fly ash) from waste combustors presents a greater
threat to human health and the environment than the disposal of municipal
solid waste. A series of recent studies suggest otherwise.''

Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
September 18, 1991

EPA'S NEW LANDFILL REGS APPLAUDED BY NSWMA, CRITICIZED BY ENVIROS

   The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's issuance September 11 of the
first comprehensive federal Subtitle-D municipal landfill standards should
''bolster confidence in landfilling'' and ''help level the playing field,''
EPA Administrator William K. Reilly said last week.
   The regs were generally applauded by industry for providing
environmental safeguards that will facilitate the construction of needed
new landfills. At the same time, the regs drew fire for their
''loopholes'' from environmentalists, whose recent lawsuit finally forced
EPA to issue the long-delayed regs when it did.
   The EPA regs, issued under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act,
include location, facility design and operation, groundwater monitoring,
financial responsibility, and closure requirements, in addition to cleanup
requirements for existing contamination. They are generally to take effect
24 months from publication in the Federal Register, with the exception that
ground-water monitoring and corrective action requirements are phased-in,
allowing up to five years for compliance.
   Under law, states will be required to incorporate the EPA standards into
their current state permitting programs. EPA approval of the state program
is then required, with the Agency retaining the authority to enforce its
standards in cases where a state program is not approved.
   In states with EPA-approved permitting programs, landfills must be
designed to ensure drinking water standards are not exceeded in
groundwater. States without EPA-approved programs are required to have
landfills designed with a composite liner made of synthetic material
covering a two-foot clay liner.
   At the same time, the regs provide states with approved program
flexibility to alter landfill requirements ''to accommodate the wide
variety of local conditions that exist around landfills,'' said EPA. Under
certain conditions, states with EPA-approved programs can approve
alternative landfill designs, allow use of alternative daily cover
materials, or modify the rule's 30-year post-closure care period.
   While this approach was cited by Reilly as an example of the Agency
having ''worked hard'' to reduce burdens that the rules might place on
communities, this flexibility was criticized by the Sierra Club for
enabling states to enact ''potentially weaker'' landfill and groundwater
monitoring standards. This, said the Sierra Club's Daniel Weiss, would
allow ''some landfills to evade strict groundwater protection requirements
which perpetuates the threat of drinking water contamination across the
nation."
   The Sierra Club also faulted the regs for not requiring leak detection
systems which would detect leaks before they contaminated groundwater, and
called on Congress to plug this and other loopholes.
   Allen Moore, president of the National Solid Wastes Management
Association, noted that the waste services industry ''has anxiously
awaited'' the EPA regs ''because they enumerate the measures being taken by
our industry to protect the environment and to assure public health and
safety in the land disposal of our nation's wastes.''
   Added Moore: ''Hopefully, these new regulations will be a catalyst for
eliminating the backlog that exists in some states where permitting and
siting of new disposal facilities have been halted due to a lack of federal
environmental protection standards. Now, using these new rules as a
building block, these stalled projects can proceed and we can begin siting
and developing the capacity to meet our future waste disposal needs.''
   Among other standards included in the EPA regs:
   -- Location requirements restrict the siting of new landfills near
airports and in ecologically valuable wetlands or areas subject to natural
disasters such as floodplains, fault areas and seismic zones.
   -- Operation standards include daily cover, methane gas monitoring,
stormwater controls, and programs to keep regulated hazardous waste out of
landfills.
   -- Closure and post-closure care include placing a final cover over the
landfill, final cover maintennace, groundwater and methane gas monitoring,
and leachate management for 30 years.

Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
September 18, 1991

BFI STOCK FALLS AFTER COMPANY LOWERS 4TH-QUARTER EARNINGS PROJECTION

   Not even the publication of RCRA Subtitle-D regulations by the
Environmental Protection Agency helped stop the fall of Browning-Ferris
Industries stock, which fell nearly six points in the 10 days following the
company's prediction of lower fourth-quarter earnings.
   BFI filed an 8-K with the Securities and Exchange Commission Sept. 3,
estimating that its fourth-quarter earnings would be 15%-25% less than its
third-quarter earnings. Earlier the company had predicted a 10%-15% drop
over the previous quarter. Net income of 28-32 cents per share is expected
for the fourth quarter, which ends Sept. 30, down from 38 cents for the
third quarter. The company also estimates income from operations for fiscal
1991 will be 12%-15% lower than the $257 million reported for 1990.
   BFI stock dropped four points to 21-3/4 after the 8-K was filed, and had
fallen another 1-7/8 by Sept. 12, the day after Subtitle D was published.
   In the 8-K report, BFI blamed lower revenues both in the third and
fourth quarters on lower commercial waste volumes as a result of the
recession, as well as state waste minimization requirements and the
diversion of a portion of the waste stream from the company's higher margin
collections and landfill operations to the lower margin recycling
business.
   Fletcher Thorne-Thomsen, BFI's vice president for investor relations,
said the company is disappointed with the results, but he would not predict
when the company would come out of the slump, nor would he name the
number-one cause of the company's economic troubles.
   A former BFI official said that in addition to the recession a major
cause of the firm's economic problems is poor management. ''The company is
just in turmoil right now,'' he said. ''Sure business is down, but it's
still solid; and saying recycling has hurt is crazy because it saves air
space, and that air space will be worth more next year than it is today.''
   Other industry observersagree that the company has a management problem.
One analyst pointed out that, while other waste management firms are
having some financial troubles because of the recession, they are not
nearly as bad as BFI has experienced.
   However, at least one Wall Street firm--Smith Barney--has some positive
words. Analyst Ken Leung is advising his clients to buy because, ''The
stock is cheap and we think it has bottomed out.''
   Leung says BFI will clearly benefit in the long run from the new
Subtitle-D regulations, which he predicts will reduce the 6,000 existing
solid waste landfills to 2,000. He adds, however, that in the near term the
new rules may put downward pressure on disposal prices, as small landfill
owners scurry to fill existing facilities that can not meet the new
requirements.
   In other BFI news, on Sept. 4 the company declared a regular quarterly
cash dividend of 17 cents per common share of stock, payable Oct. 4. At the
same time, it announced that Frank W. Montfort would fill the newly created
office of vice president, chief quality officer. Montfort had been
divisional vice president, operations.

Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
September 18, 1991

DELAWARE AUTHORITY PICKS ABB RESOURCE RECOVERY FOR WASTE-ENERGY PLANT

   The Delaware Solid Waste Authority Board has selected ABB (Asea Brown
Boveri) Resource Recovery Systems to start negotiations for the design,
construction and operation of a 500-ton/day waste-to-energy plant.
   The mass-burn facility will allow the authority to manage solid waste
generated as the result of future increased growth in Sussex County, said
the authority. The amount of the contract was not made public.
   ABB and two other companies, Foster Wheeler Power Systems and
Westinghouse Electric Corporation submitted ''excellent proposals for the
project,'' said an authority spokesman. The authority's staff, consultants
and board members conducted exhaustive evaluations of the three proposals,
he said.
   The general view was that any one of the three companies would do a good
job, he continued. Cleanliness of operations, technical capability,
operating experience, guarantees, economic, and financial strengths were
considerations in the selection process, said the official.
   ''ABB is a multi-national company with revenues of $27-billion and about
215,000 employees. ABB brings together the best of American, Swedish,
Swiss and German technology in a worldwide high technology company,'' said
the authority official. ABB acquired the U.S. firm of
Combustion-Engineering, Inc., a Delaware corporation. The authority
believes that ABB can provide Delaware with a state-of-the-art and
environmentally sound waste-to-energy facility, he said.
   The plant will be located at the authority's Southern Solid Waste
Management Center at Jones Crossroads, Sussex County, Delaware. Front-end
separation of materials will be accomplished through the ''Recycle
Delaware'' program, said the official. In addition, space will be
allocated for additional front-end separation in the Southern Reclamation
Plant if it becomes necessary in the future.
   The Southern Reclamation Plant will not only reduce material being
landfilled, but will also give the authority the opportunity to recycle
existing landfill space in the future. Timely completion of the plant will
be essential for assuring safe solid-waste disposal capacity in Sussex
County for several decades, said the official.
   The plant will have the best available control technology, which
includes the scrubbing of acid gases and a baghouse to remove fine
particulates. The authority will dispose of the ash from the
waste-to-energy plant in its Southern Solid Waste Management Center
landfill. With state and federal assistance and approval, the authority
will explore constructive uses for ash in order to minimize ash disposal in
the landfill, said the official.
   The waste-to-energy plant will generate approximately 15-megawatts of
electricity, according to officials at ABB, headquartered in Windsor,
Connecticut. Contract and price negotiations are expected to begin in
September and construction could begin as early as the fourth quarter of
1992. The plant will feature ABB's state-of-the-art environmental
controls, which have been subjected to rigorous testing by the U.S.
Department of Environmental Protection and its Canadian counterpart,
Environment Canada, said the official. The new facility will feature the
Combustion Engineering DeBartolomeis mass-burn grate system, proven in 79
plants around the world for 35 years, an ABB Combustion Engineering Systems
steam generator, and other ABB-manufactured products and systems.
   ''In today's market, winning this project against two quality
competitors is a significant accomplishment,'' said the ABB official.
''The Southern Reclamation Project will strengthen our company's position
in the North American waste to-energy market and enhance our stature as a
major full-service vendor.''
   ABB Resource Recovery Systems designs, builds and operates both
mass-burn and processed fuel waste-to-energy plants, including operational
facilities in Hartford, Detroit and Honolulu, and several projects
currently under development.

Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
September 18, 1991

MIFA CLOSES $342-MILLION REFINANCING FOR SEMASS ROCHESTER EXPANSION

   The Massachusetts Industrial Finance Agency (MIFA), Semass and
underwriters closed a $342-million refinancing and facilities expansion
bond issue for the shred and burn Semass Resource Recovery Facility in
Rochester, Massachusetts, said a project official.
   The Semass facility is a 52-megawatt shred and burn, waste-to-energy
resource recovery plant with a capacity of 1,900-tons of solid waste per
day. It is the largest facility of the three of its type in operation,
according to the official.
   The expansion would increase total electrical output of the plant to
78-megawatts and the waste acceptance capacity by about 900-tons/day to
2,800-tons/day. The expansion is slated to be on line by the end of 1993.
   Semass is still working on building permits and obtaining a review of
the plans by the Department of Environmental Protection. It is expected
that some work on the expansion can begin this fall, he said.
   The sources of revenue to repay principal and interest on the bonds are
waste disposal fees to be derived from waste disposal contracts with
municipalities and private sources, as well as income from the solid-waste
spot market, said the official.
   Other sources of revenue will be derived from the sale of electricity to
Commonwealth Electric Company, the sale of ferrous and non-ferrous
recyclables and interest earned on funds and accounts as defined by the
indenture.
   The principal security for the bonds includes a mortgage on the Semass
plant as well as a leasehold mortgage on a transfer station in Braintree,
Massachusetts. Prudential Securities was the lead underwriter and
placement agent for the issue, which consisted of $255.6-million of
tax-exempt, 24-year bonds, $61.6-million of taxable bonds and $25-million
in taxable subordinated notes.
   Greenwich Partners, Inc. of Greenwich, Connecticut, was underwriter and
placement agent for the tax-exempt bonds, and Stephens Inc. of Little Rock,
Arkansas, was underwriter and placement agent for the taxable portion of
the issue.
   The major portion of the financing consisted of $145.6-million non-
alternate minimum tax (AMT) and $110-million AMT tax-exempt revenue bonds.
The non-AMT bonds were priced at par to yield 9%. The AMT bonds were
priced at par to yield 9.25%.
   The $61.6-million of taxable bonds are priced at par to yield 11.25%;
the subordinated notes were priced at par to yield 13.2%. The major
portion of the tax-exempt bonds were purchased by bond funds, according to
Greenwich Partners. The Semass bond issue will refund $178.6-million of
outstanding debt and provide approximately $160-million of the expansion of
the existing Semass plant.
   The principal security for the bonds includes a mortgage on the Semass
plant as well as a leasehold mortgage on a transfer station in Braintree,
Massachusetts. There is also a debt service reserve fund consisting of
approximately one year's maximum debt service.
   The existing Semass facility currently has operating contracts with 31
municipalities, one regional waste disposal district, Otis Air National
Guard Base and a commercial waste hauler.
   The Semass facility in Rochester, Massachusetts, went into commercial
operation in 1989. The shred and burn technology is based on the principle
of shredding municipal solid waste and magnetically removing a large
percentage of the ferrous metals.
   Shredding solid waste to a uniform six-inch size enhances the fuel value
so that a ton of processed refuse fuel has the equivalent heating value of
72-gallons of fuel oil. The fuel is fed to boilers where it burns
primarily in suspension creating heat and producing steam to generate
electricity, he said. The process includes clean-up systems for
removing pollutants from boiler exhaust gases. A bottom ash processing
system recovers ferrous and non-ferrous metals and converts the residual
into a usable aggregate product.
   The fly ash is stabilized to form a non-toxic, non-hazardous mortar
which is then landfilled and does not pose a threat to the environment,
continued the official. Potential uses for the Semass boiler aggregate
include cinder blocks for construction and as a gravel substitute for road
bases.
   The patented flyash stabilization system ensures that no hazardous or
toxic material from the facility leaves the site, they said. Other
facilities using the process have operated in Albany, New York, since 1981,
and Hamilton, Ontario, since 1972.
   During the 12-month period ending July, 1991, the existing plant
operated at the industry standard of approximately 85% of capacity and is
expected to continue at this rate. In the first year after completion, the
expansion facility is expected to operate at 80% of capacity and to reach
the 85% level thereafter, said the Semass official.
   The Semass facility has, since it first began accepting waste in 1988,
processed 1,250,000-tons of solid waste, and produced over 700,000-megawatt
hours of electricity, enough to service over 50,000 houses in southeastern
Massachusetts.
   It has recovered over 117-million pounds of metal, enough to build at
least 58,000 new cars, said the official. About 5% of the waste is
recovered as recyclable metals which are marketed. These metals contribute
a ''small percentage'' to the overall profits of the plant, he elaborated.
''But we look at it as a source of revenue plus the avoided cost of
landfilling,'' he explained. It also contributes to the recycling goals of
the regions, according to the official.
   The facility has produced approximately 97,000-tons of boiler aggregate
from bottom ash; and enough gravel substitute to produce over 6-million
concrete blocks. Semass is currently reviewing tests with the Department
of Environmental Protection. ''We're very confident the aggregate will be
found suitable for use in construction of the expansion, and that we'll be
able to market it in the future,'' the project official added.
   Semass is a private, for-profit entity owned by subsidiaries of Energy
Answers Corporation of Albany, New York, Bechtel Group Inc., Stephens
Holding Company and ESI Energy, Inc., an affiliate of Florida Power and
Light Company.

Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
September 18, 1991

MECKLENBURG COUNTY, N.C., TO ISSUE RFP FOR 600 T/D MASS-BURN PLANT

   Officials in Mecklenburg County, N.C. plan to issue a request for
proposals on October 1 for a 600-ton/day, mass-burn incinerator to be built
at an industrial park south of Charlotte.
   The county is seeking a turnkey contractor that will design, construct
and operate the waste-to-energy plant, said Charles G. Horne, project
manager at the county's engineering department.
   The $80-million facility, which will be built at the Arrowood Industrial
Park, will generate steam for a General Tire factory and as much as 12.5 mw
of electricity for Duke Power, the local utility (Integrated Waste
Management, 20 March, 3).
   Horne told Integrated Waste Management that responses will be due Jan.
30, and that the county will select the winning proposal by the end of
March. Construction of the plant is likely to begin in the second half of
1993, with completion of the incinerator to follow in late 1995 or early
1996.
   Mecklenburg County's first waste-to-energy plant--a two-year-old,
235-t/d facility at the campus of the University of North
Carolina-Charlotte--was designed and built by MK Ferguson of Cleveland,
which also operates the incinerator for the county.
   Horne said that parties interested in receiving information about the
upcoming RFP should call 704-336-6178.

Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
September 18, 1991

EPA SEEKS COMMENTS ON USED OIL OPTIONS; STRESSES SUPPORT FOR RECYCLING

   The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency last week sought public comment
on a wide range of options for the listing and management of used oil. In
issuing what an Agency official termed a ''neutral'' proposal--which
included one option that would list used oil as a hazardous waste--EPA
officials reiterated their interest in promoting used oil recycling in an
environmentally safe manner.
   In providing a 45-day public comment period, Agency officials said this
would be followed by issuance of final EPA rules in May, 1992. At the same
time, EPA officials noted that used oil recycling is also being taken up by
Congress as part of its reauthorization of the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act. Agency officials said they expected last week's proposal
''would become part of a dialogue with Congress''--the consequences of
which are still difficult to predict.
   Last week's proposal expands upon a 1985 Agency initiative that proposed
to list used oil as a hazardous waste. The Agency noted again last week
that it had backed away from that proposal as a result of public comments
which ''convinced the (A)gency that listing used oil as a hazardous waste
would severely cripple the recycling industry.''
   A successful lawsuit challenging this inaction, brought by the Natural
Resources Defense Council and others, concluded with the court ruling that
EPA was required to make a listing determination for used oil based on the
statutory criteria for listing, which relates to whether a material is
toxic or not.
   In addition to its option to list all used oil as hazardous, a second
option would list as hazardous ''only those categories of used oil that are
typically and frequently hazardous based on their toxicity at the point of
generation, rather than after collection and likely contamination.'' The
Agency said oils that may be listed under this option are those from
gasoline-powered engines, including used oils from automotive crankcases,
marine engines, and piston-engine airplanes.
   A third option would be not to list any used oils as hazardous, and
instead rely on management standards ''to address the types of
mismanagement that have historically occurred with used oil, such as
contamination with hazardous waste due to mixing, road oiling, releases,
and spills associated with storage and transportation.'' Should this
option be adopted, the Agency said used oil handlers would still be
required to test oil destined for disposal for hazardous characteristics,
and then manage it accordingly.
   The Agency stated its belief that used oils pose hazards to human health
and the environment, ''and therefore need to be managed safely.'' The
latest proposal contemplates a ''phased-in'' two-stage approach to
management standards, which would include the following options:
   --''Provide management standards for all used oils to some extent.''
   --''Provide one set of management requirements for all used oil
handlers.''
   --''Provide basic management standards immediately that balance the
interests of protective regulation and the need to promote recycling.''
   The Agency proposed that the Phase-1 requirements ''would be fairly
simple 'good housekeeping' practices that address the improper storage and
disposal of used oil by generators, transporters, recyclers, and disposal
facilities.'' It added that ''good housekeeping'' would include such
practices as ''inspecting for leaks, releases, or spills; maintaining
storage tanks and containers; and tracking recycled used oil from
generators to recyclers.''
   This Phase I would also ban road oiling and establish guidelines that
presume that ''all used oil being disposed is destined for recycling.''
Phase II under this approach would involve possible additional management
standards and controls for used oil, if needed.
   The EPA proposal also considers possible incentives for promoting the
collection and recycling of used oil generated by people who change thier
own oil, the so-called ''do-it-yourselfers.''

Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
September 18, 1991

DENVER SELECTS CAMP DRESSER & MCKEE TO STUDY LOWRY LANDFILL SITE

   The city and county of Denver as well as the Denver Metro Wastewater
Reclamation District have selected Camp Dresser & McKee to perform a
remedial investigation/feasibility study and treatability study of the
Lowry Landfill, located in Arapahoe County, Colo., said a company
spokeswoman. The contract is valued at $1.6 million and completion of work
is slated for March, 1993, she said.
   The landfill accepted industrial and municipal wastes from 1967 to 1980,
is listed on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's National Priorities
List and will be cleaned up through Superfund, she said. Under the
contract, Cambridge, Mass.-based Camp Dresser & McKee will evaluate the
nature and extent of contamination and evaluate remedial alternatives for
the soils and surface water and sediments media, she explained.

Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
September 18, 1991

WHEELABRATOR, REF-FUEL AND ENERGY ANSWERS REVISE GREEN ISLAND PLANS

   Wheelabrator Technologies, American Ref-Fuel and Energy Answers Corp.
have all submitted revised proposals to build a 1,500-ton/day
waste-to-enegy plant in the Village of Green Island, New York, according to
John Brown, spokesman for the Green Island Solid Waste Advisory Committee.
   The town last month had sent letters to the firms allowing them to
submit additions or amendments to their initial plans for the venture
(Integrated Waste Management, 21 Aug., 1).
   Jack Risteau, project manager for Wheelabrator Corp., said the company
has added a shopping center to its proposal. ''We've added working with
Heritage Development Company of Syracuse to build a retail center which
could generate as much as $12 million a year for the village,'' he said.
''We've interested them (Heritage Development Company) enough that they've
entered into a working agreement with us, but we're in the early stage.''
   Risteau said both Wheelabrator Corp. and Heritage Development Company
are doing market studies and other analyses to determine the value of a
shopping center for the village. ''They (Green Island) don't have any
malls. It would be a real benefit for them. It would be about 300,000
square feet, and employ 750 people,'' he said. He said the mall would be
located north of Green Island's electric substation.
   Energy Answers Corp. has added new air pollution control equipment, and
upgraded the waste processing facility by adding a 500-ton/day construction
and demolition debris recycling facility and a paper recycling mill to its
proposal, according to Thomas Julien, Project Manager for Answers. Julien
said the company's unsure as to how much the entire package will cost
because the sizes of the facilities have not been determined. However, it
is expected that Energy Answers Corp. will generate between $3- and $4
million annually in payments to the village.
   Finally, American Ref-Fuel has proposed in its revision three different
projects to complement the waste-to-energy and recycling facilities
featured in its original plan. According to J. Kevin Cmunt, Project
Development Manager for American Ref-Fuel, one option is building a Kraft
Market Pulp Mill, which would produce uncoated freesheet, coated
groundwood, coated freesheet, uncoated groundwood and bristol at a rate of
600 t/d. This includes stationery, tablets, and copier paper.
   American Ref-Fuel also proposed a 100% recycled newsprint mill or a
linerboard facility. According to Cmunt, six leading paper manufacturing
companies have expressed interest in the projects. He added an addition of
a paper recycling project would result in benefits of $8,475,000 to
$10,850,000 to the Village of Green Island per year.

Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
September 18, 1991

KEEP AMERICA BEAUTIFUL (KAB) LAUNCHES SOLID WASTE WORKSHOP SERIES in

KEEP AMERICA BEAUTIFUL (KAB) LAUNCHES SOLID WASTE WORKSHOP SERIES in
Phoenix, Arizona on September 27. The newly-designed community workshops
are intended to educate citizens and public officials about solid waste
handling practices, according to an official of the Stamford,
Connecticut-based non-profit group.
   Future solid waste workshops will be scheduled around the country. ''The
new series will continue KAB's efforts to counter our growing dependence on
a declining number of landfills, the increasing amount of trash produced
each year, and the inability of communities to site new disposal
facilities,'' said the official.
   ''Our goal,'' he concluded, ''is to accelerate the training of concerned
local citizens and public officials to prepare them to assume greater roles
in planning and implementing solid waste management programs at the
community level.'' KAB is a national public education organization
dedicated to improving waste handling practices in 460 certified affiliated
communities in 40 states, including 19 official, state-affiliated
organizations.

Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
September 18, 1991

SWANA RFQ DRAWS 49 PROSPECTIVE CONTRACTORS FOR EPA'S MITE PROGRAM

   The Solid Waste Association of North America (SWANA) has received 49
responses to its request for qualifications (RFQ) from companies,
universities and laboratories seeking to be subcontractors to perform
evaluations under the Environmental Protection Agency's Municipal Solid
Waste Innovative Technology Evaluation (MITE) program.
   SWANA and the EPA recently entered into a three-year cooperative
agreement in which the association is assisting the agency in implementing
the evaluation program (Integrated Waste Management, 29 May, 2). EPA
established the program a year ago to ''help developers address barriers to
commercialization by providing objective, independent, third-party
evaluations of selected technologies,'' said a SWANA official.
   Information produced by the program will be used not only by technology
developers but by local governments that are responsible for day-to-day
management of municipal solid wastes, the official said.
   EPA's evaluation program in the first year included solidification and
stabilization of municipal waste combustion ash residues. Second year
activities are being directed at evaluating other strategies for managing
municipal solid wastes, such as recycling, landfilling, combustion and
materials processing.
   A SWANA spokesperson said the association had not yet established the
schedule for deciding on the RFQs and further evaluations.

Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNet
September 18, 1991

MID-AMERICA WASTE SEEN MAINTAINING 25%-30% ANNUAL EARNINGS GROWTH

   Mid-American Waste Systems Inc., which is one of the fastest growing and
most profitable solid waste companies n the U.S., should maintain annual
earnings growth of 25% to 30%, according to a report prepared by Stephen
Schweich, research analyst at Alex. Brown & Sons, Baltimore, Maryland.
   Mid-American revenues are growing at a better than 30% annual rate and
operating margins exceed 25%, he continued. Solid waste management is a
$28-billion per year industry in the U.S., and ''we believe Mid-American
can reach $300-million to $400-million in revenues by 1995 while
maintaining its current profit margins,'' said the report.
   The firm, based in Canal Winchester, Ohio, has extensive landfill
resources, well-managed transfer stations and collection operations,
growing special waste businesses, and experienced management, according to
Schweich. It has 17 operating landfills, 9 transfer stations and 8
collection companies.
   Its principal areas of geographic focus include Ohio, Indiana,
Pennsylvania, Illinois and West Virginia. New landfill sites are under
development in Florida, South Carolina, California and Colorado. In the
1986 to 1989 period, Mid-American's revenues grew from $4-million to
$48-million, and net income increased tenfold.
   The company's rapid geographic expansion came primarily from
acquisitions of 10 landfills and numerous waste collection companies in
Ohio, Indiana, Kentucky and Pennsylvania. Mid-American's basic acquisition
philosophy has been to buy companies cheaply, bring in professional
management, exploit synergies with other Mid-American operations, and
ultimately build critical mass and profitability, explained the analysis.
   During the past two years, Mid-American has added other territories to
its operations base including West Virginia, Georgia and Colorado.
Moreover, the company is pursing ''greenfield'' landfill projects in
California and Florida, elaborated the report.
   According to Alex. Brown estimates, the total North American solid waste
industry was about $28-billion in 1990. Municipalities and independent
operators control roughly 71% of the market. Waste Management handles 14.3%
of the waste, Browning-Ferris controls 8.9%, and Laidlaw 2.7%.
   Of the 3.4% of the waste handled by emerging players--representing
$950-million in 1990--Attwoods earned $338-million. Chambers Development
garnered $214-million, and Western Waste $190-milion. Mid-American
achieved revenues of $79-million, American Waste $61-million, Sanifill
$39-million. Republic Waste had revenues of $18-million, and Integrated
Waste, $12-million.

Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-7</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B019-78</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev30.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001844 text/html 32783
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:16:24 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:32 GMT
Content-length: 32594
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev30.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev30.gif"><BR><BR>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
MEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 9, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>***************&nbsp;SLANTS & TRENDS&nbsp;***************</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(389 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>JCAHO ISSUES BLUEPRINT FOR&nbsp;HOSPITAL WASTE MANAGEMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(117 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>NRC REJECTS THREE SCENARIOS&nbsp;FOR FUTURE OF LLW PROGRAM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(376 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>LATEST MARKET REPORT PREDICTS&nbsp;SAFETY SYRINGE SALES TO RISE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(397 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>HRCC TO CONSIDER NATIONAL MODELS&nbsp;FOR MINIMIZING MEDICAL WASTES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(277 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>ISWA FORMS NEW WORKING GROUP&nbsp;TO RESPOND TO MEDWASTE ISSUES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(123 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>ACQUISITIONS DRIVE SUCCESS&nbsp;FOR MID-SIZED WASTE FIRMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(200 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>EPA ESTIMATES STAFF LAYOFFS&nbsp;FROM REPUBLICAN BUDGET OFFER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(166 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>AUTOCLAVING VIEWED AS APPEALING&nbsp;FOR HOSPITAL WEIGHING WASTE OPTIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(258 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>EPA AUDIT POLICY SPELLS RELIEF&nbsp;FOR CERTAIN ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATORS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(376 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>NEW HAMPSHIRE WASTE REGULATORS&nbsp;AWAIT EPA REPORT, AIR STANDARDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(928 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>REUSABLE WASTE CONTAINER ISSUE&nbsp;HIGHLIGHTED AT WASTE EXPO '96</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(128 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>MEDWASTE NAMES NEW&nbsp;CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(148 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION&nbsp;ELECTS TOP OFFICIALS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(168 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev30.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
MEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 9, 1996

***************
SLANTS & TRENDS
***************


WHISTLEBLOWER UPDATE:  A Labor Department judge is slated to
hear arguments Jan. 31 on whether to grant whistleblower
status to a former employee of a sharps container
manufacturer who complained about the integrity of products
being shipped (MWN, Dec. 12, p. 206). In that case, DOL
Administrative Law Judge Samuel Smith ruled for the first
time the federal Environmental Protection Agency could
regulate sharps collectors under the Toxic Substances
Control Act .

THE LONG-AWAITED RULING could spell relief for whistleblower
Steve Balog. Dottie Balog, his wife, said she hoped the
government's budget problems would not interfere with the
Jan. 31 court trial. Much is riding on the decision. If
Steve Balog is granted whistleblower protection, then his
employer, Med-Safe Systems, would be barred from suing him.
Also, Balog could be eligible for back pay, legal fees, and
even his job, she said.

* * *

THE COST IS NOT EXCESSIVE for hospitals to switch from
incineration to either on-site autoclaves or regional
autoclave facilities for their medical waste management,
says a soon-to-be-released cost analysis by a New York
environmental group. "We're finding its a small part of
hospitals' operating budgets," said Center for Biology of
Natural Systems' Catherine Hill. "We think its feasible."
Hill said researchers focused on the "most accepted"
alternative to incineration in crunching numbers on the
attractiveness of abandoning incineration. The group, housed
at Queens College, also factored in the necessary waste
management costs after using the steam sterilizer.

MEDICAL WASTE BECAME A TARGET for the environmental group
when it embarked on a study of air pollution sources in the
Great Lakes (MWN, May 30, p. 84). That study recommended
medical waste be sterilized and landfilled, rather than
incinerated, to decrease dioxin compounds in the Great Lakes
region. According to Hill, EPA's dioxin numbers for medical
waste incinerators were accurate for the time data were
collected in 1989/1990. Since then, more than one-half of
the incinerators have shut down, so the report may not be an
accurate snapshot of today's dioxin burden, Hill noted.

THE GROUP's FINDINGS on the benefit of autoclaves is not
news to Vicky Jas at the Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center,
whose comprehensive cost analysis convinced the hospital to
shut down its incinerator and apply for a permit to operate
an autoclave (see story, p. 5).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev30.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
MEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 9, 1996

JCAHO ISSUES BLUEPRINT FOR
HOSPITAL WASTE MANAGEMENT


     The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare
Organizations (JCAHO) recently prescribed its plan for a
safe environment.

     According to the latest manual, hospital leaders
should: plan for waste management space, equipment and
resources; educate staff about the role of environment in
supporting patient care; develop standards to measure
hospital performance in managing and improving the
environment; and develop an Information Collection and
Evaluation System to continuously measure environmental
care.

     The manual outlines what should be included in a
hazardous materials and waste management plan, and the
standards for personnel to meet in selecting, handling,
storing, using and disposing of waste.

     For more information, contact JCAHO, One Renaissance
Boulevard, Oakbrook, Ill. 60181; 708-916-5635.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev30.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
MEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 9, 1996

NRC REJECTS THREE SCENARIOS
FOR FUTURE OF LLW PROGRAM


     None of the three Nuclear Regulatory Commission staff
scenarios for the future of the commission's low-level
radioactive waste (LLW) program is satisfactory, NRC's
Advisory Committee on Nuclear Waste (ACNW) concluded Dec.
29.

     Facing severe federal budget cuts, the staff report
looked at three scenarios: continue the current program,
reduce the program by eliminating or cutting back various
parts, or terminate all parts of the LLW program.

     The staff concluded the present program could not
continue at present budgetary levels, but the entire program
could not be abolished because that move would require major
changes in a number of pieces of federal legislation. The
only viable solution, therefore, is a drastically reduced
program.

     The major failing of the staff report "is the failure
to address the question of what the LLW program ought to be
in order to satisfy the mission of the NRC," ACNW Chairman
Paul Pomeroy said in his letter to NRC Chairman Shirley Ann
Jackson.

     The budgetary focus of the report fails to address
NRC's fundamental responsibility to protect the health and
safety of the public. "Budgetary reductions need to be made
in accordance with priorities set with reference to the
underlying mission of the NRC," ACNW said.

     Necessary elements in the reshaped LLW program are: a
staff that includes experts in each of the technologies
critical to evaluation of the siting, environmental impact,
operation and closure of LLW facilities; a program that
provides technical assistance to those preparing license
applications for LLW disposal facilities; a program that
maintains NRC's capability for processing license
applications from non-Agreement states for LLW disposal
facilities; and a program that identifies and supports
limited research activities in priority areas and assures
that the information value is maintained from studies that
are terminated or transferred to other programs.

* * *

NURSING STAFF INJURY is on tap in the new Institute of
Medicine (IOM) report to be released in mid-January. The
report-Nursing Staff in Hospitals and Nursing Homes: Is it
Adequate?- focuses on how the unprecedented change in the
health care industry has affected the occupational health of
nurses, as well as patient care. IOM kicked off the probe in
response to a congressional request. For information,
contact IOM, 202-334-2138.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev30.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
MEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 9, 1996

LATEST MARKET REPORT PREDICTS
SAFETY SYRINGE SALES TO RISE


     More than 4.8 million needles and syringes were sold in
the United States in 1994, and safety syringe sales were
forecasted to jump at least 45 percent by the end of 1995,
said a new market report on the medical disposal market.

     Connecticut-based Theta Corporation predicted safety
syringe sales would increase more than 45 percent with unit
shipments to exceed 2.25 billion by the end of 1995.

     The report provided an in-depth analysis of the largest
U.S. disposal medical equipment products market. The latest
report, Dynamic Medical Disposal Market, forecasted market
trends through 2001 for the following products: needles and
syringes, procedure kits and trays, evacuated blood
collection tubes, respiratory therapy disposables and
infusion disposables.

Needle Sticks Drive Market

     According to Theta Corp., the most significant trend
affecting the medical disposables market is the increasing
awareness of the danger of bloodborne pathogen infections
from accidental needle sticks.  The greatest commercial
success will come from new features incorporated into
existing products offered by vendors who currently dominate
the market, the firm found.

     Safety needles and syringes are expected to reach
market penetration exceeding 80 percent by 2001, the report
predicted, and while the products may become more popular,
safety product prices will also decline dramatically. Since
1992, the U.S. Patent Office has approved more than 500
patents for safety features for syringes and needles.

     Today more than 60 percent of all surgical procedures
involve use of a kit, and the report charted the market for
the following procedure kits and trays: cardiovascular,
angiography and angioplasty, orthopedic, OB/GYN, ophthalmic,
endoscopic and others.

     Theta Corp. predicted sales of all respiratory therapy
disposables would reach 38.6 million units by 2001, and that
compound annual growth rates of 17.1 percent was anticipated
for sales of infusion sets from 1995 to 2001.

     Fifteen companies were selected for detailed profiles
that included information on product development, products
and marketing strategies: Baxter International Inc., Becton
Dickinson and Co., C.R. Bard, Inc., Hudson Respiratory Care
Inc., Invacare Corp., Isolyser Co., Inc., Johnson & Johnson,
Marquest Medical Products, Inc., MAXXIM Medical, Inc.,
Puritan-Bennett Corp., The Med-Design Corp., Sherwood
Medical, Siemens Medical System, Inc., Smiths Industries and
Sterile Concepts.

     To order Theta Marketing Report No. 541, contact
Phyllis Klaben, Theta Corp., Theta Building, Middlefield,
Conn. 06455; 203-349-1054 or fax 203-349-1227. Cost for the
121-page report is $995.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev30.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
MEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 9, 1996

HRCC TO CONSIDER NATIONAL MODELS
FOR MINIMIZING MEDICAL WASTES


     The Healthcare Resource Conservation Coalition (HRCC),
an ad hoc group of suppliers, haulers and hospitals, will
review national models that have proven successful in
minimizing medical waste at its next meeting in May.

     The reach of the nonprofit communications group has
been expanding over the last year. While not included at
first, waste haulers have joined the group of those
interested in solving medical waste problems, said Mayo
Medical Center's Director of Waste Management Terry Horseth.
The group recently has incorporated as a nonprofit network
and includes 50 members, such as representatives from Baxter
International Inc., Johnson & Johnson, Beth Israel Hospital
and Kaiser Permanente.

     Horseth said everyone recognizes education is key in
keeping health care organizations, manufacturers, suppliers
and government informed on the issues. "There is no central
place to find out all the information. Everyone must keep
reinventing their own wheel," he said.

     The meetings have been valuable, explained Horseth,
since all players in medical waste management share
information on what is happening nationwide, as well as
finding solutions to thorny local problems. Medical waste
management issues vary as widely as state and local
regulations, and HRCC members have the advantage of keeping
up on ever-changing waste management and recycling markets.

     "Right now we're looking for success stories," said
Horseth, who touted recycling efforts at the Mayo Center in
Rochester, Minn. The next meeting is tentatively slated for
May in Chicago.

     HRCC offers a communications network for all members of
the health care community to tackle issues such as waste
minimization, waste and product management and government
regulation.

     For information on HRCC, contact Terry Horseth, 507-
284-1912.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev30.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
MEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 9, 1996

ISWA FORMS NEW WORKING GROUP
TO RESPOND TO MEDWASTE ISSUES


     The International Solid Waste Association (ISWA) has
formed a new working group to deal with health care waste
issues.

     ISWA members have worked closely with the World Health
Organization in assisting countries in preparing their
national policies on health care waste management, said a
recent bulletin from The World Resource Foundation.

     The group has also named a new chairman: Bill Townend,
deputy director of the London Waste Regulation Authority
(LWRA). Townend represented ISWA on the European Union
Priority Waste Stream Project on health care waste that was
completed last year.

     For information on ISWA's new group, contact Bill
Townend, LWRA, Hampton House, 20 Albert Embankment, London
SE1 7TJ, UK tel: (44) (0) 171-587-3000; fax (44) (0) 587-
5258.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev30.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
MEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 9, 1996

ACQUISITIONS DRIVE SUCCESS
FOR MID-SIZED WASTE FIRMS


     Mid-sized solid waste companies had the most pronounced
growth in the industry during 1995, with revenues increasing
69 percent to $2 billion, and the trend should continue,
according to a report by Raymond James & Associates, a
financial analysis company in St. Petersburg, Fla.

     The report found that acquisition growth accelerated
over the past year. The top 13 waste companies are expected
to increase their revenues by 21 percent, with a major
revenue component driven by acquisitions.

     On financing issues, the report explained, "We wish to
stress that the improvement in the cost of financing has
been most notable for the smaller waste service companies. A
longer track record leading to enhanced credibility has
enabled these companies to dramatically lower their costs of
capital and benefit not only from lower rates, but from the
access to longer term financing and attractively priced
equity."

     In general, the analysis said, long term financing
rates for all firms, as represented by 30-year Treasury
bonds, have dropped considerably, thus providing a backdrop
for continued aggressive acquisition.

     For copies of the report, Solid Waste 1995: Mid-Sized
Companies Lead Industry in a Torrid Acquisition, contact the
firm's William Fisher, 800-237-5643.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev30.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
MEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 9, 1996

EPA ESTIMATES STAFF LAYOFFS
FROM REPUBLICAN BUDGET OFFER


     Up to one-fourth of the Environmental Protection
Agency's staff may be laid off by spring unless Republicans
substantially increase EPA's funding, said EPA Administrator
Carol Browner. EPA's budget could have dramatic implications
for its medical waste emissions rule and its long-awaited
report to Congress.

     About one-third of the workers who promulgate
regulations, issue permits and perform inspections could be
laid off if Congress approves the EPA appropriations bill
vetoed by President Clinton, agency officials said.
Researchers and employees involved in environmental cleanups
would not be cut. EPA officials were hesitant until now to
estimate the impact of the budget cuts on staffing.

     At a Dec. 18 press conference, President Clinton vetoed
the $5.7 billion spending bill, insisting the measure would
have cut environmental enforcement by 25 percent and safe
drinking water aid to local governments by 45 percent.

     In response, Sen. Christopher Bond (R-Mo.) argued that
the cuts were based on recommendations from organizations
including the National Academy of Public Administration.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev30.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
MEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 9, 1996

AUTOCLAVING VIEWED AS APPEALING
FOR HOSPITAL WEIGHING WASTE OPTIONS


     Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center may become the
state's first facility to shut down an incinerator and open
an autoclaving facility in a dramatic move to save money and
avoid having to comply with costly new emission regulations.

     The medical center's Vicky Jas conducted a
comprehensive, 12-year cost analysis that compared
retrofitting the existing incinerator to shipping wastes
off-site, autoclaving or using a gas sterilizer. Autoclaving
was by far the least expensive option, she said.

     "We had the resources to evaluate these, while others
are running scared," said Jas, who added that many hospitals
have already inquired about when the facility will be up and
running.

     The Lebanon, N.H., facility is hoping to be granted its
state permit soon, begin testing the new autoclave facility
on Jan. 29, and have it on-line in February. Right now, the
hospital is spending $5,000 a week to ship the wastes off-
site. With tens of millions being slashed from the
hospital's yearly budget, staff had to look for less costly
alternatives.

     "None of us was crazy about autoclaving since there is
still waste at the end," she explained. But Jas said the
hospital said the gas sterilizer manufacturer could not
gather independent emissions data for permit approval.

     Another item that may be on the agenda for hospital
administrators to consider include training a certified
workforce who would be involved only with waste management
in the hospital complex. Jas said she is looking into this
option to beef-up the education of hospital staff who handle
wastes.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev30.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
MEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 9, 1996

EPA AUDIT POLICY SPELLS RELIEF
FOR CERTAIN ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATORS


     Companies that report self-discovered environmental
violations within 10 days and act to correct those
violations will be eligible for reduced penalties or waivers
for civil violations and no criminal sanctions under the
Environmental Protection Agency's final policy on
environmental audits.

     The policy, which appeared in the Dec. 22 Federal
Register, does not apply to violations that harm human
health and the environment.

     The issue of EPA enforcement against self-discovered
violations has been a sticking point for many companies.

     Under the new approach, EPA retains its power to levy
fines that equal any economic gain created by the violation
in order to "preserve a level playing field." EPA also will
override state laws shielding results of corporate self-
audits from enforcement if the violations threaten public
health or the environment. At the same time, the agency said
"where a state has obtained appropriate sanctions needed to
deter such misconduct, there is no need for EPA action."

     The final policy is similar to an interim policy
released in March. The earlier statement applied only to
self-audits, while the final statement covers other self-
discovery steps such as due diligence. EPA defines due
digilence as systemic efforts to prevent, detect and correct
violations.

Audit Results Not 'Privilege'

     EPA will continue its policy on not routinely
requesting the results of corporate self-audits, although
the agency reiterated its position that environmental self-
audits and related corporate self-discovery activities are
not privileged information protected from public disclosure.
This contrasts sharply with an increasing number of state
laws that provide varying degrees of privilege for audit
results.

     EPA said it will reduce gravity-based civil penalties
by up to 75 percent. These penalties, which are based on the
severity of the pollution problem and not on economic gains,
could be waived. The policy spells out a list of conditions
that must be met to become eligible for reduced or no civil
penalties provisions.

* * *

RISK CHACTERIZATION: The American Industrial Health Council
(AIHC) recently released Advances in Risk Characterization,
a new publication designed to help risk managers improve
decisionmaking. The 11-page report describes information and
terminology risk managers request from risk assessors. For
more information, contact AIHC's Dave Williams at 202-833-
2131.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev30.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
MEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 9, 1996

NEW HAMPSHIRE WASTE REGULATORS
AWAIT EPA REPORT, AIR STANDARDS


     New Hampshire regulators are holding tight on amending
medical waste regulations until the Environmental Protection
Agency's long-awaited report to Congress is released, said
New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services' Carl
Woodbury.

     Woodbury said New Hampshire regulators are not only
anticipating EPA's report but also its new Clean Air Act
regulation for emissions from medical waste incinerators.
State regulations have already incorporated a treatment
standard similar to EPA's, he said.

     New Hampshire houses one commercial incinerator
operated by Waste Management of New England that accepts
medical waste, while there are approximately 15 small
incinerators at hospitals across the state.

     "A lot of material is still going to landfills,"
Woodbury noted. Under state regulations, medical waste must
be treated before disposal "to achieve high-level
disinfection plus a four log reduction 104 of Bacillus
subtilis, for example by infectious waste incineration,
steam sterilization, chemical disinfection, or gas
sterilization."

Autoclave Breaks New Ground

     The responsibility is on the manufacturer to prove
alternative treatment technologies are effective, Woodbury
said, noting that the state requires data with independent
laboratory confirmation. "We don't want to see just the
marketers," he added.

     But Vicky Jas, manager of the Dartmouth Hitchcock
Medical Center's Biosafety and Environmental Programs,
complained that the state had little regulation for
alternative treatment technologies, even the more
traditional autoclaving. "We really started from scratch,"
she said. "The only standard the state relied on was whether
the technology killed the bugs," Jas said.

     Woodbury said New Hampshire hospitals are eying how the
medical center is managing its wastes to decide what path to
follow in the wake of looming EPA regulation. In August, the
hospital shut down its incinerator and has applied to
operate a less-costly, commercial-sized autoclave to
sterilize wastes on-site.

     After extensive research involving a cost analysis, the
hospital opted to get out of the incinerator business, said
the state's medical waste regulator. "Other hospitals are
looking to them for guidance."

     Under New Hampshire regulations, there are certain
treatment and disposal exemptions. Limbs and recognizable
organs are to be disposed of by incineration or interment.
Non-infectious blood and body fluids and non-infectious
tissues processed by grinding may be disposed of in sanitary
sewers. Gloves, gowns and other materials that have not come
in contact with significant quantities of blood, body fluids
or secretions should not be handled as infectious wastes.
Certain animal carcasses need not be regulated as infectious
wastes, and sharp infectious wastes can be incinerated or
landfilled if treated first. Household sharp infectious
waste can be handled as municipal solid waste if
containerized.

     Medical waste cannot be stored at room temperature for
more than 72 hours, and waste stored at processing
facilities that receive waste from off-site generators
cannot be stored for more than seven days. The waste is
required to be stored and transported in a sealed, non-
permeable 3-mil polyethylene bag, placed in another bag of
similar construction and sealed.

     Sharp infectious waste, such as broken glass, scalpel
blades and hypodermic needles, must be segregated and en-
cased inside rigid, puncture-resistant containers before the
material is placed in polyethylene bags. Under New Hampshire
law, sharps are not required to be ground up and rendered
non-usable before disposal.

     For more information, contact Carl Woodbury, 603-271-
2925.


Calendar

Feb. 13-14: 1996 Conference on Corporate Environmental,
Health & Safety Excellence, New York City, sponsored by
Arthur D. Little Inc. and the Conference Board. For
information, contact 212-339-0345.

Feb. 28-March 1: Emerging Solutions to VOC & Air Toxics
Control, Clearwater Beach, Fla., sponsored by Air & Waste
Management Association and U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency. For information, call 412-232-3444, ext. 3142.

March 20-22: 5th Annual National Workers' Compensation and
Occupational Medicine Seminar, San Francisco. Toxic exposure
at work is among the topics slated for the seminar. For
information and 20-page brochure, contact S.E.A.K. Legal and
Medical Publishers, fax 508-540-8304.


Around the States

NEW YORK - New York City Health and Hospitals Corp. (HHC)
President Luis Marcos announced that 900 hospital beds will
be eliminated from the system. Marcos said the dramatic cuts
would result in greater efficiency and save the city $80
million, according to local news reports. Marcos said the
move was necessary to remain competitive and that layoffs
were not out of the question. After the cut, HHC will be
left with 5,964 beds. At a December board meeting, Marcos
noted a "dramatic decline" in the city's occupancy rates.
Health care officials predict the city will eventually
eliminate some 10,000 hospital beds in the public and
private sector.


Resources

Protecting Yourself Against Bloodborne Disease, a demo disk
illustrating an interactive computer-based training program
is available from SAVANT Audiovisuals, Inc. The interactive
program, which is designed to reach audiences in clinical,
medical and industrial environments, offers instruction on
what the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA) expects employees to know about the Bloodborne
Pathogens Standard. It offers instruction on key OSHA
regulations and how they apply to various rooms in a typical
health care facility. To order the demo or receive free
literature, contact SAVANT Audiovisuals, Inc., 801 East
Chapman Ave., P.O. Box 3670, Fullerton, Calif. 92634; 714-
870-7880 or fax 714-526-7400.

Custom Medical Online offers a new online service from
Custom Medical Stock Photo, Inc., to view hundreds of
medical stock photos and catalogues. For information,
contact CMSP, 800-373-2677.

Innovative Treatment Technologies: Annual Status Report, 7th
Edition, describes innovative methods being used at
hazardous waste sites. For information, call the
RCRA/Superfund Hotline at 800-424-9810.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev30.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
MEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 9, 1996

REUSABLE WASTE CONTAINER ISSUE
HIGHLIGHTED AT WASTE EXPO '96


     "The Economics and Issues Behind Medical Waste Reusable
Containers" is one medical waste topic on the agenda of the
upcoming WasteExpo '96 conference in Las Vegas.

     Other topics for the May 20-24 meeting include:
"Sustained Achievement in Medical Waste Minimization," and
"Alternative Medical Waste Treatment Technologies: An Impact
Analysis of the State Technical Assistance Manual."

     For the first time, the meeting includes a new Medical
Waste Pavilion for firms to exhibit waste equipment,
technology and services. More than 40 sessions presented by
waste industry experts and environmental professionals are
planned.

     Early-bird registration deadline is March 20. The
meeting is co-sponsored by the Waste Equipment Technology
Association, the National Solid Wastes Management
Association, and Waste Age Publications. For information,
contact Waste Expo '96, 301-694-5243.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev30.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
MEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 9, 1996

MEDWASTE NAMES NEW
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER


     Med/Waste, Inc. of Opa Locka, Fla., has named Michael
Elkin as its vice president and chief financial officer,
replacing James Pekarek, who resigned.

     "We are very pleased to have Mike as our chief
financial officer," said President and Chief Executive
Officer Daniel Stauber. "He's played an integral part in
Med/Waste's recent turnaround and emergence as a leading
provider of medical waste management services in Florida.
Our rapid expansion and aggressive growth goals will be well
served by someone of Mike's experience and expertise."

     Prior to joining Med/Waste, Elkin was comptroller for
Miami's Tecmarine Lines, Inc., and before that, was chief
financial officer of Sequest Cruises of Fort Lauderdale.
Elkin received his Bachelors Degree from the University of
Florida, a Masters Degree in finance from Florida
International University and a Masters Degree in accounting
from Nova Southeastern University.

     For information, contact Med/Waste, Inc., 305-688-3931.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev30.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
MEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 9, 1996

HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION
ELECTS TOP OFFICIALS


     The American Hospital Association (AHA) announced that
Ronnie Walker, president of Weatherford Hospital Authority-
DBA Southwestern Memorial Hospital, Weatherford, Okla., is
the new chair of the group's special forum for small or
rural hospitals.

     During the one-term term, Walker will serve as a key
spokesperson for small or rural hospitals and oversee a 24-
person governing council for the Section for Small or Rural
Hospitals.

     AHA's governing council also elected Patrick Muldoon,
president and chief executive officer of North Adams
Regional Hospital, North Adams, Mass., as chair-elect in
1996 and will serve as chair of the group's policymaking arm
next year.

     Members new to the council in 1996 are: Brian Colfack,
CEO/administrator, Berger Hospital, Circleville, Ohio;
William Gravely, Jr., president, Culpeper Memorial Hospital,
Culpeper, Va.; Leslie MacLeod, president, Huggins Hospital,
Wolfeboro, N.H.; Gerald Worrick, administrator, Door County
Memorial Hospital, Sturgeon Bay, Wis.

     For information on other AHA news, contact AHA's Alicia
Marshall, 325 Seventh St., N.W., Suite 700, Washington, D.C.
20004; 202-626-2339.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-8</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B019-108</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev03.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001928 text/html 45096
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:17:34 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:21 GMT
Content-length: 44907
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev03.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 4, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>SLANTS AND TRENDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(377 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>ARTHUR D. LITTLE AWARDED $7.6 MILLION&nbsp;TO HELP BELARUS TACKLE MISSILES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(662 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>REPROCESSING AT SRS CHEAPER&nbsp;THAN REPOSITORY, REPORT FINDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(724 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>AUSTRALIANS TO USE BATTELLE ISV&nbsp;PROCESS TO CLEAN MARALINGA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(293 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>DESIGN PROBLEMS DELAY FERNALD&nbsp;LLW VITRIFICATION TESTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(429 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>SDMP&nbsp;NRC LISTS A MIXED LOT OF 47&nbsp;SITES ON LATEST SDMP TALLY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(492 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>ORNL CONTAMINATED SITES OFFERED&nbsp;FOR JOINT GROUND WATER RESEARCH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(542 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>D&D&nbsp;NRC INTENDS TO OKAY PGE'S&nbsp;TROJAN DECOMMISSION PLAN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(278 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>NEWS BRIEFS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(252 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>DOE COMPLEX</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1805 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>CALENDAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(262 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

SLANTS AND TRENDS


NO CIGAR: None of the three Nuclear Regulatory Commission
staff scenarios for the future (or non-future) of the
commission's low-level radioactive waste (LLW) program are
satisfactory, NRC's Advisory Committee on Nuclear Waste
(ACNW) concluded Dec. 29. Facing severe federal budget cuts,
the July staff report looked at three scenarios: continue
the current program, reduce the program by eliminating or
cutting back various parts, or terminate all parts of the
LLW program. The staff concluded the present program could
not continue at present budgetary levels, but the entire
program could not be abolished because it requires major
changes in a number of pieces of federal legislation. The
only viable solution, therefore, is a drastically reduced
program (NWN, Oct. 26, 1995, p. 413).

   The major failing of the staff report, "is the failure to
address the question of what the LLW program ought to be in
order to satisfy the mission of the NRC," ACNW Chairman Paul
Pomeroy said in his letter to NRC Chairman Shirley Ann
Jackson. The budgetary focus of the report fails to address
NRC's fundamental responsibility to protect the health and
safety of the public. "Budgetary reductions need to be made
in accordance with priorities set with reference to the
underlying mission of the NRC," ACNW said.

   Necessary elements in the rescaled LLW program are: a
staff that includes experts in each of the technologies
critical to evaluation of the siting, environmental impact,
operation and closure of LLW facilities; a program that
provides technical assistance to those preparing license
applications for LLW disposal facilities; a program that
maintains NRC's capability for processing license
applications from non-Agreement states for LLW disposal
facilities; and a program that identifies and supports
limited research activities in priority areas and assures
that the information value is maintained from studies that
are terminated or transferred to other programs.

   Some areas targeted for termination or limited support in
the staff report need re-evaluation. These include review of
topical reports and the quality of Agreement-State programs
and NRC representation of the U.S. LLW policy.

   % Pomeroy's letter to Jackson, 8 pp., is available for
purchase through BPI DocuDial, No. 48-1111, as is the July
31 report to the commission from the NRC staff, 29 pp., No.
48-1112.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

ARTHUR D. LITTLE AWARDED $7.6 MILLION
TO HELP BELARUS TACKLE MISSILES


by Gordon Feller

   The international consulting firm Arthur D. Little has
been awarded a $7.6 million contract to help the former
Soviet republic of Belarus solve nuclear waste, safety and
other environmental problems related to its former Strategic
Rocket Forces (SRF) bases.

   The two-and-a-half-year contract from the Defense Nuclear
Agency (DNA) is part of the Cooperative Threat Reduction
(CTR) Program developed under the l991 Nunn-Lugar
legislation. The program was set up to assist the countries
of the former Soviet Union in elimination of weapons of mass
destruction and prevention of their proliferation.

   Arthur D. Little experts will help Belarus personnel to
assess radiation and conventional environmental damage at
sites where intercontinental ballistic missiles were based,
transported, operated or maintained, and will help the
country restore them for other purposes. In Belarus alone,
at the height of the arms race, there were more than 80 SS-
25 missiles. Belarus has since declared itself a non-nuclear
state and wishes to return the facilities to civilian use.

   Arthur D. Little consultants will integrate a number of
different technical resources within the program to provide
training and technical assistance to the Belarus officials
and experts. The consultants will work with the Belarus
personnel to analyze the environmental problems at one
missile site and devise a restoration plan, then oversee the
Belarus technicians as they do environmental restoration
work at a second site. The ultimate goal is to transfer
enough knowledge to Belarus so that it can complete the
environmental restoration work at the remaining sites.

   Potential environmental problems include heavy metal and
low-level radioactive contaminants, spilled petroleum,
spilled liquid rocket fuel, and some minefields around the
sites' perimeters containing unexploded ordnances.

   As part of the effort to transfer environmental
restoration expertise, Arthur D. Little will conduct
international conferences co-sponsored by DNA and the
Belarus Ministry of Defense. Experts from around the world
will be invited to Belarus to discuss environmental
restoration experiences, technologies, and management
issues.

   As part of the CTR program, an agreement was signed in
l993 between the United States and the Republic of Belarus
to assist in development of the Environmental Restoration
Project. Other CTR projects in Belarus under Nunn-Lugar
include assistance in defense conversion, export control
systems and training, government-to-government
communications links, and emergency response equipment and
training.

   Belarus, located between Poland and Russia, has an
especially high water table and active ground water
movement, which can exacerbate ground water pollution.

   Other organizations involved with Arthur D. Little on the
Environmental Restoration Project include the Army Corps of
Engineers' Waterways Experiment Station, Los Alamos
Technical Associates, Technology Management Co., the
Environmental Chemical Corp., Environmental Hazards
Specialists International, Environmental Careers
Organizations, the World Environment Center, and Clean Sites
Inc.

   Arthur D. Little, which managed the largest environmental
impact assessment ever conducted in the Former Soviet Union
by a Western company, has handled more than 3,000
environmental audits and assessments in 30 countries
throughout Europe and the United States. Headquartered in
Cambridge, MA., Arthur D. Little has offices around the
world. It provides consulting in three areas: environmental,
health, and safety consulting; management consulting; and
technology and product development.

RUSSIAN NUCLEAR SAFETY: Viktor Mikhailov, Russia's minister
of nuclear energy, announced Jan. 2 that nuclear smuggling
should be the top item on the agenda for the April G-7
summit in Moscow. Mikhailov said the summit, devoted to
nuclear safety issues, should draft "common procedures" for
dealing with nuclear smuggling and tightening control over
nuclear materials. He also announced his ministry made $1.65
billion from exports in 1995, a significant contribution to
Russia's $63 billion in total exports, and not much less
than the $2.5 billion Russia earned by exporting arms.
However, many of the countries that want to purchase Russian
civilian nuclear technology, such as Iran and Cuba, have a
questionable ability to pay for it, casting doubt on
Mikhailov's prediction that nuclear exports can be boosted
to $2 billion by 1998.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

REPROCESSING AT SRS CHEAPER
THAN REPOSITORY, REPORT FINDS


   Using existing facilities at DOE's Savannah River Site
(SRS), Aiken, S.C., to reprocess civilian spent fuel (SF)
would be considerably cheaper than continuing with the
current repository program, concluded a report prepared by
Westinghouse Savannah River Co. for DOE at the request of
Rep Charles Norwood (R-Ga.).

   The report, delivered to DOE Aug. 21, is unclassified,
but has not been officially released by DOE or Norwood's
office.(% Available through BPI DocuDial, 28 pp., No. 48-
1110.)

   Questions about using SRS to reprocess spent civilian
fuel and the impact on the civilian waste program prompted
Norwood to make the request, an aide said. Reprocessing
operations could provide an economic boon to the region
around SRS.

   The report, Chemical Stabilization of Defense Related and
Commercial Spent Nuclear Fuel at the Savannah River Site,
said a repository is required, even with reprocessing. But
"technical uncertainty would be significantly lessened by
the 20-fold volume reduction, and the conversion of the
waste to a single form containing only short-lived, non-
fissile products."

Billions To Be Saved?

   Westinghouse estimates the annual cost of reprocessing
civilian spent fuel at $350 million a year and the cost for
dealing with the current inventory of spent civilian fuel at
$8 billion, including estimated repository fees. "Chemical
stabilization is almost certainly less costly than direct
disposition technology, maybe by several billion dollars,"
the report said.

   "These facilities could consolidate and stabilize nuclear
wastes into manageable and ultimately disposable forms,
thereby providing a bridge to the future when decisions will
have to be made as to the long-term approach to energy
production, defense needs and nuclear waste management in
this country," the report said.

   Besides costs savings, reprocessing civilian SF at SRS
solves on-site storage problems at commercial nuclear
powerplants and allows DOE to comply with the Nuclear Waste
Policy Act by accepting SF by 1998, the report said.

   Under the plan spelled out in the Westinghouse report, SF
now stored at SRS would be reprocessed and then the facility
could provide "ongoing treatment services for a wide variety
of defense and commercial spent fuels." Radioactive waste
produced from the reprocessing operation would be vitrified
in borosilicate glass logs. DOE could either sell
reprocessed civilian fuel back to powerplants or dispose of
it in a repository.

Upgrade Costs Omitted

   In estimating the cost of reprocessing civilian SF at
SRS, the report does not include the costs of upgrades
needed for the F- and H- canyons. John Duane, a Westinghouse
manager who helped prepare the report, said the upgrades
could be anywhere from minor to major, depending on what
types of fuel will be reprocessed. It was an oversight that
upgrade costs were omitted; they should be in the report, he
said.

   A standard shear/leach process would be used to process
commercial SF. The report estimates these upgrades would
cost $100 million. After that, only normal capital upgrades
would be needed, Duane said. Brian Costner, of the Energy
Research Foundation, an SRS watchdog group, disputes those
figures. When SRS reprocessing operations stopped in 1992,
major upgrades to the facility were never completed.
Completing the upgrades is expensive, Costner said. Duane,
however, said about three-quarters of the planned upgrades
were completed before the shutdown. The buildings are 40
years old, but the reprocessing equipment is fairly new, he
added.

   Costner thinks the purpose of the report is to build
political support for commercial reprocessing. He expects
reprocessing supporters to use it to press for a change in
U.S. policy, which now prohibits civilian SF reprocessing.
Reprocessing, however, is gaining support in Congress.

   Norwood's office had no comment on whether the
representative would propose legislation to open SRS for
civilian reprocessing. At press time Jan. 4, Norwood was
touring SRS and would make a decision based on what he
learned during the tour, an aide said.

   Using a U.S. defense facility to reprocess civilian SF is
a new idea and sets a dangerous precedent, said Arjun
Makhijani, president of the Institute for Energy and
Environmental Research. The report is "a clear waste of
taxpayers dollars and a dangerous waste of taxpayer
dollars," he said.

   No other Congress members contacted by NWN had seen the
report. Nuclear-industry representatives also were
unfamiliar with it or any plans to reprocess civilian fuel
at SRS.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

AUSTRALIANS TO USE BATTELLE ISV
PROCESS TO CLEAN MARALINGA


   An in-situ vitrification (ISV) system developed for DOE
by Battelle is receiving international attention. The
Australians tested the process for treating contaminated
areas of the Maralinga test range in South Australia. The
tests, carried out by Geosafe, a Battelle subsidiary, ended
in October 1995.

   The British used Maralinga as a  nuclear test site in the
1950s and subsequently contaminated several kilometers of
desert. Most of the contamination is plutonium, and includes
21 pits containing equipment contaminated with transuranics.
The Australians expect the cleanup of Maralinga to cost
about $100 million Australian, equal to $75 million U.S.
(NWN, June 6, 1995, p. 243).

   The Australians hope to use in-situ treatment to deal
with the pits. The Geosafe tests involved 13 test melts over
six-months. Initial tests used a surrogate for the nuclear
materials, but the final two tests used actual
radionuclides. One five-ton test melt used soil and debris
containing a kilogram of uranium as well as hazardous metals
and large quantities of scrap metals.

   Another test melt used not only uranium-contaminated
soil, but also a steel plate contaminated with about two
grams of plutonium. The Australian Nuclear Science and
Technology Organization is analyzing the radioactive
samples.

   The Australians are looking at radionuclide distribution
within the vitrified material and at the strength of the
material. They also will conduct leach testing of the
vitrified material. Test results should be available early
this year, Geosafe said.

   Test results show the in-situ vitrification process can
be used to treat the 21 contaminated pits, Geosafe said.
"Most notably, the radioactive testing did not result in
contamination of the off-gas hood or piping, indicating very
high uranium and plutonium retention efficiencies in the
vitrified product," according to a Geosafe test report.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

DESIGN PROBLEMS DELAY FERNALD
LLW VITRIFICATION TESTS


   Design problems will delay the start-up of a pilot low-
level radioactive waste vitrification plant at DOE's
Fernald, Ohio, site by 17 months. But the problems will not
delay completion of the 10-year cleanup plan for the
facility, Fernald officials say.

   The $21-million vitrification plant, built by GTS Duratek
of Columbia, Md., was scheduled for surrogate testing in
July 1995, but DOE moved the start date of testing with a
uranium substitute to March 1996, said Perry Richardson, a
Fernald Environmental Restoration Management Co. (FERMCO)
spokesman.

   DOE initially had problems getting bids on a melter for
the pilot plant. Originally, DOE requested a melter capable
of operating at temperatures of 1,450 degrees C and able to
process five tons of material per day. DOE revised its
specification, requesting a melter capable of handling only
one ton of material per day.

   Superfund deadlines forced parallel design of portions of
the plant that should have been designed in sequence,
officials said. The delays do not surprise Richardson. "This
is the closest thing to research and development we have at
Fernald," he said. A few "bumps" in the process should be
expected, he added.

'We Were Overly Optimistic'

   Fernald also overestimated the amount of time the pilot
plant could operate. Initial plans were to operate the
facility continuously, but FERMCO decided that was not
realistic. "We were overly optimistic," Richardson said.

   For planning purposes, Fernald officials are assuming the
melter will operate 30 percent of the time, although
Richardson said he thinks the actual operational operating
time will be better.

   DOE eventually will vitrify 9,700 tons of uranium mill
tailings now stored on site at Fernald. Information gathered
from the pilot plant operation will be used to design a $200
million full-scale vitrification plant, capable of
processing 30 tons of material per day.

   DOE plans to vitrify all the mill tailings at Fernald and
send the vitrified waste to a disposal facility on the
Nevada Test Site before 2005, Richardson said.

DAVIS BESSE: Toledo Edison Co. Dec. 26 began transferring
spent fuel from the fuel storage pool at its Davis Besse
nuclear power plant to three dry storage casks at an
independent spent fuel storage facility on the plant site.
The three casks will hold 72 fuel assemblies. The plant
needed to free space in the storage pool to receive new fuel
and to unload the full reactor core during a refueling
outage in April. Inspectors from the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission's Region III office, Lisle, Ill., are monitoring
the fuel transfer.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

SDMP
NRC LISTS A MIXED LOT OF 47
SITES ON LATEST SDMP TALLY


   The latest version of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission's
Site Decommissioning Management Plan (SDMP) list, released
Dec. 26, shows 47 sites that still must be either evaluated
or remediated under the SDMP program. These sites are a
mixed bag of possibly contaminated sites where remediation
was in danger of falling through the cracks in NRC's
licensing system.

   SDMP sites vary in the degree of radiological hazard,
decommissioning complexity and cost. Some sites comprise
tens of acres that require assessment for radiological
contamination; others have contamination known to be limited
to individual buildings or discrete piles of waste or
contaminated soil. Some sites still have active NRC nuclear
materials licenses.

   Some sites already are almost completely cleaned; others
have had little or no remediation.

   NRC has removed nine sites from the SDMP list since the
program began in 1990. Some of these sites have been
successfully cleaned; others are cases where NRC deferred
oversight to other agencies or determined the site was not
subject to NRC licensing.

   Sites are added to the list if they satisfy one or more
of the following criteria:

Problems with the viability of the responsible organization,
e.g. inability to pay for or unwillingness to perform
decommissioning.

Presence of large amounts difficult-to-dispose material such
as soil contamination, unused settling ponds or waste in
burial grounds.

Long-term presence of contaminated, unused facility
buildings.

Previously terminated license.

Contamination or potential contamination of the ground water
from on-site wastes.

   The 47 sites on the new list are:

   Indiana (1): Jefferson Proving Ground;

   Maryland (2): Anne Arundel County Curtis Bay site;
Aberdeen Proving Ground;

   Massachusetts (6): Engelhard Corp., Plainville; Nuclear
Metals Inc., Concord; Texas Instruments Inc., Attleboro;
Watertown Arsenal, Watertown; Watertown GSA, Watertown;
Wyman-Gordon Co., North Grafton, Mass.

   Michigan (4): Brooks & Perkins, Detroit and Livonia; Dow
Chemical Co., Bay City and Midland;

   Minnesota (1): 3M Co., Pine County;

   Missouri (1): Lake City Army Ammunition Plant,
Independence;

   New Jersey (3): Heritage Minerals, Lakehurst, N.J.; RTI
Inc., Rockaway, N.J.; Shieldalloy Metallurgical Corp.,
Newfield, N.J.

   Ohio (11): Advanced Medical Systems Inc., Cleveland;
Alcoa, Cleveland; BP Chemicals America Inc., Lima; Chemetron
Corp., Cleveland, Ohio, two sites; Clevite, Cleveland; Elkem
Metals Inc., Marietta; Horizons Inc., Cleveland; Northeast
Ohio Regional Sewer District Southerly Plant, Cleveland; RMI
Titanium Co., Ashtabula; Shieldalloy Metallurgical Corp.,
Cambridge;

   Oklahoma (5): Fansteel Inc., Muskogee, Okla.; Kaiser
Aluminum, Tulsa, Okla.; Kerr-McGee, Cimarron and Cushing,
Okla.; Sequoyah Fuels Corp., Gore, Okla.;

   Pennsylvania (13): Babcock & Wilcox, Apollo, and Parks
Township; Cabot Corp., Boyerton, Reading and Revere;
Molycorp Inc., Washington and York; Permagrain Products,
Media; Pesses Co., METCOA Site, Pulaski; Safety Light Corp.,
Bloomsburg; Schott Glass Technologies, Duryea; Westinghouse
Electric Corp., Waltz Mill; and Whittaker Corp., Greenville.

   Contact: David Fauver Sr., Project Manager, Low-Level
Waste and Decommissioning Projects Branch, Division of Waste
Management, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Mail Stop
T7F27, Washington, DC 20555; (301) 415-6625.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

ORNL CONTAMINATED SITES OFFERED
FOR JOINT GROUND WATER RESEARCH


   DOE's Oak Ridge National Laboratory, near Oak Ridge,
Tenn., is offering use of previously studied field sites at
the laboratory for collaborative ground water research. Past
disposal of radioactive and mixed radioactive hazardous
waste at Oak Ridge has led to concerns about ground water
contamination that require a better understanding of the
complex subsurface heterogeneous fractured media. Past
research has focused on water and contaminant movement.

   Sites the laboratory is making available for
collaborative research include:

   Walker Branch Watershed and Melton Branch Watersheds:
These small watersheds (0.47 ha and 0.62 ha, respectively)
are particularly suitable for studies of subsurface
transport processes. Each has a trench excavated across its
outflow region. Trenches are 2.5 m deep and 16 m long, and
contain six pans pressed against the face of the trench to
collect subsurface seepage outflow. A line source for tracer
distribution is buried at the top of each site. Transects of
solution samplers, tensiometers and piezometers are located
throughout the site. Much of the data-collection equipment
is interfaced for computerized data collection.

   West Bear Creek Valley Tracer Test Site: This site was
developed for investigating new ground water tracer
techniques. It is located in an uncontaminated area, and has
been instrumented with more than 70 piezometers, some of
them multi-level, and a rain gauge. Water levels and
temperatures have been recorded at 30 minute intervals for
two years. During the last three years, three principal
tests have been conducted at this field site:

A one-year dissolved-gas tracer test using helium and neon
to test the effect of matrix diffusion on solute transport.

A natural-gradient test that used injection of colloid-size
tracers, including bacteriophage, microbes and microspheres,
to measure fracture-flow velocities.

A test using microspheres labeled with DNA as tracers of
fracture flow.

   Fractured Rock Sampling Protocol Site: This site has been
used for tracer tests to study ground water sampling methods
in fractured media. At the site, 5 to 6 m of soil and
saprolite overlies folded and fractured shale and limestone.
The site has an injection/pumping well screened from 6 to 20
m, three pairs of wells screened from 5 to 7 m and 18 to 20
m, and three multilevel wells with five sampling ports
installed close to the pairs of wells. Many data are
available from the site, including six pumping tests,
natural water levels, tracer tests using bromide, sulfur
hexafluoride and colloids, continuous core from three holes,
bore-hole flowmeter measurements, point dilution tests,
mineralogical data, field parameters, and geochemical
analyses.

   Tritium Test Site: In 1977, 50 curies of tritium were
released in an open borehole in fractured shale. Tritium was
monitored in the injection well and in five monitoring wells
for the first five years, with an additional sampling after
16 years (1993). Efforts to remove the tritium by pumping
were unsuccessful. A large amount of tritium was still
present after 16 years. Results of this test have been
interpreted to indicate the severe limitations of pump-and-
treat methods.

   Contact: Gary Jacobs, Head of the Earth and Engineering
Sciences Section, Environmental Sciences Division, Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, (423) 576-0567, fax (423) 576-3989, e-
mail gkj@ornl.gov. More details are available on the World
Wide Web at http://www.esd.ornl.gov/
facilities/hydrology/.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

D&D
NRC INTENDS TO OKAY PGE'S
TROJAN DECOMMISSION PLAN


   The Nuclear Regulatory Commission staff intends to
approve Portland General Electric (PGE) Co.'s proposed
decommissioning plan for the Trojan Nuclear Power Plant near
Ranier, Ore.

   The plant was closed down in 1993 and all spent fuel has
been removed from the reactor and placed in the spent fuel
pool. The pressurizer and the four steam generators have
been removed from reactor containment and shipped to a low-
level radioactive waste disposal facility.

   NRC's latest proposed action would allow PGE to complete
decommissioning according to its proposed plan, submitted
Jan. 25, 1995. PGE intends to dismantle the plant using the
DECON alternative after a five-year transition period.

Transition Period

   During the transition period, which began with the
January 1993 shutdown date, PGE intends to remove and
dispose of selected large components; license and construct
an independent spent fuel storage installation (ISFSI); and
transfer fuel to the ISFSI. The utility also would assess
environmental impacts associated with construction and
operation of the ISFSI.

   The DECON phase will consist of the major disassembly and
dismantlement of radioactive structures, systems and
components. Low-level radioactive waste resulting from
dismantling the plant will be sent to a licensed waste
disposal site for burial.

   At the end of the DECON phase, the site, except for the
ISFSI, will be released for unrestricted use.

   Requests for a hearing on NRC's proposed approval of
PGE's decommissioning plan (Docket No. 50-344) must be
forwarded to the commission by Jan. 22. See the Federal
Register, Dec. 22, for details and instructions for
petitioning for a hearing. % Copies also are available for
purchase through BPI DocuDial, 3 pp., No. 48-1105.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

NEWS BRIEFS


California and DOE's Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
have agreed to work together to evaluate new environmental
technologies for certification under the state's
Environmental Technology Certification Program (ETCP). The
California Environmental Protection Agency (Cal/EPA) and
Livermore signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) giving
the state access to skilled laboratory personnel and
laboratory facilities to evaluate new technologies in
radioactive and hazardous waste management, site cleanup,
waste minimization and pollution prevention. In 1993, the
state set up the California Environmental Technology
Partnership (CETP) to promote research, development,
commercialization and export of California-based
environmental technology, goods and services. ETCP was
established by CalEPA's Department of Toxic Substances
Control in response to a CETP study of the state's $18
billion environmental technology industry that found a need
for a simpler, less cumbersome evaluation and permit
process. The program provides one-stop scientific and
engineering evaluation of new technologies to encourage
development and speed their acceptance. Contact: Dan
Pellissier, CalEPA, (916) 324-9670.

NCSL: The National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL)
has introduced a new version of LEGISNET, NCSL's intelligent
information retrieval system that includes the
Transportation Legislative Database (TLDB). TLDB is an on-
line information service containing summaries of federal,
state and certain local government statutes and regulations
relating to the transportation of radioactive materials in
the United States. TLDB is operated by NCSL under a
cooperative agreement with DOE's Office of Civilian
Radioactive Waste Management. Contact: Bob Frohling, NCSL,
1560 Broadway, Suite 700, Denver, Colo. 80202; (303) 830-
2200; fax: (303) 863-8003; e-mail: bob.frohling@ncsl.org.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

DOE COMPLEX


DEAR: DOE has revised its Department of Energy Acquisition
Regulation (DEAR) to codify the department's technology
transfer mission for the national laboratories and weapons
production facilities operated by management and operating
(M&O) contractors. Details of the revised regulation appear
in the Dec. 22 Federal Register or % can be purchased
through BPI DocuDial, 7 pp., No. 48-1106.

Hanford: DOE and the Washington State Department of Ecology
seek public comments on DOE's proposal to amend the Hanford
Tri-Party Agreement to make it compatible with DOE's
proposal to privatization cleanup of Hanford's radioactive
waste tanks. Under the proposal, private companies will
contract with DOE to treat the wastes and return a treated
product to DOE. The department anticipates awarding multiple
contracts to encourage innovation and competition among
contractors. Selected contractors will invest private funds
to design, construct and operate the facilities needed to
meet the needs of the Tank Waste Remediation Systems. DOE
will define and monitor the requirements to be met by
selected contractors in order for treated tank waste to be
returned to DOE control after treatment. DOE will offer
incentives to contractors to reduce immobilized waste
volumes and optimize waste loading. The first phase of the
privatization strategy will demonstrate the technical and
business viability of using privatized facilities to treat
and immobilize the waste. The Phase One treatment facility
will be capable of treating six to 13 percent of the low-
activity tank wastes. In Phase Two, a full-scale production
facility would be capable of processing and immobilizing the
remaining waste on a schedule that would accommodate
removing waste from the single-shell tanks by 2018. Comments
are due Feb. 15. Public meetings are scheduled tentatively
for Jan. 30 in Portland, Ore., and Feb. 1 in Richland, Wash.
For more information, contact: Toby Michelena, Washington
Department of Ecology, (360) 407-7144; Carolyn Haass, DOE,
(509) 372-2731; or the Hanford Cleanup Hotline, (800) 321-
2008.

INEL: The Environmental Management Site-Specific Advisory
Board (SSAB) for Idaho National Engineering Laboratory will
meet Jan. 16-17 in Boise, Idaho. The purpose of the meeting
is to continue discussions of DOE's prioritizations of
environmental management (EM) funds for fiscal year 1998.
Other topics include the environmental restoration scoping
process, prioritization of the INEL SSAB's own activities
for the remainder of FY '96 and participation in an
educational activity highlighting research and development
capabilities at INEL. Contact: Idaho National Engineering
Laboratory, (800) 708-2680, or Marsha Hardy, Jason
Associates Corp., staff support, (208) 522-1662.

Los Alamos: The Environmental Management Site-Specific
Advisory Board for Los Alamos National Laboratory will meet
Jan. 9 in Mora, N.M. Contact: Lisa Roybal, EM SSAB, Los
Alamos National Laboratory, Northern New Mexico Community
College, 1002 Onate St., Espanola, NM 87352; (800) 753-8970
or (505) 753-8970.

Oak Ridge: The Environmental Management Site-Specific
Advisory Board will meet Jan. 17 and Jan. 24 in Oak Ridge,
Tenn. The Jan. 24 meeting was called solely to discuss the
proposed by-laws for the board. The Jan. 17 meeting will
discuss not only the by-laws, but a report on an
administrative session held in Denver in November and a
technical presentation on results of the aerial remote-
sensing survey of the Oak Ridge Reservation. Contact: Sandy
Perkins, Site-Specific Advisory Board Coordinator, DOE, Oak
Ridge Operations Office, 105 Broadway, Oak Ridge, TN 37830;
(423) 576-1590.

UMTRA: DOE has completed cleanup of uranium mill tailings
and contaminated materials from the 61-acre abandoned
uranium processing site southwest of Gunnison, Colo., under
the Uranium Mill Tailings Remedial Action Project (UMTRA).
Some 750,000 cubic yards of contaminated material was hauled
by truck to a disposal site seven miles east of the old
processing site. DOE and the state of Colorado jointly began
cleanup of the site in 1991 with demolition of the mill
buildings. The disposal cell was excavated in 1992 and
transportation of contaminated material to the cell began in
1993. Cleanup activities at the mill site ended in November,
and the cleaned areas were backfilled with clean soil to a
level comparable with the surrounding terrain. Construction
crews completed work on the disposal cell cover in December.
The Gunnison mill is the 16th of 24 congressionally
designated uranium mill tailings sites to be cleaned.

Business & Technology

ESRI: Illinois Department of Nuclear Safety (IDNS) decided
in 1992 to use a computerized, integrated GIS/GPS/radiation
detection system to map for remediation the former Kerr-
McGee Chemical Corp. thorium milling facility in West
Chicago. The department contracted with GIS Solutions Inc.,
Springfield, Ill., to assemble and develop a database for
the Kerr-McGee remediation. The company also conducted the
GIS analysis based on the GPS data collected in the study
area. GIS advised IDNS to use ARC/INFO and ArcView GIS
software from ESRI, which would allow the database to be
used for project management. ESRI is a research group
founded in 1969 to develop methods of handling georeferenced
data. It is the world leader in development of GIS software,
with more than 100,000 clients worldwide. Contact: Tim
Runyon, IDNS, (217) 786-6365; or Bob Lindquist, GIS
Solutions Inc., (217) 546-3654.

NUKEM GmbH of Germany has acquired ENSR Nuclear Services and
ENSR Nuclear Engineering, the nuclear divisions of ENSR
Corp., a key U.S. hazardous waste treatment and remediation
firm. The names of the two divisions have been changed to
NUKEM Nuclear Technologies Corp., with two divisions -
services and engineering. NUKEM is owned by RWE AG, the
fifth largest German corporation, with annual sales of more
than $45 billion. NUKEM is a world leader in engineering and
design for the nuclear industry, including radioactive waste
processing and storage, decommissioning, nuclear materials
handling and processing and related services. Other
companies in the NUKEM family include WasteChem Ltd., a
major British decommissioning company; DETEC, the leading
German decommissioning company; ANSA-A, a French state-of-
the-art robotics company; and GNB, a German spent fuel
storage system designer. NUKEM intends use the Nuclear
Technologies Corp. to introduce its nuclear technologies to
DOE, DOD and the commercial nuclear market. These include
liquid and solid radioactive waste volume reduction,
vitrification, pyrolysis, incineration, tritium control,
spent fuel services, robotics, engineering, decommissioning
and other nuclear waste services. Ruediger Koenig will serve
as Nuclear Technologies Corp. president. The existing ENSR
core leadership will remain in place, including John
Raymont, vice president; Glen Rae, national sales and
marketing manager; Robert Williams, operations manager in
the services division; Detlef Schmidt, general manager in
the engineering division; and Jim Janzen, engineering
division manager. Contact: Glen Rae, NUKEM Nuclear
Technologies, 250 Berryhill Rd., Suite 500, Columbia, SC
29210; (803) 731-1588; fax: (803) 731-8435.

Holtec International and U.S. Tool and Die (UST&D) have
received a $6-million contract to supply spent- and fresh-
fuel storage equipment to the Angra Unit 1 nuclear power
plant, owned and operated by FURNAS Centrais Eletricas S.A.,
headquartered in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Holtec will serve
as prime contractor and UST&D will fabricate the fuel
storage equipment. The reracking will increase the unit's
in-pool fuel storage capacity from 363 storage locations to
1,252. Holtec will design, license, remove and volume-reduce
the existing racks and install the new racks. UST&D will be
responsible for manufacture and testing of the new racks.
The racks are designed to store fuel in a discrete zone two-
region storage pattern. Region 1 is designed for storing
fresh fuel assemblies and Region 2 for spent fuel
assemblies, taking credit for burnup. The racks will be of a
detuned cellular construction so as to minimize pool slab
loading under seismic conditions. Boral will be used as a
neutron poison. All hardware is due to be delivered by May
1997 and installation will be completed by October 1997.
Contact: Christian Blessing, Holtec International, 2060
Fairfax Ave., Cherry Hill, NJ 08003; (609) 424-0999, ext.
620.

Rust Federal Services has entered into a Cooperative
Research and Development Agreement (CRADA) with Kaiser-Hill
Co. LLC, operating contractor at DOE's Rocky Flats
Environmental Technology Site, for commercialization of
polymer encapsulation processes for stabilizing low-level
radioactive wastes (LLW) and mixed wastes. Personnel from
Rocky Flats developed a process to encapsulate LLW using
low-density polyethylene. Under the CRADA, Rust will examine
the economic feasibility of using waste plastic in the
encapsulation process. Low-density polyethylene, which
includes post-consumer products such as coffee can and
yogurt container lids, now is not recycled in Colorado. Rust
is working with its affiliate, Waste Management of Colorado
Inc., to determine if post-consumer plastic collection is
feasible. If it is, this could lead to full-scale
commercialization of the technology, with wide-ranging
applications at DOE sites and commercial nuclear plants.
Contact: Rust International Inc., 100 Corporate Parkway,
Birmingham, AL 35242-2926.

SOLUTIONS Software Corp. has available a CD-ROM with all 50
titles of the Code of Federal Regulations, including all
text, tables and graphics and Adobe Acrobat search-and-
retrieve software, at a cost of about $1 per title. Contact:
Mark Wemhoff, SOLUTIONS Software Corp., 1795 Turtle Hill
Road, Enterprise, FL 32725; (407) 321-7912; fax: (407) 323-
4898 or (407) 321-3098; Internet: solution@env-sol.com;
World Wide Web: http://www.env.sol.com.

LLW Compacts

Massachusetts: The Low-Level Radioactive Waste Management
Board will meet Jan. 10 in Boston. The agenda includes a
discussion of possible changes in language on Independent
Review Grants contained in the Draft Volunteer Sites
Program; decommissioning of the Yankee Rowe nuclear power
plant; review of literature on very-low-dose radiation
exposure; and discussion of issues surrounding disposal of
radioactive materials via release into sanitary sewer
systems. Contact: The Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Low-
Level Radioactive Waste Management Board, 100 Cambridge St.,
Room 903, Boston, MA 02202; (617) 727-6018; fax: (617) 727-
6084.

Texas: The Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission is
running about a month behind in its review of the license
application for a low-level waste disposal facility at
Sierra Blanca in west Texas, said sources in the Texas Low-
Level Radioactive Waste Authority (TLLRWA). The commission
originally planned to complete its review by the end of the
year, but now are saying it will be the end of January.
TLLRWA submitted the last three additional revisions to the
license application requested by the commission before the
end of the year. Revision 12 addressed site closure and
decommissioning; Revision 13 addressed various general
description changes, design criteria and features, operating
procedures, radiological and non-radiological impacts and a
list of permits the authority will have obtained prior to
operation; Revision 14 addressed the remaining questions
from the commission. The Natural Resources Commission did
not request any more information. Contact: Texas Low-Level
Radioactive Waste Disposal Authority, 7701 North Lamar,
Suite 300, Austin, TX 78752; (512) 451-5292.

Professional Development

41st Annual Underground Corrosion Short Course, May 14-16,
West Virginia University, Morgantown, W.Va. Course includes
basic, intermediate and advanced classes covering practical,
technical information about the causes of corrosion,
instrumentation, corrosion surveys, cathodic protection,
pipe coatings, water and wastewater and methods of corrosion
control. Contact: Angela Durham; (304) 293-3745.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev03.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

CALENDAR


   Jan. 10-11, 1996: Nuclear Waste Technical Review Board
Meeting, Las Vegas. Contact: Paula Alford, Nuclear Waste
Technical Review Board, 1100 Wilson Blvd., Suite 910,
Arlington, VA 22209; (703) 235-4473.

   Jan. 18, 1996: Central Interstate LLW Compact Commission
Meeting, New Orleans. Contact: Don Rabbe, Central Interstate
Low-Level Radioactive Waste Commission, 1033 O St., Suite
530, Lincoln, NE 68508; (402) 476-8247.

   Jan. 24-26, 1996: Meeting of the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission's Advisory Committee on Nuclear Waste, Rockville,
Md. Contact: Richard K. Major, Chief, Nuclear Waste Branch,
NRC; (301) 415-7366.

   Feb. 3-6, 1996: National Governors' Association, Fajardo,
Puerto Rico. Contact: National Governors' Association, 444
N. Capitol St., NW, Suite 250, Washington, DC 20001; (202)
624-5300.

   Feb. 5-6, 1996: Canadian Nuclear Association/Canadian
Nuclear Society Winter Seminar, Ottawa, Ontario. Contact:
Sylvie Caron, CNS Office, 144 Front St. West, Suite 725,
Toronto, Ontario M5J 2L7; (416) 977-7620, ext. 18; fax:
(416) 979-8356.

   Feb. 25-29, 1996: Waste Management '96, Tucson, Ariz.
Theme: HLW, LLW, Mixed Waste and Environmental Restoration -
Working Towards a Cleaner Environment. Contact: WM Symposia
Inc., 245 S. Plumer, Suite 19, Tucson, AZ 85719; (520) 624-
8573; fax: (520) 792-3993.

   Feb. 25-29, 1996: American Institute of Chemical
Engineers Spring National Meeting, New Orleans. Contact:
AIChExpress Service Center, 345 East 47th St., New York, NY
10017-2395; (800) 242-4363.

   March 10-14, 1996: International Conference on Nuclear
Engineering, New Orleans. Sponsored by the American Society
of Mechanical Engineers and the Japan Society of Mechanical
Engineers. Contact: Brian Bigalke, ASME, 345 E. 47th St.,
New York, NY 10017; (212) 705-7057; fax: (212) 705-7856.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-9</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B019-134</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev32.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002005 text/html 19160
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:18:14 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:33 GMT
Content-length: 18971
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev32.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
OIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
May 3, 1990<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Spring Cleanup Resumes on Alaska's Beaches</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(372 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Bulgarian Vessel Sinks, Spills Diesel Fuel Near Stornoway,&nbsp;Scotland</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(400 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>USCG Tanker Safety Study Group Releases Final Report</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(203 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>US EPA Extends Compliance Dates for UST operators</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(362 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>***WORLD NEWS BRIEFS***</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Amoco Pipeline Ruptures in Texas</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(118 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>US Barge Spills 10,000 Gallons in Texas</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(292 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Exxon Rejects Environmental Proposals</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(69 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Judge Rules Against Limited Liability in Glacier Bay Spill</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(108 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>Comprehensive US Contingency Plan Review Due Out Shortly</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(240 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>Barge Spills 18,000 gallons of Gasoline in Kentucky</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(185 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>***HOTLINE***</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>Editor's note: OSIR subscribers may now call me on a new telephone</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(83 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
OIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
May 3, 1990

Spring Cleanup Resumes on Alaska's Beaches

     On 1 May, Exxon deployed its first five cleanup squads,
totaling 100 workers from Seward and Valdez, back to the beaches
in Prince William Sound, Alaska, USA.  The beaches were polluted
by nearly 11 million gallons of crude oil that spilled from the
tanker Exxon Valdez in March 1989.
     For the past several weeks, survey teams walked these beaches
to determine both surface and subsurface oiling conditions.  The
teams -- made up of Exxon employees, state and federal
representatives, scientists, and land owners -- recorded their
observations with maps, sketches, and questionnaires that asked
about location, oil coverage, oil characteristics, and their
suggested method of cleanup.  Thus far, two out of three
surveillance phases are complete: crews have studied close to 480
miles of beach in Prince William Sound and the Gulf of Alaska.
The third phase will begin this week and will address the
remaining priority areas in the Gulf of Alaska (86.4 miles).
     At the end of each day, the groups faxed their findings back
to Exxon's command center in Anchorage where a Technical Advisory
Group (the TAG team) in Anchorage plugged the information into a
decision matrix.  The TAG teams are made up of representatives
from Exxon, the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation
(ADEC), the US Coast Guard (USCG), and the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
     Days before cleanup was to begin, crews deployed boom in
environmentally sensitive areas, near commercial fishing areas and
where wildlife has begun to migrate for the spring.  The squads
sent out on 1 May will begin removing tar mats and debris from:
Herring Bay; Seal Island; northwest Prince William Sound; south
Prince William Sound; and Kenai and the Gulf of Alaska.
     Officials have not yet established a general cleanup plan,
especially for subsurface oil.  The disagreement has, for the most
part, centered around the use of bioremediation.  Though there are
few practical alternatives to bioremediation, and although the
USCG, NOAA, and Exxon agree that it is the best solution for this
summer's cleanup, ADEC, which has undergone agency personnel
changes and claims there is not enough time and information to
make a knowledgeable decision, has not yet approved its use.  ADEC
is expected to give its answer within the next few days.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
OIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
May 3, 1990

Bulgarian Vessel Sinks, Spills Diesel Fuel Near Stornoway,
Scotland

     At 0022 LT on 25 April, the 2,654-ton Bulgarian motor stern
fish factory ship Kondor sank three kilometers east of Kebock Head
(Lat 58 0.25N, Long 06 18.4W), south of the town of Stornoway, on
the Isle of Lewis, Scotland.  The vessel, owned by Okeansky
Ribolov of Bourgas, Bulgaria, was under tow following a grounding
on Sgeir Graidach (Lat 57 48N, Long 06 28W).  At 1600 LT, the crew
of the fishery protection vessel Sulisker confirmed that the
sunken vessel was leaking diesel oil and lubricating oil.  The
Kondor's masters estimated that there were 17,000 to 24,000
gallons of diesel oil and 1,500 to 1,800 gallons of lubricating
oil in the vessel's bunkers.  "Although there are no estimates of
the actual amount that has spilled thus far, all of it will
eventually seep out," said Ian Stephen, an officer with the
Stornoway Coast Guard.
     Officials were concerned about the proximity of the spill to
local fish farms and the use of dispersants in this location, even
though it was a "fairly light spillage," David Deas of the British
Marine Pollution Control Unit (MPCU) in London told OSIR.  The
MPCU finally gave permission for the Sulisker to apply 2.1 cubic
tons of dispersant at 2145 LT on the evening of 25 April.  The
MPCU, after approval from local authorities, the Nature
Conservancy Council, and the Department of Agriculture and
Fisheries in Scotland, applied an additional four tons of
dispersants from aircraft over the next two days.  The MPCU has
taken no further action after 28 April, according to Deas.
     Stephen told OSIR that the diesel fuel slick was surveyed
twice in the last two days -- once by a Coast Guard boat and once
by a Nature Conservancy boat.  Both surveys showed the 1.9- by
3.7- kilometer slick to be breaking up and moving north and south
away from the coastline of the Isle of Lewis.  "There was great
concern about the large number of fish farms in the sea lochs
along the coast," said Stephen, "but it may not be as bad as
originally feared."
     The Kondor, which was a part of a large fleet of "Klondikers"
that buy mackerel and herring fish from local fishermen during
on-sea transactions, will continue to leak what remains of its
fuel oil, according to Stephen.  "It is hoped that nature will
take its course and disperse the fuel oil naturally," Deas told
OSIR.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
OIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
May 3, 1990

USCG Tanker Safety Study Group Releases Final Report

     The US Coast Guard (USCG) recently released its final report
of the Tanker Safety Study Group.  The five USCG officers in the
study group, headed by USCG Rear Admiral H.H. Bell, meant the
45-page report to be an internal working document.  However, the
report, dated October 1989, was made public two weeks ago.
     The report is a comprehensive review of the USCG's US and
foreign tankship inspection programs, a review that has not taken
place for over a decade.  Among the problems outlined in the
report, the study group found that: there are too few inspectors,
many of whom are overworked or inexperienced; present-day ships
are made with less steel and travel at higher speeds, making them
more vulnerable to cracking; and crews have been reduced, making
crewmembers fatigued and overworked.  "The age-old problem of too
few people and not enough fully qualified inspectors still exists.
These problems have been around for years although their magnitude
has increased rapidly since 1982.  Decreased budgets, manpower
cuts, larger ships, more sophisticated shipboard systems, quicker
turn-around times, and the shifting emphasis of USCG duties from
safety to law enforcement have had far-reaching effects on the
program."
     For a copy of the report, contact the OSIR Hotline.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
OIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
May 3, 1990

US EPA Extends Compliance Dates for UST operators

     The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) recently
extended the financial responsibility compliance dates for two
petroleum underground storage tank (UST) owners and operators.
Petroleum marketers owning between 13 and 99 tanks who were
required to comply by 26 April 1990, now have until 26 April 1991.
Those owning between one and 12 USTs, those having fewer than 100
at one site, non-marketers with less than $20 million tangible net
worth, and local governments have until 26 October 1991 to comply
instead of 26 October 1990.
     The requirements fall under subtitle I of the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act, which demands that owners and
operators of USTs meet certain financial responsibilities in
cleanup and third-party damages resulting from leaks.  Petroleum
marketers owning 1,000 or more USTs and non-marketers with more
than $20 million in tangible net worth were required to comply in
January 1989; and petroleum marketers owning between 100 and 999
USTs were required to comply in October 1989.
     The EPA recognizes that those in the third and fourth
compliance groups, however, need more time to comply.  Many of
them cannot obtain insurance because they cannot meet insurers'
underwriting requirements.  "We heard loud and clear ... about
unnecessary hardships that would be imposed by the earlier
compliance dates," said EPA Administrator William K. Reilly.  "In
some cases, the affected service station or store is the only
available facility for miles around and without adequate assurance
funding would have had to close.  The challenge we face along with
Congress and the states is to protect groundwater and the
environment from leaking USTs while making sure that mom-and-pop
gas stations and other small operators are not subjected to
needless economic hardships because of real problems in securing
the required insurance arrangements.  This is a problem that we
intend to solve in order to make this important program succeed."
     To date, 34 states have enacted legislation creating state
assurance funds to help owners comply with the requirements and to
clean up releases.  However, the EPA has approved only seven of
these to be used as compliance mechanisms.  The states and the EPA
will use the additional time to approve the funds and make them
operational.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
OIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
May 3, 1990

Amoco Pipeline Ruptures in Texas

     On 24 April, an Amoco pipeline ruptured and spilled an
estimated 50,000 gallons of crude oil into Millsap Lake, in
Millsap, Texas, USA.  Amoco spotted the four-inch-thick slick from
the air, and immediately hired local contractors to begin cleanup
efforts with sorbent booms and vacuum trucks.  Though workers
placed boom around the water intakes, heavy rains and local
flooding caused some oil and sorbent pads to be washed past the
booms and into the nearby Brazos River.  The Texas Department of
Health sampled the lake water, which services 300 customers, and
determined that Millsap's water requirements can be safely met by
adjusting the water intake to a depth of 30-48 inches.  Officials
expect environmental damage to be minimal.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
OIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
May 3, 1990

US Barge Spills 10,000 Gallons in Texas

     The 246-foot US tank barge MGM 2001 leaked approximately
10,000 gallons of #2 diesel fuel into the Colorado River at the
Way Energy dock, Texas City, Texas, USA, on 22 April.  Workers
from Georgia Transporters of Panama City, Florida, USA -- the
operator of the tug that was pulling both the MGM 2001 and the MGM
2002 -- noticed the leak near the #1 starboard tank.  Divers
confirmed reports of a crack three to ten inches wide and five to
six feet long.  The barge carried a total of 500,000 gallons.
     The tug's operator first contacted the two companies in the
area, Way Energy and Hoechst Celanese Chemical, for assistance.
Celanese sent out about 300 feet of boom until Martin Gas Marine,
the owner of the barges, hired Garner Environmental Services of
Houston, Texas, to set up an additional 2,500 feet of containment
and sorbent boom around the barge, and at two locations across the
entrance to the Colorado River turning basin.  With the help of
sorbent pads and sweeps and vacuum trucks, crews were able to
recover about 44,000 gallons of oil/water.  Salvage crews pumped
the remaining oil in the tank to barge MGM 2002.  "This cleanup
went better than the one a month ago in Freeport, Texas (OSIR, 29
March)," Richard Rhodes, USCG investigation officer in charge of
pollution, told OSIR.  "This time we had better weather and tides
 ... and it was in an ideal area.  In the Freeport spill, the
tides switched three times on us."
     The barge is currently undergoing permanent repairs at the
Channel Shipyard in Channelview, Texas.  An investigation into the
cause of the accident is underway.  "The captain says he didn't
hit anything," said Rhodes, "but I can't imagine how that crack
got there."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
OIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
May 3, 1990

Exxon Rejects Environmental Proposals

At Exxon's annual shareholders meeting on 25 April in Houston,
Texas, USA (OSIR, 24 April), Exxon overwhelmingly rejected six
proposals by a small portion of the 1,850 shareholders present to
establish "responsible" environmental policies, including a
proposal to adopt the "Valdez Principles," a set of corporate
guidelines to safeguard the environment.  Exxon further implied
that the company has no intention of voluntarily replacing its
tanker fleet with double-hulled vessels.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
OIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
May 3, 1990

Judge Rules Against Limited Liability in Glacier Bay Spill

     US District Court Judge H. Russel Holland recently ruled that
the owner (Trinidad Shipping Co.) and operators of the tanker
Glacier Bay, which spilled 160,000 gallons of crude oil into Cook
Inlet, Alaska, USA, in 1987 may not limit their liability to $6.6
million, the value of the ship and its cargo, under the Liability
Limitation Act of 1851.  In its complaint, Trinidad claimed that
the 1851 law held precedence over the Trans-Alaska Pipeline
Authorization Act (TAPAA), which holds a spiller liable for $14
million and the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Liability Fund liable for
another $86 million.  But Holland ruled that TAPAA repealed the
Limitation Act in this instance.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
OIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
May 3, 1990

Comprehensive US Contingency Plan Review Due Out Shortly

     In an October 1989 US General Accounting Office study on the
adequacy of preparation and response of the US Coast Guard (USCG)
to the Exxon Valdez oil spill, the USCG reported that it had
initiated a nationwide study of contingency plans, "because of the
President's concern about the nation's ability to respond to major
spills."
     The USCG study has since evolved into a review by the entire
federal government including the fourteen agencies that make up
the National Response Team -- the Environmental Protection Agency,
the Department of Defense, the Department of Energy, the
Department of Commerce, the Department of Agriculture, the
Department of Transportation, the State Department, the Department
of Labor, the Department of Justice, the Department of Health and
Human Services, the Department of the Interior, the Federal
Emergency Management Administration, the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission -- and all the USCG Regional Response Teams, according
to Commander Doug Lentsch of the USCG Chief Pollution Response
Branch in Washington, DC, USA.  The review includes a total of 75
reports from these various agencies.  "It will be a snapshot in
time, as to where we stood at the time the report was done,"
Lentsch told OSIR.  "The basis of it is well-founded.  What the
politicians will do with it is unknown."  According to Lentsch,
the nationwide US contingency plan review, still awaiting the
signatures of the Environmental Protection Agency and the
Secretary of Transportation, is due out in a few weeks.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
OIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
May 3, 1990

Barge Spills 18,000 gallons of Gasoline in Kentucky

     On 23 April, the 206-foot US barge Chotin 2880 struck a
submerged object and spilled an estimated 18,000 gallons of
unleaded gasoline while mooring at the Southern States Petroleum
facility on the Ohio River, Owensboro, Kentucky, USA.  According
to the USCG Marine Safety Office in Louisville, Kentucky, the
submerged object, believed to be a "D" ring off of the mooring
cell, caused an 18-inch by 2-inch crack in the vessel's hull,
approximately six inches below the waterline.  Although crews
smelled gasoline, they did not observe a sheen, since most of the
gasoline evaporated in the warm weather.  A local cooperative,
Owensboro Cooperative, deployed boom around the vessel and
offloaded the remaining product.  The lightering of the vessel
caused the crack to rise above the waterline, which stopped the
discharge.  The vessel is currently on its way to Owensboro River
Service for permanent repairs.
     To prevent barges from hitting the "D" rings in the future,
USCG Lt. Terry Hoover told OSIR, the local towing company will
install fenders between the barges and the mooring cells and
Southern States will weld metal beams outside the mooring cells.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
OIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet
May 3, 1990

Editor's note: OSIR subscribers may now call me on a new telephone

Editor's note: OSIR subscribers may now call me on a new telephone
line.  Please make note of the new number: 1-617-641-5110 -- A.S.
 . . . Exxon recently pleaded not guilty to federal charges
stemming from the Exxon Valdez oil spill.  The company will go on
trial 18 June . . . If you need more information on these brief
notes or any article in this issue, contact the OSIR Hotline; Tel:
1-617-641-5110 or 617-648-8700; Fax: 1-617-648-8707; Tlx: 650 100
9891 MCI UW.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-10</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B019-157</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev46.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002024 text/html 7052
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:18:41 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:37 GMT
Content-length: 6864
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev46.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
OZONE DEPLETION NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNet <BR>
January 3, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>------------------------------</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>New Ozone Depleter Suit to be Filed</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(211 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>---------------</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>Industry Urges Contractors to Make Phaseout Plans</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(330 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>DuPont Says It Will Phase Out HCFCs 10 Years Early</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(332 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
OZONE DEPLETION NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

New Ozone Depleter Suit to be Filed

The Environmental Law Foundation (ELF), U.S. Public Interest
Research Group (PIRG), Earthday 2000 and Ozone Action will file suit 
January 6, 1996, against refrigerator manufacturers Maytag and Sanyo 
and their retailers Montgomery Ward, Circuit City and Basic Living 
Products. The suit alleges that the parties are in violation of the 
Clean Air Act in failing to label products manufactured with and 
containing CFCs.

The Clean Air Act states that all products containing or
manufactured with CFC must be labeled to warn consumers that the
chlorfluorocarbons are harmful to public health and the environment.  
Manufacturers Amana, GE and Whirlpool replaced CFCs with HCFCs in 
their refrigerators. As a result of another recent settlement with 
ELF, Ozone Action and Earthday 2000, these three manufacturers are 
required to halt all advertising that their HCFC refrigerators are 
"ozone free" or "CFC free."

According to ELF associate attorney Christine Mailloux, "The
CFC-containing refrigerators sold by Maytag and Sanyo pose far more
of a public threat than those containing HCFCs. Especially with 
other manufacturers selling HCFC-based models in the same stores, it 
is imperative that Maytag, Sanyo and their retailers comply with 
federal law to help consumers make more environmentally conscious 
decisions."

For details contact Kalee Krieder at 202/265-6738.

(OZONE ACTION RELEASE: 12/21)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
OZONE DEPLETION NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

Industry Urges Contractors to Make Phaseout Plans

As the CFC phaseout takes effect, heating, ventilation and air 
conditioning industry contractors are being urged to make good on
their New Year's resolutions to start a retrofit/replacement program 
and to do it now.

Even though the use of equipment using CFCs is still legitimate, the 
cost of the refrigerant will continue to climb as time passes.  End 
users who have not looked at their options for phasing out equipment 
that uses CFCs will "have to think about the future," says Tom 
Crane, manager of communications for fluorine products of 
AlliedSignal Chemicals.

Melody Dixon-Brown, marketing communications program manager for
DuPont Fluoro-products warns that complacency is the major problem.
"It's prudent to have a transition plan," she said.  At the 
beginning of 1996, Dixon-Brown estimates that three million 
commercial refrigeration systems and 67,000 centrifugal chillers in 
the U.S. will still operate on CFCs, representing $135 billion of 
refrigeration and a/c equipment.

Dixon-Brown predicts that those still operating CFC-using products
will begin running into serious shortages within two to five years.
Speaking for Elf Atochem, Harold Lamb, business manager for 
refrigerants is not so sanguine: "I suspect we'll see spot shortages 
during the next year," said Lamb, who predicts shortages may become 
acute by 1997.  The tax on CFCs in the U.S. is now $5.35 per pound 
and will rise again in 1996.

Supermarkets in particular need to investigate options after taking
inventory of their existing equipment and its projected life,
manufacturers advise.  Retrofitting can be expensive but even 
changing to the use of more costly HFCs over HCFCs makes sense when 
equipment can expect a long service life since the refrigerant is 
not due to be phased out.  In some cases it will, in the long run, 
be less expensive to replace equipment entirely, the industry 
advises.  The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and DuPont 
suggest that the time to convince customers to switch to alternative 
refrigerants is during routine service jobs.

(RSES JOURNAL: DECEMBER 1995, p.24)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
OZONE DEPLETION NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNet
January 3, 1996

DuPont Says It Will Phase Out HCFCs 10 Years Early

DuPont, in an effort to stem criticism of its production of ozone
destroying products, says it will phase out HCFCs 10 years earlier
than the Montreal Protocol requires.

Earl Clark, senior refrigerant engineer for the company's CFC 
Retrofit Program announced the plan at the Mechanical Service 
Contractors of America's 10th annual conference in San Antonio 
recently.  Under the Protocol, a 100 percent phaseout of HCFC 
production is called for by 2030.  DuPont says it will discontinue 
sale of R-22 in new equipment by January 1, 2020.  The company, 
according to Clark, is working on an "aggressive industry program 
for R-22 replacements" to be in use by that date.

The gradual phaseout planned from 1996 through 2030 will probably be 
accomplished in Europe by 2015, Clark said.  The Clean Air Act now
says that a loss of 15 percent of HCFCs used in industrial air 
conditioning units of 50 pounds or more constitutes a violation and 
that fines of up to 25,000 per day may be levied by the EPA.

DuPont remains an advocate of HCFC in centrifugal and screw
chillers, however, along with residential air conditioners,
commercial and transport refrigeration and in heat pumps.  DuPont 
says advantages of R-22 include low toxicity and  ozone depletion 
potential (ODP) 20 times lower than R-11 or R-12.

HCFC-123, said Clark, is vital to DuPont's success, and points out
that its ODP and global warming potential (GWP) are far lower than
any other refrigerant.  The company also revealed that a two-year 
inhalation study completed in 1991 indicated that the benign tumors 
found in lab animals had "little relevance to man."  HCFC-123 is 
DuPont's replacement for R-11 since their operating characteristics 
are similar and the same lubricants can be used.

DuPont is now producing HFC-134a as its replacement for R-12 and
R-500 in centrifugal and screw chillers.  The product's ODP and GWP
are 0.0 and 0.28 compared with R-12's ODP OF 1.0 and its GWP of 3.0.

(ACHR NEWS: 12/18, p.17)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-11</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B019-197</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev04.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002052 text/html 102368
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:18:54 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:22 GMT
Content-length: 102178
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev04.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet <BR>
September 1992<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>HEALTH BEAT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>PARENTAL CELL DAMAGE MAY BE LINKED TO ALPHA RADIATION&nbsp;EXPOSURE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(259 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RADON IN WATER</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>ADVISORY BOARD CRITICIZES EPA WATER GUIDELINES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(242 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>VIEWPOINT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>ANSWERING QUESTIONS ABOUT RADON TESTING AND MITIGATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(811 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>NEW LANDAUER RELO PROGRAM RAISES MANY QUESTIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1088 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS BRIEFS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>INTERNATIONAL RADON SYMPOSIUM SET FOR SEPTEMBER 1992</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(45 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>RADON DOCUMENTARY TO AIR AGAIN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(57 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>AD COUNCIL DEVELOPS NEW PUBLIC SERVICE RADON CAMPAIGN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(64 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>DOW CORNING HALTS SALE OF "FIRE STOP"</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(95 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>BOWSER-MORNER OPENS NEW CALIBRATION FACILITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(111 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>ATTORNEYS SAY IAQ LITIGATION GROWING FAST</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(183 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>RELOCATION COUNCIL INTRODUCES DISCLOSURE FORM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(36 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>CLINTONS' TO TEST THEIR ARKANSAS MANSION THIS FALL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(47 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RESEARCH</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>FAMILY PET MAY BE "WATCH DOG" FOR ENVIRONMENTAL RISKS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(721 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MITIGATION NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>CARBON MONOXIDE, BACKDRAFTING ISSUES ADDRESSED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1236 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><LI>RADON AND BACKDRAFTING: AN ADDENDUM TO EPA MITIGATION&nbsp;STANDARDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(54 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INDOOR AIR POLLUTION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>FEDERAL INVESTIGATORS HALT BOGUS AIR FILTER CLAIMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(364 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RADON FACTS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>RADON AND CIGARETTE SMOKING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(32 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>LEGAL NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>RADON HAS ITS DAY IN MARYLAND COURT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(370 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>CERCLA: EPA ISSUES RULE ON LENDER LIABILITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(367 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>REAL ESTATE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>HOME BUYER'S AND SELLER'S GUIDE TO RADON: REVIEW</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(610 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>DRAFT EPA RADON TESTING PROTOCOLS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(332 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RADON MAPPING</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#22"><A HREF = "#22"><LI>EPA "GEOLOGICAL PROBABILITY OF ELEVATED INDOOR RADON" MAP&nbsp;DISTRIBUTED, CRITICIZED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(242 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>LEGISLATIVE UPDATE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>RADON LEGISLATION AND RELOCATION PROPERTY TRANSFERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2451 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>HR 3258 REVIEWERS MAKE COMMENTS, SHARE CONCERNS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1158 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CALENDAR OF RADON EVENTS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>SEPTEMBER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(38 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>OCTOBER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(51 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RADON QUOTES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>DISCLOSURE AND RADON. WHAT THE RELOCATION INDUSTRY SAYS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(40 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>EPA RADON PROGRAM REVIEW</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#28"><A HREF = "#28"><LI>EPA RADON PROGRAM REVIEW: GOVERNMENT, PRIVATE SECTOR&nbsp;RESPONSES ARE VARIED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1437 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RADON FACTS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#29"><A HREF = "#29"><LI>RADON LUNG CANCER DEATHS AVERTED PER YEAR AFTER&nbsp;IMPLEMENTATION OF RADON_RESISTANT BUILDING CODES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(24 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RISK ASSESSMENT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>THE CHANGING FACE OF RISK ASSESMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(298 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RADON NEWS HEADLINES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>School Surveys. Data from the U.S. EPA survey of U.S. schools is</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(38 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>Residential data. Out this fall. Montana & Virginia are two states to</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(17 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>Mitigation standard. Lou Nelson is working with AARST to develop a</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(16 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#34"><LI>New RMP Measurement Protocols. Due out in August. Exams will</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(35 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#35"><LI>RMP Participants. As of July, 1451 participants in the EPA program.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(27 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#36"><LI>RCP Participants. As of July, 931 participants.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(7 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#37"><LI>Backdrafting. Of importance to mitigators, Section 5.8 of final</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(21 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#38"><LI>EPA Mitigation Program. Officials say they are working on the</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(49 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>LETTERS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#39"><LI>READER'S VIEWS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(937 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

PARENTAL CELL DAMAGE MAY BE LINKED TO ALPHA RADIATION
EXPOSURE

The possibility that exposure to ionizing alpha radiation may damage
descendent human cells could help explain the "Gardner Phenomena,"
in which cases of children's leukemia are believed to have been
caused by father's employment at a British nuclear facility.
Scientists now have some reason to believe alpha radiation emitted
by radon and plutonium may be responsible for those chromosomal
abberations.

These findings, however, are extremely controversial because they
challenge traditional knowledge and involve scientists leaping from
one biological principle to another in order to make their case.

The scientists examining alpha radiation and its effects linked
leukemia among children to their fathers, who worked at a nuclear
fuel reprocessing plant. Research data indicate increased risk of
leukemia (six to eight times) in the offspring of fathers receiving
total radiation does of 100 millisieverts or greater prior to
conception.

From examining the results of laboratory tests, the researchers
believe they have found an unexpected mechanism associated with
alpha radiation -- chromosomal abberations which occur in an
apparently random fashion -- in descendent cells. The chromosomal
abberations shed new light on the potential damage alpha radiation
may cause.

"If a comparable phenomena could be demonstrated in spermatogonial
(sperm forming) stem cells," says researcher Eric Wright, "then it
is possible that a similar abberation could arise in sperm.

"Whilst our experiments don't actually address the Gardner
Phenomena," Wright says, "they do offer a biological mechanism
worth thinking about if you are going to take the alleged paternal
transmission of radiation damage seriously."  Wright is research
leader at the British Medical Research Council's Radiobiology Unit.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

ADVISORY BOARD CRITICIZES EPA WATER GUIDELINES

Guidelines created by the U.S. EPA to assist public water utilities
dispose of wastes created during the radionuclide removal process
need more work, according to EPA's own Science Advisory Board
(SAB). The SAB Radiation Advisory Committee says it's worried
EPA's non-binding guidelines will "by default ... become the
standard."

According to committeeman Richard G. Sextro, in the absence of
"specific" federal regulations, EPA's guidelines for removing
radioactive wastes from treated drinking water will be viewed as a
standard and cause states to spend billions of dollars to comply.
Greg Helms of EPA's Office of Ground Water says the agency doesn't
have authority to "require" anything specific regarding disposal of
treated ground water waste.

A 27-member California congressional delegation says it disagrees
with EPA's proposed radon in water rule. In a letter to President
Bush, the group called EPA's proposed rule "very stringent and
costly," adding that the $3.7 billion compliance price tag will only
reduce "on average, about one percent of the public's total exposure
to radon according to EPA's Science Advisory Board." California
representatives asked Bush to direct EPA Administrator William
Reilly to conduct a full multi-media risk assessment in order to
produce a comprehensive cost effective radon reduction program for
the U.S.

The delegates also asked Bush to direct EPA to adopt a radon in
drinking water standard consistent with the goals of the Indoor
Radon Abatement Act of 1988.

Contact: Scott Abel (317) 843-0804




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

ANSWERING QUESTIONS ABOUT RADON TESTING AND MITIGATION

Recently I spoke at a radon meeting sponsored by the National Civic
League. A number of county health officials and neighborhood housing
groups were in attendance. The meetingTs purpose was to develop a
radon action plan designed to reach local communities. But, it
became clear early in the meeting that neither of these groups had a
very good grasp of basic radon fundamentals, nor were they
convinced there was a radon problem in their area.

I'm sure they aren't much different than any average American. Yes,
they've heard of radon, but radon is a problem in someone else's
home or neighborhood, not in their's.

EPA has been trying since 1988 to convince the public radon is a
serious health threat. Their efforts have probably made them feel
much like the "boy who cried wolf" because nobody seems to be
paying attention. Government officials have known the danger of
radon exposure for many years. In fact, in the early 1940's the U.S.
Public Health Service warned the Atomic Energy Commission about
radon and its threat to uranium miners. Unfortunately, the
Commission chose to ignore the warnings, and as taxpayers, we are
now compensating the miners' families for their exposure.

As you may know, radon didn't make headlines until it became a
"crisis" in the home of Stanley Watras. He and his family were
forced to vacate their house until their radon problem could be
corrected. When you stop to think about it, radon is still that way in
the majority of homes. Until someone moves, there is no radon
crisis, even if they know it is there!

My company has tested thousands of homes for radon. But more-
often-than-not, when home owners learn they have elevated levels
they usually don't take any action to lower their exposure. Initially
they might be concerned enough to start calling local "experts" until
they find someone who will calm their fears and tell them not to
worry. It seems the only time radon indeed becomes a crisis which
leads to action is when it comes time to sell a home. When sellers
become buyers, however, they are far more likely to insist on low
radon levels. Ironic? Perhaps. But, it's not such a bad situation,
because two houses get fixed as a result of the original transaction.

Radon isn't really much different than other health-related issues.
We generally don't do anything until we are forced to do so. Doctors
tell us we must lower our cholesterol, quit smoking, loose weight,
etc. or we may face the possibility of premature death. Look at the
change AIDS has brought to our society due to the tremendous fear
generated by public information. EPA took a lot of heat last year
over their public service ad campaign. The sad thing is the most
severe criticism of the campaign was due to a set of billboards
declaring "Radon is a Severe Risk in this Area" showing an X-Ray of
a pair of lungs. Some who saw the ads said they were "scared" the
visability of the ads would lower their property values. They could
care less, it seems, about the health risk radon poses.

I'm not a health physicist, but I do review a lot of scientific
information about radon that seems to validate the old adage "where
there is smoke, there is fire." Some researchers now believe radon
exposure may cause damage to genes that prevent tumors. Others
report possible links to leukemia, cancer of the liver, breast and
brain. I know there are those who will read these words and respond
with "show me the bodies." Although that evidence may be provided
in the future, until it is, we will just have to "smell the smoke."

When I was a small child, I can remember seeing ads with doctors
advertising Lucky Strikes and Chesterfields. When scientists began
raising the possibility that cigarette smoking might cause lung
cancer, other experts derided their research saying "prove it." But I
ask, where are those critics now?

The funny thing about radon is that the actions of one lawyer may be
saving more lives than the efforts of all health professionals
combined. Several years ago, Dick Mansfield, chief attorney for the
Employee Relocation Council, began evaluating environmental
pollutants. He issued a white paper in the late 1980's advising all
members of the relocation industry to test homes for radon before
taking them into inventory. He has since been criticized for that
decision but remains resolute in his position. Even though his
direction was designed to protect corporations against future
liability, the end result is that he may be responsible for saving
thousands of lives over the next decade or two. Ironic, isn't it, but
then again, pioneers always seem to get arrows in their backs.

Richard Jordan - Editor & Publisher, Radon News Digest.
Contact: (317) 843-0804



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

NEW LANDAUER RELO PROGRAM RAISES MANY QUESTIONS

Despite less than favorable sales of radon detectors over the past
several years, Glenwood, Illinois-based Landauer, Inc. has reason to
be excited about radon. The AMEX-listed corporation recently rolled
out a new testing and mitigation program designed to help relocation
companies reduce administrative costs while increasing Landauer's
share of the radon detector market. According to company brochures,
the program would take the "corporation, relocation company,
transferee and real estate agent out of the testing and mitigation
process."

Landauer calls their new relocation marketing scheme the Home
Buyer's Preferred Radon Protection Program. It is a novel idea with
potential. In fact, at first glance, I'm sure it sounds very attractive
to relocation administrators, many of which are already
overburdened by increasing environmental concerns.

HERE'S HOW IT WORKS

The Landauer plan is sold as a service agreement provided by the
corporation or relocation company to the buyer at closing. After
closing is completed, Landauer sends the buyer a RADTRAK( alpha
track detector (manufactured by Landauer), which the buyer deploys
in the home, removing and returning it to Landauer after 120 days.
Landauer analyzes the device and provides results to the buyer, now
the owner of the home.

If levels of radon gas of 4 pCi/l or higher are detected by Landauer,
the home will be mitigated by a Landauer selected mitigator at no
cost to the buyer or relocation company. Landauer provides for post-
mitigation testing "to confirm the radon concentration has been
reduced to below 4 pCi/l."

WHAT'S THE PROBLEM?

Company brochures tout Landauer's RADTRAK long-term  alpha track
detector as the type of test kit "recommended by the EPA," adding
that short-term tests "may produce a false positive or negative
resulting in unneccessary mitigation, or worse, an undetected health
hazard."

Landauer ought to know a lot about "false" test results. Remember
the Landauer Quick Screen( detector? That device, also touted by
the company as reliable, was sold all over the United States to an
unknown number of consumers and yet never managed to pass EPA
proficiency tests. In fact, according to officials with the company,
Landauer never bothered to alert those consumers who relied on the
Quick Screen that their test results might not be accurate. Some
states, like Pennsylvania, ordered the device off retail shelves and
out of the state.

In addition, Landauer's ability to provide accurate results have been
called into question once again. According to the EPA, the company's
most recent attempt to pass their alpha track detector through the
RMP failed. According to EPA staffers, Landauer has been "delisted"
from the U.S. EPA's RMP program for failing to pass the latest round
of blind tests. Will Landauer fail to notify recent RADTRAK
customers as well?

SOMETHING IS WRONG WITH THIS PICTURE

Although Landauer's program seems to be a great potential money-
maker for the company and its stockholders, it deserves scrutiny by
the radon and relocation industries.

For starters, it is commonly believed that the soon-to-be-released
"Home Buyer's and Seller's Guide to Radon" will not "recommend"
long-term test devices, but rather, short-term tests, when testing
is performed as a result of a real property transfer. As a major
player in the industry, Landauer  should have planned their marketing
materials to reflect this.

Second, Landauer shouldn't be in the radon business if they can't
meet EPA proficiency standards. That's just asking for trouble. And
not just for the company, but for the entire radon and relocation
industries. Negative media coverage of radon service companies like
Landauer, who fail to meet EPA criteria, yet continue to offer
services to the public, can damage the credibility of the entire radon
industry, giving the public another reason not to test or mitigate.

Third, Landauer's plan, although perfectly legal, leaves its
customers open to intense scrutiny, and perhaps, liability. Although
Landauer's Brett Ladda describes the program as "no different than
going to the doctor" (Landauer provides the test, analyzes it,
remediates if necessary and then provides a confirmatory test and
results, similar to physicians who both examine patients and
prescribe treatment), the plan does not provide enough details to be
attractive to the relocation industry. For instance, who will audit
the test results? How can homeowners be assured that Landauer
devices will detect radon without a confirmatory reading from an
independent firm of their choice? What does Landauer know about
mitigation? What experience do they have mitigating homes? How
will they ensure their "network" of mitigation contractors will
actually do the job right -- and that their work will meet EPA
standards? And, perhaps more importantly, do they guarantee their
work?

A GOOD IDEA, BUT POORLY PLANNED

Although the concept of the Landauer plan is not such a bad idea
from a consumer savings point of view, choosing Landauer for
anything radon-related could be a mistake for a corporation or
relocation company. It's a public relations disaster waiting to
happen. For instance, if one of Landauer's RADTRAK detectors were
discovered to have performed poorly, the media would first point to
Landauer as "the fox guarding the henhouse," comparing the
company's service agreements with those currently under fire
between physicians, insurance companies and home health care
providers.

Good reporters would then do a "history" of Landauer, pointing out
the company's size, revenues, other business dealings,  the Quick
Screen fiasco and the company's current delisting. Landauer and its
clients would be portrayed in a negative light.

The way I see it, Landauer has two options. One -- Landauer could
stop pretending to be a radon service company.  After passing EPA
proficiency tests, Landauer could begin making improvements to its
plan to make it more marketable.

Two -- Landauer could drop out of the radon testing and mitigation
industry altogether.  The companyTs error-ladden radon efforts are
nothing but a liability. Its past record speaks for itself. Today,
Landauer is still attempting to sell its new testing and mitigation
plan to a fictional corporate America . They call the plan "the no
hassles solution to radon" -- as if hassles top the corporate
relocation gripe list. In the real world of radon and relocation,
liability is of more concern. And, liability concerns can only be put
to rest when all environmental defects have been disclosed. Without
addressing disclosure, the Landauer plan falls short of "preferred"
and offers little "protection" to anyone.

Scott Abel is associate editor of Radon News Digest and president of
Reincarnate Marketing and Design Group, Indianapolis. Abel, a
freelance journalist, has been an observer of the radon industry
since 1987. Contact: (317) 843-0804.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

INTERNATIONAL RADON SYMPOSIUM SET FOR SEPTEMBER 1992

"Assessing the Risk," the 1992 International Symposium on Radon
and Radon Reduction Technology, September 22-25, 1992, Sheraton
Park Place Hotel, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Sponsored by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency and the Conference of Radiation
Control Program Directors. Contact: Diana Fry (502) 227-4543.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

RADON DOCUMENTARY TO AIR AGAIN

The American Medical Association and EPA have joined together to
produce a half-hour documentary on radon. The program has aired
several times already this year and is scheduled to be shown again
October, 10, at 12:30 p.m. on cabel channel CNBC. Copies of the video
also are available by calling 800-933-4AMT. ($29.95)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

AD COUNCIL DEVELOPS NEW PUBLIC SERVICE RADON CAMPAIGN

The Advertising Council is in the process of developing new TV
public service announcements due to be released in mid-August of
this year.

According to the Council, radon hotline volume is one way to assess
the impact of the advertising campaigns to date. Recent hotline
volume (Jan-July 1992) included 43,033 calls, twice as many calls
as were logged in all of 1991.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

DOW CORNING HALTS SALE OF "FIRE STOP"

Dow Corning recently withdrew its "Fire Stop Intumescent Wrap
Strip 2002" from the market. Recent testing of the wrap strip
revealed what the company calls "some performance limitations"
which develop as the product ages.

Dow Corning says it will no longer sell the product and advises
contractors and suppliers to return all unused wrap strip for
replacement. The company is looking into whether or not retrofits
will be necessary "in homes where Dow Corning Wrap Strip
previously had been installed."

For more information contact: Greg Whitaker (517) 496-8378 or
Dave Horschig (517) 496-5206.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

BOWSER-MORNER OPENS NEW CALIBRATION FACILITY

Bowser-Morner, Inc., an independent, accredited testing facility in
Dayton, Ohio, has opened a commercial radon calibration laboratory
the company says is identical to the chambers used by the U.S. EPA
in size, air flow, temperature, humidity controls, radon source,
monitoring methods and equipment.

The lab's quality assurance program features periodic data
comparisons with both EPA environmental laboratories in
Montgomery, Alabama and Las Vegas, Nevada; and the Department of
Energy's Environmental Measurements Laboratory in New York.

Editor's Note: Commercialcalibration facilities calibrate
measurement devices for radon service providers. The quality of
calibrations conducted for radon service providers affects the
accuracy of radon measurement results provided to consumers
(Source U.S. EPA).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

ATTORNEYS SAY IAQ LITIGATION GROWING FAST

According to attorneys interviewed by Indoor Air Quality Update
(IAQU), the courts have seen a tremendous increase in indoor air
quality (IAQ) lawsuits. The attorneys say as plaintiffs' interest in
IAQ lawsuits rise, so too will the interest and attention of the
design and construction industries.

Attorneys interviewed by the monthly trade journal say that
although many past lawsuits have centered around residential
pollutants, the focus is now shifting. In the future, they predict,
more and more IAQ lawsuits will center on commerical, industrial
and multi-family residential properties.

Building designers, construction contractors and building operators,
attorneys say, should ensure the safety of their tenants by testing
for the presence of all possible known contaminants and routinely
inspecting HVAC systems for problems.

Frank Cross, author of "Legal Responses to Indoor Air Pollution"
says, "Most building managers are hesitant to do this, in part,
because they may not want to know, and in part because they don't
want to unnecessarily alarm their tenants. "But if they want to
avoid future litigation," Cross told IAQU, "this (testing and HVAC
inspections) could make a big difference."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

RELOCATION COUNCIL INTRODUCES DISCLOSURE FORM

The relocation industry introduced a homeowner's disclosure
statement at this year's Corporate Relocation Council meeting in
Chicago. The homeowner disclosure statement is a form designed for
transferees to disclose any known housing problems, including radon
gas.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

CLINTONS' TO TEST THEIR ARKANSAS MANSION THIS FALL

According to Clinton/Gore media relations associates, Democratic
presidential candidate, Gov. Bill Clinton, will test the Arkansas
governor's mansion for radon this fall. Clinton staffers say the
candidate is aware of the radon problem, and, if elected, would help
focus more attention on indoor air quality issues.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

FAMILY PET MAY BE "WATCH DOG" FOR ENVIRONMENTAL RISKS

Man's best friend might also be his best doctor. "The family dog and
other pets can be ideal sentinels of health hazards in your
environment," says researcher Dr. Lawrence T. Glickman of Purdue
University's School of Veternary Medicine. "Now, for the first time,
a state health department is considering using animals to help
identify human diseases caused by environmental factors, in hopes
of spotting health problems before they happen or diagnosing them
when they do."

North Carolina is considering such a system, following a May
conference at which Glickman and other public-health experts
explored the possibility.

Glickman and Dr. Ralph C. Richardson, also of the Purdue School of
Veternary Medicine, say using animals as health sentinels has
several advantages.

"Pets are ideal health sentinels because they intimately share the
same environment as their owners and often eat the same things,"
says Glickman, an epidemiologist and head of the Department of
Veternary Pathobiology.

Richardson, professor of small animal medicine and oncology and
head of Purdue's Department of Veternary Clinical Sciences, says,
"Dogs acquire diseases sooner because of their shorter lifespans.
This gives us a chance to perhaps figure out why a disease develops,
thereby allowing owners to take preventative measures for
themselves and for the other animals in the environment."

Two years ago Glickman chaired the National Academy of Sciences'
Committee on   Animals as Monitors of Environmental Hazards,
which reviewed and evaluated the usefulness of animal studies in
assessing health risks for people.

The committee found that although many scientists view animal
sentinels as valuable indicators of environmental hazards, the
approach has not been widely accepted. Part of the reason, Glickman
says, is that such studies rely on epidemiology as the basic tool, and
that the science is relatively new. Epidemiology is the study of how
disease develops and spreads into a population.

Another reason, Glickman says, is that many government funding
agencies are unaware of the value of such animal studies. "But I
hope that the report might help legitimize this approach," he says.

The committee published its report last summer. One of the group's
recommendations was to require the reporting of environmentally
caused animal diseases to appropriate state or federal agencies,
which would allow the data collected to be shared with public health
officials.

"It's done for infectious diseases like rabies, so it just makes sense
to do it for something like bladder cancer, which can affect people,
too," Glickman notes.

The report also recommended making the best use of animal-
exposure and disease record systems via computer not only for
companion animals and livestock, but also fish and wildlife. In
addition, the report noted more and more veternary and biological
sciences schools are offering courses and graduate programs in
epidemiology, with an  emphasis on environmental health.

Glickman has done several animal-sentinel studies, including one on
breast cancer and diet in dogs. Another study linked bladder cancer
in dogs to owners' using flea and tick dips on the animals and living
near areas sprayed with insecticides.

Glickman also is part of a Purdue study of dogs to assess their
owners' exposure to radon gas in the home. The first phase of the
research involved attaching radon detection collars to about 30 pet
dogs in Tippecanoe County, Indiana, to measure home radon levels.
Phase one has been completed and researchers hope to obtain funding
for phase two, which will compare radon levels in homes of dogs
with lung cancer and a control group without cancer from the same
neighborhood.

Purdue's Comparative Oncology Program, which seeks novel and
effective ways to treat animals afflicated with cancer, includes a
tumorregistry of tissue samples suspected of being cancerous.
The programTs most recent work on animals as human health
sentinels found owners of dogs with cancer used 2, 4-D herbicide on
their lawns and/or used a lawn-care company about one-third more
often than did owners of dogs without the disease. Maligant
lymphoma in dogs is very similar to non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in
people. 2, 4-D also is one of the components in Agent Orange, the
defoliant used during the Vietnam War.

"We definitely want to help animals with better diagnosis and
treatment," says Richardson. "But the dream is to use animals that
may have been exposed to environmental hazards as sentinels for
how cancer develops in people."

By Ellen Rantz.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

CARBON MONOXIDE, BACKDRAFTING ISSUES ADDRESSED

There is a risk of carbon monoxide poisoning in any building with
fuel burning equipment. In some buildings this risk is essentially nil,
such as houses that use electricity for home and water heating,
clothes drying, and cooking and that do not have attached garages
where gasoline engines may be operated. In other buildings, the risk
of carbon monoxide poisoning is also very low, such as houses with
newer, high-efficiency, closed-combustion furnaces, boilers, or
water heaters. However, the overwhelming majority of houses have
boilers, fireplaces, furnaces and water heaters that use house air to
support combustion and depend upon traditional chimneys or flues to
vent combustion products to the outdoors. When combustion products
spill into the house (backdraft), the potential for carbon monoxide
poisoning is established.

Unfortunately, many conventional boilers, fireplaces, furnaces and
water heaters spill combustion products into the home. Spillage
commonly occurs during the first minute or two of ignition until the
chimney is sufficiently warm to draw combustion products to the
top. The longer the spillage occurs, the greater the risk. Complete
spillage may result from several causes: a blocked chimney, a
disconected flue, a cracked heat exchanger, or an insufficient
amount of air to support the draft up the chimney. The latter
condition occurs when the combustion appliance is located in a
space that is under negative pressure (depressurized) relative to the
outdoors. The amount of depressurization depends on the air-
tightness of the space containing the combustion appliance and the
capacity of other exhaust devices as well as duct design and leakage
in forced-air heating/cooling systems.

Fortunately, carbon monoxide is usually found in very small
concentrations in combustion gases from properly maintained
furnaces, boilers and water heaters. However, when combustion is
starved for oxygen, an atom of oxygen is stripped from carbon
dioxide (CO2, a common combustion byproduct) and carbon monoxide
(CO) is produced.

WHAT'S THE RISK OF CO POISONING?

Several hundred people die from carbon monoxide produced by
combustion appliances in the home each year. Several thousand
additional people have less dramatic symptoms of carbon monoxide
poisoning (headaches, nausea, shortness of breath) although not all
the symptoms may be attributed to carbon monoxide.

WHO SHOULD BE CONCERNED?

Any contractor, tradesperson, inspector, or sponsor who makes
modification of ventilation rates in houses should be concerned
about combustion spillage. This includes those who: install exhaust
fans and devices, modify HVAC systems, and/or modify airtightness
of buildings or install mitigation systems. Mitigation contractors
have been alerted to this concern since 1986 by the New York State
Energy Office (NYSEO) and, since 1988 by the U.S. EPA. These alerts
cited previous guidance directed to low-income weatherization
providers and other contractors by the U.S. Department of Energy
(DOE). Portions of DOE's guidance reflect tests required by building codes.

WHICH TEST IS BEST?

First, any of the described tests is better than none. Second, each
test is like a tool -- one may fit a specific radon mitigator in a
situation better than another contractor in another situation. Select
the test that best fits your situation (understanding limitations),
conduct it, document and report it.

WHY NOT PROVIDE CLIENT WITH A DETECTOR?

Passive carbon monoxide detectors are available for about $3.
However, there are several concerns about such detectors: first, the
minimum sensitivity of such detectors may be above the threshold
of health effects; second, the detectors must periodically be
replaced (for example, every month); and third, the detector requires
a significant CO exposure that may not be discovered by the occupant
in time.

WHAT ABOUT HEAT-SENSITIVE DETECTORS?

These devices are probably fine as a back-up but are not a substitute
for spillage testing when working on a house. Such detectors require
the client to monitor the detector.

WHY NOT MEASURE CARBON DIOXIDE NEAR COMBUSTION APPLIANCES
TO DETECT SPILLAGE?

If you have a carbon dioxide monitor (several hundred to several
thousand dollars) or hand pump and detector tubes (several hundred
dollars), you can measure for it. For most radon mitigation, an
inexpensive smoke bottle will be adequate to test for spillage associated with
depressurization (conditions may be related to radon mitigation). Of course, a
carbon dioxide test may reflect other defects (e.g. cracked heat exchanger) not
related to radon.

WHY NOT USE A BLOWER DOOR TO CHECK SPILLAGE?

A blower door is a great diagnostic tool in the hands of a skilled
operator, especially for advanced indoor air quality work. If you use
a blower door and understand interzonal analysis, use your blower
door in your spillage checks. However, a blower door is not a
requirement for testing for backdrafting.

WHO HAS DIED FROM CO DUE TO RADON MITIGATION?

The best available evidence suggests about 10 percent of houses
with conventional combustion appliances have unacceptable spillage
due to depressurization. Most radon mitigation increases
depressurization. A brief test for spillage, requiring several minutes
by an EPA-approved conractor, is not unreasonable. No EPA-approved
contractor should reduce one environmental health risk while increasing
another.

GIVE ME A SIMPLE CHECKLIST SO I CAN GUARANTEE I'LL NEVER HAVE
A PROBLEM.

There are simple procedures and checklists to help you test for
spillage, as previously identified. However, there is not any one test
that will ensure future maintenance and use of combustion
appliances. Thus, it is unclear how a reasonable person could expect
or offer an
unconditional guarantee.

ADDITIONAL SOURCES FOR BACKDRAFTING INFORMATION

* National Fuel Gas Code, Appendix H (pages 2223.1-89), 1988,
"Recommended Procedures for Safety Inspection of an Existing
Appliance Installation." This procedure includes a combustion
appliance spillage test (at the draft hood using smoke) while
exterior windows and doors, fireplace dampers, and the door
between the combustion appliance and the remainder of the house
are closed and exhaust fans and devices are operated.

* American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning
Engineers, ASHRE Standard 62-1989, Appendix B, "Positive
Combustion Air Supply." This procedure includes combustion spillage
testing involving measuring the ratio of dilution air in the stack
above the draft hood (40 percent minimum) under "closed house"
conditions and with all commonly used exhaust fans and devices
operated. This test should not be performed when the inside-outside
temperature difference is more the 30 degrees farenheit (18 degrees
celsius) or wind velocity is more than 5 mph (2.2 m/s).

* "Procedure for Determining the Safety of Residential Chimneys"
in Chimney Safety Test User's Manual (Second Edition) prepared for
the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation (CHMC) by Scanada -
Sheltair Consortium (January 12, 1988). This document outlines a
two-step procedure: the first step involves a simple paper
excercise; and, if necessary, a more rigorous "worst case
simulation" test using pressure measurement in spaces containing
combustion devices as well as spillage tests.

* "Worst Case Draft Test"  required by the Minnesota Department of
Jobs and Training, St. Paul, MN., for all weatherization contractors
using state administered federal funds. This procedure outlines a
simple pressure measurement in flues under "closed house"
conditions and with all commonly used exhaust fans and devices
operating.

* "Retrofit Ventilation System Guide," 1991 (November), Energy
Conservatory, Minneapolis, MN., for blower door operators. This
procedure outlines an indoor air quality strategy involving
combustion spillage tests using simple equipment and procedures.
Radon mitigation contractors may wish to check with local HVAC
inspectors, HVAC contractors, or low-income weatherization
providers about these or similar procedures. Each procedure has
advantages and disadvantages that should be considered.

BILL ANGELL, MIDWEST UNIVERSITIES RADON CONSORTIUM



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

RADON AND BACKDRAFTING: AN ADDENDUM TO EPA MITIGATION
STANDARDS

5.8  All buildings where active depressurization systems have been
installed "shall" be tested for backdrafting of combustion
appliances immediately upon completion of the mitigation system
installation. Any backdrafting caused by the installed mitigation
system "shall" be corrected immediately. The mitigation system
"shall not" be operated until backdrafting conditions are corrected.

Source: EPA draft standards.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

FEDERAL INVESTIGATORS HALT BOGUS AIR FILTER CLAIMS

"Phototron" indoor greenhouse claimed to remove everything,
including radon and pet odors.

Phototron indoor greenhouse isn't all it's cracked up to be. At least,
that's the opinion of investigators at the Federal Trade Commission
(FTC), who charge that San Diego-based Pyraponic Industries II, Inc.
and it's owner, Jeffery Julian DeMarco, made false and
unsubstantiated claims that their "Phototron" indoor air cleaner
would remove all indoor air contaminants.

According to the FTC, Pyraponic ran advertisements in a variety of
national magazines claiming it's "Phototron natural home air
purifier" would remove "radon, formaldehyde, pet odors, kitchen and
bathroom smells, cigarette smoke" and, at the same time,
"replentish oxygen 33 times, along with the fresh scent of the
plants of your choice." Furthermore, the ads claimed a Phototron
could eliminate all pollutants in a 1,000 square foot area.

FTC staffers agreed to a consent decree to settle the charges with
Pryaponic, which prohibits the firm from representing in the future
that its products remove all indoor air contaminants.

The decree also requires the company's future ads be based on
"competent and reliable scientific evidence supporting its claims
that Phototron is a viable substitute, or is superior to, any other air
cleaning products, or is effective within a specific size area."

A January 1992 General Accounting Office report makes it clear
misrepresentation and public manipulation in the air and water
filtration and treatment industries is occuring. The report warns
consumers that disjointed regulation of these emerging industries
has left the door open for unscrupulous businesspersons.

Policing air and water cleaning systems is something the FTC does
under its "Green Claims" category. FTC staffers say complaints that
focus on a company's attempt to take advantage of public concern
about the environment are becoming more common.  Several claims
have been made to date by the FTC against water and air purification
companies.

Editor's Note: Consent agreements (decrees) are for
settlement purposes only and are not an admission of
participation in an unlawful act. Consent orders carry the force of
law, once finalized by the agency, with respect to future
actions. Violations can result in fines as high as $10,000.

For more information contact the FTC at (202) 326-2161.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

RADON AND CIGARETTE SMOKING

Smoking, smokers & radon gas
Current smokers face lung cancer risk 20 times that of never-
smokers. Former smokers risk is about 8 times that of never-
smokers.
Source: U.S. EPA




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

RADON HAS ITS DAY IN MARYLAND COURT

In the Spring 1992 issue of RND, we reported the story of a
Baltimore, Maryland tenant who broke her lease after discovering
her rental home had an indoor radon level of 9 pCi/l.

The renter, Nina Bingham, moved out of the home immediately after
discovering the elevated radon level and was sued by the owner of
the rental unit for past rent, damages and legal fees.

Unfortunately for Bingham, her lease agreement did not include a
provision (relating to radon or other indoor air pollutants) for
breaking the lease, the judge reluctantly sided with the property
owner, ruling that Bingham did not follow proper protocol for
breaking a lease in the State of Maryland.

Cindy Scott Hibert, a producer at WMAR TV Channel 2 in Baltimore,
the station which originally reported on the  story, told RND "the
problem with Nina was that she didn't follow the proper steps. If she
just would have followed our county statutes -- which require
proper return of keys, notification, and  the establishment of an
escrow account for rent payments -- the judge would have ruled in
her favor."

Hilbert, a licensed attorney, says  the most  interesting twist to
this emotional story is that the realtor who arranged the lease
produced a document releasing Bingham from it.

"Unfortunately, Nina didn't want to sign it," Hilbert says. "She
should have."

Hilbert says although the judge determined an elevated radon level
does pose a health risk to Bingham and her children, he had no legal
grounds to support his personal feeling that Bingham had done the
right thing.

"I'm just praying that a tenant (with an elevated radon level in a
leased property) will come forward and follow the law as it regards
breaking leases.

"Breaking a lease for reasons of elevated radon is possible (in
Maryland, or elsewhere) if it is done so by the books," Hilbert says.

"I can't wait," she added. "Then we'll really see some changes."

Editor's Note: Our original story was based, in part, on an article
reported in the Midwest AARST Radon Reporter. The  article reported
Bingham had won the case, which she did, until a motion by the
plaintiff's attorney forced the judge to rule against Bingham for
improperly breaking her lease.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

CERCLA: EPA ISSUES RULE ON LENDER LIABILITY

The U.S. EPA's long-awaited rule on lender liability was published in
the Federal Register, April 29, 1992 (57 Fed Reg 18344). The rule
provides protections to lenders from  contamination they are
innocent of causing.

The rule was issued to clarify statutory phrases in the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Liability and Compensation
Act (CERCLA), pertaining to property ownership and liability for
pollution cleanup.

The "security interest exemption," as defined by EPA, specifies the
range of activities which may be conducted by an entity/person who
maintains  "indicia" ownership of a facility for security interests -
- without such activities being deemed "participation" in managing
the secured  property.

The resulting EPA final rule adopts a new test for "participation." In
brief, a lender participates in property management only if the
lender either exercises decision-making control over environmental
compliance issues on the property, or, where the actions of the
lender create or assume responsibility for the day-to-day operations
of the property. The agency also determined that a government
lender, receiver or conservator  which involuntarily aquires a
contaminated property is entitled to "innocent landowner" third-
party defense provided under CERCLA Section 101 (35)(a)(ii) and
(107)(B)(3).

According to environmental attorneys interviewed by RND, a
government entity, not-for-profit organization or university, for
example, which acquired a property as a gift, would qualify for the
innocent landowner defense. Under CERCLA there are three defenses
under which a property holder may be absolved of liability. If the
pollution was caused by 1) an act of a third-party with whom the
property holder has no contractual relationship; 2) an act of God; or
3) an act of War.

Although radon gas is listed  in the Hazardous Waste Regulations (40
CFR 302.4)(Appendix B), environmental attorneys say they aren't
clear whether or not radon is actually a CERCLA issue.
"Theoretically," one attorney  says,"itTs a CERCLA issue. But, a
lender making a residential loan probably wouldn't be concerned
about radon.

Nevertheless, lenders should be concerned about radon. They'll want
to do their environmental due dilligence upfront, whether they are
required to do so by law or not."

Editor's Note: EPA has classified radon as a "Class A" carcinogen.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

HOME BUYER'S AND SELLER'S GUIDE TO RADON: REVIEW

Draft copy yields variety of responses; comments shed light on
concerns.

There has been much speculation as to what the soon-to-be-released
EPA "Home Buyer's and Seller's Guide to Radon" will advise. The
purpose of the guide, according to EPA, is to help both home buyer's
and seller's become informed about radon and its dangers, learn how
to test a home and, should it be necessary, determine the best way
to remediate.

A draft copy of the "Real Estate Guide" (October 1991) along with
interviews with EPA officials reveals some of the agency's possible
recommendations for radon testing during a real property transfer.
EPA advises buyers of homes that have already been tested for radon
to "select your own professional radon contractor." In addition, the
agency instructs buyers to find out: 1) The results of the previous
test, 2) Who conducted it, and, 3) Where in the house the test was
performed.

Buyers of homes that have not previously been tested for radon are
advised to: 1) Make sure a radon test is done as soon as possible, 2)
"Work with the seller to arrange testing," 3) Make sure the test is
conducted on the lowest level in which the buyer intends to use.
In addition, the draft includes sections on test results and what they
mean, radon in water, remediation, selecting a mitigator, EPA's RMP
program, radon myths and a copy of the risk chart from the"Citizen's
Guide".

INDUSTRY COMMENTS

As usual, many radon industry members submitted comments to EPA
expressing their concerns about the contents of the draft "Real
Estate Guide". Many of these concerns were expressed in the review
comments submitted by the radon industry via the American
Association of Radon Scientists and Technologists (AARST). Some of
these concerns are detailed in the following

AARST COMMENTS.

AARST recommends that EPA change the words "lowest living area"
to "lowest liveable area" before finalizing the document. AARST
reviewers say the "lowest living area" instruction (contained in the
draft) does not provide enough direction for the buyer of a real
property, which may result in a "grey area" in need of
interpretation. In many cases, AARST reviewers say, a buyer of a
home relies on a real estate agent to interpret these unclear issues.

Real estate agents, the reviewers say, have a vested interest in
making certain that radon results are low and that his/her
interpretation of what constitutes the "lowest living area" may not
be in the best interest of the buyer.

Instead of following EPA's lead, AARST reviewers offer several
"good" reasons for continuing the "lowest liveable area" approach.
The basement, according to one EPA  contractor, can be easily and
consistently maintained under closed house conditions. This
measurement location gives the most consistent readings in both
summer and winter. Confirmation of results, he says, is more
consistent, thus avoiding the confusion of the larger measurement
variations found during first floor testing.

As an interesting twist, results of an informal survey of AARST
members also was provided to EPA. The survey found that most radon
industry leaders believe the "lowest liveable area" of a home should
be tested at a minimum. A majority of those surveyed said they
believe that both the "lowest liveable area" and "lowest living
area" should be tested simultaneously.

Sixty-seven percent of those polled said they support a single
measurement period with duplicate measurements versus 36 percent
who said they would support a recommended follow-up test.

According to EPA's Rita Hoyt, the draft guide currently is undergoing
an internal review. The agency hopes to release the final version of
the "Home Buyer's and Seller's Guide to Radon" this fall.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

DRAFT EPA RADON TESTING PROTOCOLS

The following is taken from a draft version of EPA's "Buyer's and
Seller's Guide to Radon." These are NOT the finalized radon testing
protocols for real estate transactions. Draft documents are
presented here for your review. Please be sure to check with the EPA
before making decisions based on information contained in any
government document draft. EPA says it expects to release the final
document later this fall.

TESTING PROTOCOL ONE

Protocol 1(a). Take a short-term test.
Protocol 1(b). If your results are 4 pCi/l or higher, take a follow-up
short-term test to be sure.

MITIGATION OPTIONS

Under protocol 1 (a) or (b): Fix the home if the average of the first
and second tests is 4 pCi/l or more.

TESTING PROTOCOL TWO

Protocol 2. Take two short-term tests at the same time.

MITIGATION OPTIONS

Under protocol 2: Fix the home if the average of the two tests is 4
pCi/l or more.

TESTING PROTOCOL THREE

Protocol 3. Test the home with a continuous monitor for at least 48
hours -- preferably longer.

MITIGATION OPTIONS

Under protocol 3: Fix the home if the average radon level is 4 pCi/l
or more.

RADON TEST DEVICE PLACEMENT

According to a recent EPA draft, the testing device(s) should be
placed in the lowest level of the home suitable for occupancy. For
example, the basement, if it is used frequently. If you are the seller,
and currently not using the basement, you may still want to test the
basement if it could be used by a buyer without renovations. The test
should be conducted in a room used regularly (like a living room, play
room, den or bedroom, but not a kitchen or bath).

In selecting a testing option, you may want to consider factors such
as cost, accuracy, availability of tamper-resistant features, and
how soon you can get test results. Your State Radon Office can help
you decide which option is best for you.

Source: EPA draft document.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

EPA "GEOLOGICAL PROBABILITY OF ELEVATED INDOOR RADON" MAP
DISTRIBUTED, CRITICIZED

Attendees of the National Association of Counties annual meeting in
Minneapolis, Minnesota this past July, received  draft copies of the
U.S. EPA's "Geological Probability of Elevated Indoor Radon" map.

The map is designed to reflect NURE data, as well as radon testing
data from both EPA and U.S. Geologic Surveys.

The map, still in draft form, is a political football, some government
insiders say, because it is highly generalized and fails to provide
enough specific data.

Several state radon program directors say they agree. "The
usefulness of the map (to the public), is not very great," says one
program director whose opinion seems to be shared by several
others interviewed by RND. Program directors who have seen the
draft, say the map is better than nothing, but needs some improvement before
being released to the public.

Local and state government representatives say they have made
their concerns about the map known to EPA, but says one, "we're not
sure they'll do anything to address our concerns."

Mike Hanson of the Ohio Geologic Survey says the map leaves
something to be desired. For instance, Hanson says, in some areas,
where we know 60 percent of the homes are likely to have elevated
radon levels of 4-20 pCi/l, the map says otherwise.

Another problem is that the map is based on "lowest liveable space"
readings. States are concerned their test databases would become
obsolete because of new protocols in the Citizen's Guide.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

RADON LEGISLATION AND RELOCATION PROPERTY TRANSFERS

National, state and local radon legislation reviewed

As the downturn in the U.S. economy continues, every corporate
department is under pressure to reduce costs and relocation is no
exception. Some companies are reducing relocation costs by
transferring fewer employees and all are carefully scrutinizing
their relocation policy for cost-cutting opportunities. In the past
several months, I have been asked whether there have been any
recent events that would justify saving money by eliminating radon
tests. The answer to the question is an uncategorical "no." In fact,
there has been a spate of recent state and federal legislation
designed to encourage radon testing and awareness.

STATE LEGISLATION

The following is a list of radon legislation compiled by the
Conference of Radiation Control, an association of state and local
radiation control programmers showing both proposed and enacted
legislation in the 18 states in which the issue has come before the
legislature (as of February 1992).

California -- AB765, Chapter 1.5. Establishes requirements for the
certification of radon measurement laboratories, radon testing and
consulting specialists, and radon mitigation contractors.

Connecticut -- Sec. 19a-14b, General Statutes. Requires any
company that performs testing or mitigation to be certified by the
state, and mandates publication of a list of these companies.
S.234. Addresses radon hazards in schools.

District of Columbia -- Proposed "Indoor Safe Air Act." Would
establish procedures for testing and abatement of radon gas and
radon progeny in District of Columbia buildings.

Illinois -- HB1611, The Radon Testing Act.
Authorizes the Department of Environment to establish a
registration program for individuals and companies that test for
radon.

HB 2709, The Radon Mitigation Act. This is basically an omnibus act,
authorizing the Department of Environment to conduct a wide range
of activities including surveys, public education programs, and other
radon-related activities.

Indiana -- IC 13-1-14. Authorizes rules to establish and operate
programs for the certification of individuals engaged in testing for
radon gas in buildings and in soil, and the abatement of radon gas in
buildings.

Iowa -- Chapter 136B of the Iowa Code. Mandates that persons who
do testing and mitigation be certified by the state. Establishes
requirements for reporting test results on non-public buildings, and
outlines department spot-check validity measurements and
reporting procedures.

Kansas -- Proposed HB 2408. Would require state certification of
persons providing devices or services related to radon testing and
mitigation.

Maine -- Chapter 165 Revised Statutes Annotated, Title 22, sec. 771
et seq. Establishes a program to register firms and individuals
involved with radon testing, consulting, or other remedial services
to ensure accurate radon testing, to encourage safe and effective
mitigation of dangerous radon levels, and to protect property
owners from unqualified or unscrupulous vendors.

Massachusetts -- Proposed HB 548. Would establish requirements
for persons testing and mitigating radon. Would require that a
radon test be done by the seller of any residential dwelling and
would require pertinent information about the test be made
available to a prospective buyer.

Proposed HB 2099. Would require any peron who tests for and
mitigates radon to be certified by the state and to file timely
reports.

Proposed HB 3160. Would provide a tax credit for testing and
abatement of radon gas.

New Hampshire -- RSA 125:9. States that the director of the
Division of Public Health Services shall conduct inspections of all
buildings and dwellings, upon request, for the presence of radon or
other health hazards present in indoor air. Provides education,
technical consultation, and recommendations for abatement of such
health hazards in conjunction with the University of New Hampsire
cooperative extension service.

RSA 477:4a. States that, prior to the execution of any contract for
the purchase and sale of any interest in real propoerty that includes
a building, the seller or the seller's agent shall provide notice to the
buyer that radon may be found in some areas of New Hampshire.

New Jersey -- PL 1985, Chapter 408. Establishes a state radon
program.

PL 1986, Chapter 83. Establishes a certification program for radon
testers and mitigators.

PL 1989, Chapter 189. Mandates that new
construction be tested for radon.

New York -- S. 6496, A. 8594. Directs the State Energy Office to
develop and implement a radon diagnosis assistance program and
promote radon remediation actions in at least one of every four
family residences with elevated radon levels. Also establishes
research grants for not-for-profit organizations.

S. 7690, A. 9978. Provides financial assistance for the performance
of radon diagnostic services and the preparation of specifications
for appropriate, energy-efficicient mitigation measures for one- to
four-family residences with elevated radon levels.

S. 9594, A. 11717. Directs the State Energy Office to develop and
implement a radon detection, public information, and technical
assistance program, to further energy conservation and assist and
promote radon remediation.

Ohio -- Am. Susb. HB 279. Establishes a state program for
licensure of individuals and businesses involved in radon
testing and mitigation activities, and requires the Public Health
Council to establish rules regarding the licensing program;
requires the Director of Health to administer and enforce the
program in accordance with the Public Health Council's rules;
establishes civil and criminal penalties for violation of laws and
rules governing radon licensure; and establishes a standard of
liability for license holders.

Pennsylvania -- SB 857. Authorizes low-interest loans for
radon gas mitigation and appropriation.

HB 687. Provides personal income tax credits for expenses
incurred for home radon-reduction projects.

HB 956. Requires radon testing and notification before certain real
property transactions, and provides a remedy for failure to do so.

HB 2001. Requires radon testing and notification for sale of
residential property; imposes administrative penalties; and
imposes powers and duties on the Department of Environmental
Resources.

Rhode Island. Has proposed an act that would authorize the Director
of Health to promulgate regulations and conduct programs related to
radon control. The act would also create a state radon trust fund.

Virginia -- Section 32.2-299 A.1. Provides for a program of
education and technical assistance related to radon.

Section 32.1-299 A.2. Requires the State Department of Health to
make available the U.S. EPA Radon Mitigator Proficiency (RMP) and
Radon Contractor Proficiency (RCP) lists.

Section 32.1. Requires that persons screening, testing or mitigating
radon be listed as proficient by EPA.

Washington -- SHB 2662. Authorizes the certification of person who
perform radon gas or radon progeny measurements, including sample
collection, analysis, or interpretation of such measurements, and of
those who perform radon mitigation of buildings for radon gas or
radon progeny; and authorizes fees for certification.

SHB 1535. An act relating to radon testing required by the State
Building Code Council.

Wisconsin -- Act 399. Authorizes the development and
dissemination of radon information, and the coordination of a
program to measure radon gas, perform home surveys, develop
training materials, and conduct training classes.

Most of the aforementioned legislation concerns certification or
licensing of companies engaged in testing for, or mitigation of,
radon. It is likely that the majority of states will have this type of
legislation in place within the next few years. Licensing and
registration of testers and mitigators is a positive change for
relocation because it upgrades the overall quality of testers and
remediators and identifies a pool of qualified companies available to
the relocation administrator.

It is more difficult to predict whether more states will enact
mandatory testing and/or disclosure statutes. However, given the
increasingly broad court interpretations of the duty to disclose, the
National Association of Realtors' recommendation that its state
members propose and lobby for state disclosure laws, and current
federal legislation (discussed below), it is likely that a substantial
number of states will enact radon testing and disclosure legislation
in the coming years.

The significance of state laws to the relocation administrator is
that such legislation may conflict with a company's relocation
policies in some way. In all cases to date, state requirements with
respect to testing and disclosure are minimum standards, and there
is nothing wrong in exceeding them. For example, a company may
decide to require mitigation as well as disclosure of test results.
However, varying state laws necessitate that a company's radon
policy also vary according to the state from which the employee is
transferred.

FEDERAL LEGISLATION

For the past several years, I have been reporting on bills
introduced before the U.S. House and Senate on the subject of radon.
Few have been voted on. On March 10 of this year, the Senate passed
S. 792, a reauthorization of the Indoor Radon Abatement Act of
1988, known as the Indoor Radon Abatement Reauthorization Act of
1991. This very comprehensive bill is likely to be modified in
conference, should the House pass its radon bill, H.R. 3258, the
"Radon Awareness and Disclosure Act." The House bill has not come
up for a vote as of the date this article was written, but is expected
to pass if the House is able to vote on it in this an election year.

Among the provision of S. 792 of interest to relocation:

1) Federally mandates the EPA's development of a "Home Buyer's and
Seller's Guide to Radon," a document specifically aimed at the real
estate process. As with the "Citizen's Guide to Radon," E-R-C and
other organizations have been working with and advising EPA on the
content of this document for more than a year. The current draft
presently is undergoing review by the administrator of EPA. (Editor's
Note: EPA staffers say the document should be released sometime
this fall.)

2) The "CitizenTs Guide to Radon" is described in the legislation.
This guide already has been completed.

3) The bill requires that "every original mortgage institution"
provide the "Home Buyer's and Seller's Guide to Radon" to each
person "from whom it receives or for whom it prepares a written
application for an applicable mortgage loan." In addition, it bars
federally chartered secondary mortgage institutions from
purchasing any loans in which this requirement has not been met.
The application for a mortgage usually is made after the contract of
sale is signed by the buyer. In order to reduce pressure to amend
contracts based on the warnings in this brochure, it is likely that
real estate agents will begin making the booklets available at or
before the signing of the contracts, should this part of the bill be
adopted into law.

4) The bill also provides for federal radon disclosure. Any
residential dwelling or multi-unit structure owned by the federal
government or any government corporation located in a high priority
radon area (as defined below) will have to be tested prior to the
contract of sale, and the results of that test disclosed to the
potential buyer.

5) The bill requires EPA to come up with a list of high priority radon
areas, based on indoor radon test results and geology. The country
would be divided into three such zones, each ranking the likelihood
of finding indoor radon. However, EPA will not change its
recommendation that all homes, regardless of their location, be
tested. See Radon Map page 11.

6) EPA, in conjunction with other agencies, will be required to
devise model construction standards for radon resistant housing. All
federally assisted housing, and federal office and other structures
are to be built using this technology in high priority radon areas.

The remainder of the bill contains outreach, research, and disclosure
provisions, all of which are designed to increase radon awareness
among the general public and encourage testing and disclosure.

EPA ACTIVITIES

Regardless of whether any federal legislation is passed this year,
EPA will continue to carry out its mandate under the 1988 Act to
provide information to the public on the dangers of indoor radon
pollution and its elimination. EPA's Radon Division currently has a
number of projects underway. The ones most directly affecting
relocation are the publication of the previously mentioned "Citizen's
Guide to Radon" and the "Home Buyer's and Seller's Guide to Radon."

In addition, it has begun programs to provide information and grants
to state radiation control departments, to perform research on radon
testing and mitigation, to perform research and devise recommended
model building codes for radon-resistant construction, to administer
the Radon Contractor Proficiency (RCP) program, and to devise and
implement public information campaigns aimed at persuading the
public to test for and mitigate indoor radon. EPA already has
produced the first draft of a national radon potential map that
divides the U.S. into three radon zones, similar to the requirements
of S. 792.

Acting on the advice of E-R-C and other real estate groups, EPA has
committed to producing the "Home Buyer's and Seller's Guide to
Radon" as a supplement to the "CitizenTs Guide," aimed strictly at
the real estate transaction. Besides being a more concise document
than the "Citizen's Guide," the "Real Estate Guide" will recommend
short-term testing protocol that is not as time consuming and,
hopefully, not as expensive as the two-test recommendation in the
"Citizen's Guide."

After months of consulting with outside groups and scientists, EPA
narrowed the possible testing methodologies to eight, and asked for
an opinion from its Science Advisory Board as to the efficacy of
each. Although the board has yet to return its recommendations, it
appears likely that the "Real Estate Guide" will recommend either
one short-term test in the lowest liveable area of the house, or two
short-term simultaneous tests in the lowest living area.

WHAT THIS MEANS TO RELOCATION

The relocation industry took an early, pro-active stance concerning
indoor radon. Because of the policies that were enacted years ago, it
has been argued that a potential spate of claims and lawsuits has
been avoided.

When EPA began to reconsider its recommended testing procedures,
the scope of the testing and remediation required to limit liability
became unclear. When released in the "Citizen's Guide" and the "Real
Estate Guide", these recommendations essentially will form the
minimum standard for any relocation policy.

Absent any federal or state law to the contrary, relocation
administrators will be free to reevaluate their radon policies,
bringing them into compliance with the recommendations of EPA
publications, making judgements about, for example, whether it is
necessary, from a liability point of view, to remediate homes with
levels moderately above 4 pCi/l, or whether simple disclosure will
adequately protect against liability.

All of these decisions will be made in an environment in which, if
EPA is sucessful, all home buyers will be better informed about
indoor radon potentials.

By Richard Mansfield III. Mansfield is a partner in the Washington,
DC, law firm of Mansfield & Muse. He has served as general counsel
of the Employee Relocation Council since 1977. Reprinted with
permission from Mobility, 1992. Mobility is the official publication
of the Employee Relocation Council, Washington, DC.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

HR 3258 REVIEWERS MAKE COMMENTS, SHARE CONCERNS

As radon-related bills develop and mature on Capitol Hill, both
private and public sector lobbyists spend considerable effort
organizing letter writing campaigns, telephone trees and
encouraging industry members to make known their concerns. During
the formulation and development of House Bill 3258, and its
companion, Senate Bill 792, the radon industry showed it is no
exception to the rule.

On March 10 of this year, the Senate passed S. 792, a reauthorization
of the Indoor Radon Abatement Act of 1988, known as the Indoor
Radon Abatement Reauthorization Act of 1991. This very
comprehensive bill is likely to be modified in conference, should the
House pass its radon bill, H.R. 3258, the "Radon Awareness and
Disclosure Act."

The comment period for H.R. 3258 drew a variety of responses,
including comments providing insight into organizations and their
concern for the radon issue. Of particular interest to our readers are
comments submitted by Richard Martin (AARST), Dr. Jill Lipoti (New
Jersey, Department of Environmental Protection), Bob Chase
(National Education Association and the National Parents and
Teachers Association), and representatives for the National
Association of Home Builders (NAHB) and the Consumer Association
of America.

NAHB

NAHB comments indicate the organization supports "prescriptive
construction techniques only in areas where radon is a problem."
NAHB says its members might need an "incentive" to cooperate
volunarily, such as a limitation on liability for builders who build to
EPA construction standards or state equivalents.

As has been the case in the past, NAHB says it "does not believe
tying radon testing to the home sales transaction is the answer."
The primary objection, short-term test reliance. As a justification
for their objection to testing new homes as a condition of sale,
NAHB says its members believe testing should only be done while the
homeowner is actually living in the home. In addition, they say, "new
homes take up to a year to settle" so testing a brand new house that
has not fully settled "is likely" to produce a false reading.

The association says its members already are complaining that
banks are refusing to make loans for homes where testing is
required as a condition of sale -- "out of fear for future legal
liability."

CONSUMER FEDERATION

The Consumer Federation for America, in conjunction with the
American Cancer Society, the American Lung Association, the
American Public Health Association and the U.S. Public Interest
Research Group, made their feelings about H.R. 3258 known to
legislators as well.

Representatives from these organizations say they believe the
public can no longer rely on realtors, builders, salespersons or the
radon industry to inform them about radon. The reason: ignorance.
These organizations say they believe the American public is in need
of an education when it comes to radon, especially if they are to
make decisions about testing and mitigation voluntarily.

According to a national survey conducted by the Federation, few
Americans are prepared to make such decisions by themselves. When
survey respondants were asked "Why is radon a problem?", 17
percent replied because it can cause high blood pressure, 15 percent
believed the gas caused unpleasant odors, and an additional six
percent said they believed it discolored walls and furniture.

As far as testing is concerned, nearly half of all respondants knew
next to nothing about radon testing.

According to the Federation survey, 45 percent of Americans
surveyed answered the question "How do you detect radon?"
incorrectly. Twenty-two percent of the respondants said radon could
be detected by smell, 12 percent by stains on walls and 11 percent
by using a Geiger counter.

The Federation says its supports H.R. 3258 because "it addresses
two fundamental issues for consumers: saving lives and protecting
consumers in radon-related transactions. Protection? From what?
According to the Federation, consumers need protections from
potentially unscrupulous radon contractors and test device
manufacturers who fail to participate and pass proficiency exams.
Civil penalties should be put in place, the Federation says, "to act as
a deterrent."

PARENTS AND TEACHERS

The NEA and PTA, both organizations specifically concerned about
radon in schools, say a two-tiered approach is needed to address the
issue in America's schools. First, they say, schools in high radon
priority areas should be tested as soon as possible. Schools not
located in high radon priority areas should be allowed four years
from the date of enactment to test.

In determining compliance, NEA says it believes the legislation
should specify waivers to school districts which have already tested
and/or mitigated -- providing all EPA protocol, including parent and
teacher notification of testing and mitigation results, were
followed.

NEA also says it supports an "ongoing annual notification rule"
requiring schools to keep parents notified of the mitigation process
progress until completed.

NEW JERSEY DEP

The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection says it
supports the continuation of grant assistance to state programs
found in H.R. 3258, however, the agency says, "more" state
assistance is needed. The agency says it believes the feds must kick
in additional support, including 75 percent program costs, in order
for most states to continue existing and planned radon programs.

They cite a recent Conference of Radiation Control Program
Directors survey which indicates state radon programs are in danger
of being cut back. The survey found that if State Indoor Radon Grants
are not extended beyond fiscal year 1991, 84 percent of the
responding state radon program leaders said they "would be forced
to reduce their radon program, drastically."

Thirty-four percent said they would eliminate staff, while six
percent would have to abandon their programs entirely.

NJDEP, no doubt echoing the opinions of other states with existing
radon programs and legislation, suggests exempting persons
participating in state programs from mandatory participation in a
federal program, in order to "avoid placing undue burden on regulated
individuals in states which already have a state certification
program, the requirements of which, in most cases, far exceed those
listed in H.R. 3258."

AARST

Representing the radon industry, Rich Martin, president of DMA-
RADTECH, said H.R. 3258 would help reduce cancer risk by
providing increased industry professionalism by mandating
participation in testing and mitigation programs. Mandatory
participation in RMP/RCP programs, the association says, will help
"elevate the quality" of radon related services to a minimum
competence level acceptable to a federal agency.

Not unlike the Consumer Federation, AARST also supports the civil
penalties contained in the bill.  those contractors who choose not to
follow the laws regarding certification and participation.

The radon industry association says if H.R. 3258 is enacted it will
help reduce cancers risk by: 1) providing financial assistance to
schools which need to test and/or mitigate but cannot afford to do
so, 2) requiring schools that test or mitigate to utilize approved
firms or individuals who have satisfactorily passed certification
programs, and, 3) forming a Presidential Commission on Radon
Awareness designed to assure radon public outreach programs reach
their specific goals.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

SEPTEMBER

September 26, 1992 -- RCP Biennial re-exam. In conjunction with
the 1992 International Symposium on Radon and Radon Reduction,
Minneapolis, MN, at the Sheridan Park Place Hotel. Application
package fax request to ICF, Inc. at (703) 218-2669.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

OCTOBER

October 18-20, 1992 -- Environments for People. Golden Gate
Holiday Inn, San Francisco, CA. Sponsored by ASHRAE. Information
call Jim Norman at (404) 636-8400.

October 19-21, 1992 -- Indoor Air Quality Continuing Education
Course.  American Industrial Hygiene Association, sponsor. Salt Lake
City, UT. Contact Continuing Education at (216) 873-2442.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

DISCLOSURE AND RADON. WHAT THE RELOCATION INDUSTRY SAYS

What is the Employee Relocation Council's position on disclosure of
radon testing results during a relocation property transfer?

"Disclosure is critical," says the Employee Relocation Counil's Chief
Counsel, Richard Mansfield. "We recommend all houses be tested and
results be disclosed."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

EPA RADON PROGRAM REVIEW: GOVERNMENT, PRIVATE SECTOR
RESPONSES ARE VARIED

Last fall, radon industry professionals participated in an intra-
agency review of EPA's Radon Program. Comprised of members of
government and the private sector, the agency's Radon Program
Review Panel was charged with assessing the program's past
efforts, current progress and future direction. Their efforts
produced a draft report, sent to reviewers earlier this year, which
assessed the costs and effectiveness of a range of radon control
strategies and contained the Panel's findings and recommendations
for improving the radon program.

EPA REVIEWERS

EPA says it is looking for "opportunities for pursuing new
directions" in an effort to increase radon reduction in the U.S. The
agency says the review was conducted with three objectives in
mind:

1) to examine the appropriateness of program goals and EPA's
progress in achieving them;

2) to evaluate the effectiveness of the current approach; and

3) to identify alternative approaches and determine what they might
enable EPA to accomplish.

EPA representatives on the panel included senior managers who were
responsible for recommending actions which would improve the
radon program and determine the appropriate role government should
play in reducing public risk. Four major recommendations were
issued.

1) EPA should focus on the greatest risks first. In the near-term,
EPA should target its efforts and resources on high radon potenital
areas and smoking-related risk. EPA survey data indicate about half
of the homes over the action level are located in areas comprising
(as a group) about one-fifth of the country. This same area is
estimated to contain a significant portion of the lives projected to
be saved if all U.S. homes above the current 4 pCi/l action level were
tested and mitigated. Current epidemiological data indicate both
smokers and former smokers face over 90 percent of radon risk.
While EPA should not abandon its efforts in other areas, these
factors must shape EPA's policy.

2) EPA should work now to support the long-term strategies of
promoting radon-resistant new construction and testing and
mitigation in connection with real estate transfers. Beginning in
targeted areas, EPA should encourage and support pilot projects at
the State and local level and explore new approaches to implement
these strategies. EPA experience to date indicate the vast majority
of radon risk reduction occurs in the context of real estate
transactions and adoption of new construction standards has the
potential for very cost-effective risk reduction -- in some cases
saving both lives and dollars. While the risk reductions offered by
these strategies are modest at first, over the long-term, they offer
the possibility of very large risk reductions. Only through these
strategies can EPA aspire to its ultimate statutory goal of
approaching ambient levels in all U.S. homes.

3) A new strategy for public information. As a health risk controlled
primarily by individual citizens, EPA has properly set for itself a
central and independent goal of informing the public about radon
risk. The public's generally weak response suggests EPA must move
beyond a program of nationwide public information efforts such as
the "Citizen's Guide" and the Advertising Council's public service
announcement campaign. In the short-term, EPA's public information
efforts should focus on high radon potential areas and populations. In
the long-term, efforts should be directed toward construction of
radon-resistant new homes and testing and mitigation of existing
homes when they are sold.

4) EPA should develop a coordinated research plan. EPA has
successfully supported a wide range of radon testing, mitigation,
and characterization research. With basic technologies established,
EPA must develop a long-term plan to prioritize and coordinate
potential future research in areas such as health effects,
measurement, mitigation technology, geographic targeting, and risk
communication approaches.

THE PRIVATE SECTOR

Private sector reviewers developed recommendations addressing
several dozen issues which affect the radon industry. Of
significance are three of the panel's findings relating to radon and
public information, resistant building techniques and radon testing
at point of sale.

1) Reducing Risk by Radon Resistant Construction. The panel
determined "if all new homes built in designated areas" were built
with radon-resistant features, an estimated 30-50 lung cancers
deaths would be averted each year. The panel noted the rate of lives
saved would increase each year.

"Radon resistant new homes," the panel says, "are also specially
sealed and weatherized, which, in addition to retarding radon entry,
can make the home substantially more energy efficient. This
increaseed efficiency is estimated to yield a substantial energy
credit."

2) Reducing radon risk at real estate transactions. Because most
radon testing and mitigation currently occurs during real estate
transactions, the panel says "testing and mitigation of all homes
sold would yield steadily increasing risk reduction each year."

According to the panel, nationwide testing and mitigation of all
home sold (when necessary) would avert an estimated 110 lung
cancer deaths at a cost of $700,000 per life saved. The panel noted
requiring distribution of radon information when homes are
purchased with federal-guaranteed mortgages would offer only
moderate risk reduction -- averting an estimated 10-15 lung cancer
deaths each year.

Editor's Note: It would take approximately 10 years of information
distribution in federal-related mortgages to produce lung cancer
death reductions equal to or greater than one year of requiring radon
testing and mitigation during all real property transfers.

3) Public Information. The reviewers determined that state and local
public information and incentive programs have yielded "limited
responses." EPA's experience to date suggests, the panel says,
"public information alone is not enough to contribute significantly
to future risk reduction."

Public information may make its most significant risk reduction
contribution by providing support for long-term institutional
changes encouraging both actions to reduce radon risk when homes
are sold and the adoption of radon resistant new construction codes.

Other key issues examined by the panel include:

What role should government play in dealing with radon in homes?

The panel says it believes government bears a special responsibility
to inform the public about radon. Success in fulfilling this role
should be measured by the quality of information provided and the
extent of improvement in public understanding -- not necesarily the
amount of testing and mitigation it triggers.

When public protection cannot be achieved with stronger action,
government should move beyond providing information. The panel
determined government's role should be shaped by level of risk. And,
it's role in informing the public should be stronger in areas with
higher levels of risk. Both federal and state, as well as local
governments, health and consumer organizations, should play a
critical role.

What should be the ultimate goals of the radon program?

The reviewers make five suggestions, first of which is radon
reduction. Informing the public and building a private sector radon
testing and mitigation industry also is critical, the panel says.
Moving beyond solely providing information to achieve reduction is
next on the list with recommendations to establish "separate but
complementary" short- and long-term goals by which to judge
success. Improving and maintaining credibility, ranked fourth and
fifth.

To what extent should special efforts be made to reach smokers and
former smokers?

Because of substantial risk differentials between smokers, former
smokers and non-smokers, EPA should make a strong effort to target
smokers and former smokers.

The panel recommends EPA urge organizations and agencies
providing anti-smoking programs to warn smokers radon is a serious
hazard to their health  even if they stop. Exploring specific ways to
target current and former smokers is a must, they say.

How can EPA most effectively increase testing and mitigation at the
time of real estate transfers?

Voluntary testing in connection with real estate transactions is
currently too infrequent to result in significant risk reductions, the
panel says. Such voluntary testing will not increase significantly
until action is taken to remove or reduce some of the obstacles (e.g.
workable testing protocols.

The panel also says the agency should seriously examine radon
escrow accounts and dissemination of radon information at the time
of a real estate property transfer.

Is there a need for additional radon-related research?

EPA's radon-related research efforts have been successful, the panel
says, however, they are in need of greater coordination. EPA needs a
comprehensive, prioritized and coordinated plan to guide its future
research activities. Further research topics include health effects
and risk to smokers, former smokers and never smokers,
measurement device accuracy, correlations between short- and
long-term measurements, new testing devices, tamper resistant
measurement techniques, ambient radon levels in high radon
potential areas, mitigation technology, geographic targeting
research and risk communication.

Editor's Note: It will interesting to see how these recommendations
affect future EPA activities.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

RADON LUNG CANCER DEATHS AVERTED PER YEAR AFTER
IMPLEMENTATION OF RADON_RESISTANT BUILDING CODES

First year: 30-50

Second year: 60-90

After 10: 300-400

Assuming 100 Percent Implementation of Radon-Resistant Building
Codes. Source: US EPA




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

THE CHANGING FACE OF RISK ASSESMENT

As a young industry with many critics, professional risk
assessors say they are re-examining the way in which they
determine environmental risks. The industry is searching for the
best methods of determining risk by making swift strides away from
defining risk by "maximum worst case exposure" standards and
moving toward a "reasonable maximum exposure" unit of measure.

According to industry news articles, changing the way assessors
measure risk will make a big difference in how a site is evaluated
and treated. Risk assessors say they are ready to move toward
evaluating environmental hazards by using the "weight of evidence"
approach, which if adopted by the industry, would put radon higher
up on the EPA priority list.

Under the "weight of evidence approach," assessors would compile
all relevant data, including animal and human toxicology studies,
extrapolated estimates of risk and all additional information
available on a potential hazard, to help make a determination of risk.
Estimates of risk would then be made by examining all data
available and formulating a "reasonable maximum exposure."

The risk assessment industry is not alone in seeking change. Two
Nuclear Regulatory Committees are examining risk assessment
methods; the interagency Federa; Coordinating Council on Science,
Engineering and Technology is attempting to standardize the U.S.
government's health and environmental risk assessment methods.

Vice President Danforth Quayle's Council on Competitiveness is
evaluating biotechnology risk assessment policy. The U.S. Congress
and the White House have agreed to set up the Risk Assessment and
Management Commission. And, EPA Chief William Reilly is
prioritizing environmental hazards so EPA can perform bureaucratic
triage.

Should the EPA and risk assessors adopt the "weight of evidence"
approach, and bureuacrats begin funding environmental cleanup
program based on risk to the public, funding for the radon issue
should get a significant boost.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

School Surveys. Data from the U.S. EPA survey of U.S. schools is

School Surveys. Data from the U.S. EPA survey of U.S. schools is
scheduled to be released this fall. According to the agency, 928
schools have been surveyed over the course of the past year or so.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

Residential data. Out this fall. Montana & Virginia are two states to

Residential data. Out this fall. Montana & Virginia are two states to
be included in this report.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

Mitigation standard. Lou Nelson is working with AARST to develop a

Mitigation standard. Lou Nelson is working with AARST to develop a
"consensus standard" for radon mitigation.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

New RMP Measurement Protocols. Due out in August. Exams will

New RMP Measurement Protocols. Due out in August. Exams will
reflect new measurement protocols, new device specific protocols
and the changes relating to radon and the latest "Citizen's Guide to
Radon." Exams start this November.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

RMP Participants. As of July, 1451 participants in the EPA program.

RMP Participants. As of July, 1451 participants in the EPA program.
506 primary, 1259 secondary, 314 both. Number of people who
passed the individual operator test -- 278.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "36"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

RCP Participants. As of July, 931 participants.

RCP Participants. As of July, 931 participants.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "37"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

Backdrafting. Of importance to mitigators, Section 5.8 of final

Backdrafting. Of importance to mitigators, Section 5.8 of final
mitigation standards out this fall. Will require mitigators test
systems for backdrafting.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "38"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

EPA Mitigation Program. Officials say they are working on the

EPA Mitigation Program. Officials say they are working on the
following issues: radon mitigation and entry into sub-soil;
measurement of radon content in various types of building
materials, including concrete; research in large buildings with
elevated radon levels; computer models for determining
indoor air mixing rates; backdrafting issues.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "39"></A>Copyright
RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet
September 1992

READER'S VIEWS

Dear Editor:

I would appreciate it very much if you would publish this letter. The
so-called "radon experts" in the Ohio Department of Health have
argued with me that radon companies that utilize continuous
monitors are not primarly laboratories and for that reason their
handlers need not be licensed as primary labs, nor need they pay the
$600 license fee required by the state.

As a result of their false interpretation of our State law
(3701-69-08), there are testers using continuous monitors who have
not paid their State registration fee and are not licensed to operate
primary laboratories according to EPA definitions.

A continuous monitor has been defined by EPA as a primary lab. It is
not fair to those of us who have paid their laboratory license fees to
allow these people to compete with us in the radon testing market
without having paid the $600 license fee. Some of these people are
in further violation of the law since they are not maintaining their
current listing in the EPA RMP Round. This fact again gives these
people a further advantage to offer cheaper radon testing services.

I had to fly to Las Vegas to the EPA Radon facility on order to
maintain my current listing for continuous monitors. Flight, hotel,
cab fare, etc., cost me $650, which I now have to pass on to the
consumer.

Therefore, I am asking that the DOH immediately enforce the law by
ordering non-licensed and non-EPA listed primary labs to cease
radon testing using continuous monitors.

The success of the newly-enacted State Radon Licensure Program
depends on its fair and equitable enforcement for all.

Helmar H. A. Dollwet, PhD
Akron, OH

Editor's note: We contacted the Ohio radon program and were told
that the state "as of now" does not require continuous monitor
operators to meet the requirements of a primary radon laboratory.
State officials told RND that continuous monitors are considered "a
tool" and for that reason operators of those devices need not meet
primary lab requirements.

We also contacted EPA and they seem to be in agreement with Mr.
Dollwet, although at presstime, we were unable to get through to
those "in the know" at the agency. We will follow-up on this issue
and report our findings in a future issue.

Mr. Dollwet, meanwhile, has found his own solution. He says, if the
State of Ohio won't make the situation right he will refuse to pay
future State licensing fees.

Dear Editor:

I just received the enclosed bulletin from Mr. Cris Collie of the
Employee Relocation Council. (The bulletin alerts those concerned
with real estate property transfers that H.R. 11, a House bill
containing a proposal to place a cap of $5,000 on allowable moving
expense deductions, needs an immediate response from radon
industry members.)

With the consumer deficient awareness of the radon hazard and the
apathetic attitude of many in the federal and state governments,
radon testing where it is not mandatory will be an expense that will
not be considered. It is addressed at the lattermost orientation of
the employee's move and close to the cumulative dollar total.

To be perfectly frank, my past experience as an executive with a
large Fortune 200 company leads me to believe that expenses which
have tangible value will be considered as foremost. The family will
forego the expense of radon testing and other "nuisance" expenses.
They do this so as to escape the burden of taxes.

Since we are so directly Involved, we point out the dangers of this
bill, H.R. 11. I believe we as the representatives of an industry, must
point out the detrimental health effects of this bill. Though the
profit motive is important, the paramount motive is to save lives.

Nick Nickitas
Tampa, FL

Editor's Note: We contacted Mr. Collie, who told RND that the House
has already passed the bill, although, the Senate is considering
another, more favorable version. Contact Mr. Collie at 202-857-0857
for information on how you can help make sure radon-related issues
are not left out.

Dear Editor:

The United States Code of Federal Regulations includes an entire
section (10 CFR 20) devoted to both occupational and non-
occupational exposure to many forms of radiation. However, there is
not one mention of indoor radon exposure despite the fact that
radon-related research has produced the most complete body of
evidence that radon exposure causes lung cancer.

For miners, radiation is an occupational hazard. In an attempt to
minimize exposure, miners are restricted to a total yearly dose of 4
WLM and must wear respirators if the concentration of radon in the
mine reaches 16 pCi/l.

Although it is quite common for indoor radon levels to reach 16
pCi/l in many U.S. homes, government regulations offer more
protection from radiation exposure in mines than they do in our
homes.

Why is it that the Nuclear Regulatory Commission believes
occupational radiation exposure should be limited to 500 MREM per
year in nuclear facilities while residents of homes with a 4 pCi/l
radon level are allowed to receive over 650 MREM of exposure (12
hours per day in the home, 340 days per year)?

If regulations governing radiation exposure at nuclear power
facilities were applied to residential radon exposure the NRC policy
would make better sense. We must treat radon as the health hazard
that it is. And, according to the U.S. EPA, radon is a Group A
carcinogen with solid human data directly linking it to cancer.

Dick Manning
Vice President, American Association of Radon Scientists and
Technologists



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-12</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B019-224</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev28.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002144 text/html 39475
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:19:36 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:31 GMT
Content-length: 39286
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev28.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
REPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 5, 1990<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>SLANTS & TRENDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(312 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>DOE TO DEVELOP DEEP BOREHOLE SAMPLING&nbsp;TECHNIQUES IN MICROBIOLOGY PROGRAM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(658 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>RISK OF CANCER FROM LOW-LEVEL EXPOSURE&nbsp;TO RADIATION COULD BE HIGHER THAN THOUGHT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(340 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>GAO OFFERS DOD ADVICE ON MINIMIZING AMOUNT&nbsp;OF UNUSED HAZARDOUS WASTE SENT FOR DISPOSAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(553 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>EPA REGION 5 PROPOSES INCREASE IN PENALTY&nbsp;AGAINST WESTINGHOUSE FOR FMPC VIOLATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(572 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>BATTELLE SENSOR FOR DETECTING CONTAMINANTS&nbsp;IN SOIL TO BE MORE ACCURATE, LESS EXPENSIVE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(334 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>ARMY TESTING COMPOSTING OF SOIL&nbsp;TO ELIMINATE EXPLOSIVE CONTAMINATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(183 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>DOE'S IDAHO AND RICHLAND OFFICES&nbsp;SEEK BETTER CLEANUP TECHNOLOGIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(521 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>DROUGHT MAY BE TO BLAME FOR HIGH URANIUM&nbsp;LEVEL OF CONTAMINATION IN GROUND WATER AT FMPC</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(624 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>LAWRENCE LIVERMORE ASKS EPA TO REVIEW&nbsp;REFUSAL ON HAZARDOUS WASTE PERMIT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(266 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>DOE 'TIGER TEAMS' TO CHECK&nbsp;LIVERMORE LATE NEXT MONTH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(132 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>HOUSE PANEL TO VISIT ROCKY FLATS: The House Armed Services Defense Nuclear</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(107 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>OTHER BUSINESS AND TECHNOLOGY NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>    ICF Kaiser Engineers, Oakland, Calif., has received a task-order</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(97 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>    Battelle Memorial Institute has selected Donald A. Kane to direct</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(66 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>    Defense Department Environmental Compliance will be the focus of the</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(65 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>    DOE's Epidemiological Research Panel met in Albuquerque, N.M., Dec.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(104 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNet
JANUARY 5, 1990

SLANTS & TRENDS

NEW READINGS OF URANIUM CONTAMINATION in wells drilled at the Feed
Materials Production Center may be alarming the public needlessly. Regular
monitoring of ground water contamination in an admittedly contaminated area
last spring showed a sudden spike in uranium concentrations,
and comments by officials from the U.S.  Department of Energy and Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency were misinterpreted.

ALTHOUGH THE LEVELS WERE 10-30 TIMES as high as proposed standards by the
federal EPA, results in the lower end of that range were fully expected.
When word of higher readings came out early this month, newspapers and
newswire services quickly said the officials suspected new contamination
and even contended the water supply of Cincinnati, 18 miles away, and
Dayton, 40 miles away, might be endangered.

NO SUCH THREAT EXISTS, the officials tell DPW, and they never hinted at
one. Graham Mitchell of Ohio EPA explained his comment about the
contamination possibly being more recent meant it might have happened 10
years ago instead of 20 years ago. And while contaminated wells are tapping
a part of the same aquifer used for drinking water for Dayton, the polluted
plume extends only about 1.5 miles from the plant and is heading away from
that city. Even though it is headed generally toward Cincinnati, both DOE
and Ohio EPA officials are confident it can be stopped long short of there.
"I don't think it will ever have the chance to get to Cincinnati," said
Mitchell.

IF FERNALD AND ROCKY FLATS LOOK BAD, the explosion at a high-level nuclear
waste dump at Kyshtym in the USSR was much worse than anyone has admitted,
the Soviets now say.  That accident in the late 1950s released not the 2
million curies admitted by Soviet officials only a year ago, but 20 million
curies. This compares to the 50 million curies released by the Chernobyl
civilian nuclear accident.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNet
JANUARY 5, 1990

DOE TO DEVELOP DEEP BOREHOLE SAMPLING
TECHNIQUES IN MICROBIOLOGY PROGRAM

    Department of Energy will develop and evaluate sampling techniques in
fiscal 1990 and 1991 under its Deep Microbiology Program. This will be
followed by an accelerated five-year (FY'92-96) Phase II research program
including field experimentation to test new concepts with contaminated
zones at one or more DOE sites.

    The 15- to 20-year goal of the program is to contribute new scientific
information that will make bioremediation of contaminated DOE sites easier,
the agency says in an implementation plan. Experience gained at the DOE
sites will be transferred to other agencies and to private industry. The
most important scientific goal of the transitional program is to obtain
comparative information on subsurface microbial communities among DOE
sites.

    At present, DOE says, "no cost-effective technologies exist for cleanup
of ground water contamination at depths of 400-600 ft. or greater." By
studying the presence, diversity and adaptability of deep microorganisms at
various sites, DOE hopes to contribute to, and speed the cleanup of, deep
aquifers. "Recently discovered deep microorganisms obtained [last year]
during Phase 1 appear to be physiologically capable of degrading
recalcitrant organic chemicals (and possibly organic-radionuclide
complexes), and their activity may be enhanced in-situ to eliminate or
transform contaminants," says the implementation plan.

    DOE's Richland and Idaho Operations Offices, Pacific Northwest
Laboratory's Environmental Sciences Research Center and the Idaho National
Laboratory, run by EG&G Inc., will provide financial and scientific
support. DOE's Office of Energy Research Subsurface Science Program is
funding competitive research and essential logistical tasks to ensure
aseptic samples are obtained.

    DOE will implement the transitional program at INEL and the Hanford
site. Results at the first site will meet two or more scientific
objectives in the program plan and provide scientific and technological
experience needed to confirm results or meet objectives at the next site.
Site sampling and analysis will be completed sequentially through
activities at INEL, Hanford and the Nevada Test Site. Operational and
scientific payoffs of FY'90 activities are as follows:

    o Savage Island Exploratory Borehole (Hanford). Operational:
Development of microbial tracers; initial experience in hard-rock sampling
protocols; refinement of rotary-mud drilling methods for partially
consolidated sediments. Scientific:  First indication of microbes in deep
zones with different hydrochemistry from SRS; improved detection of
microbial contamination with labelled natural bacteria.

    o Snake River Deep Interbed Probe (INEL). Operational: Enhanced use of
hard-rock and unconsolidated sampling for use at Hanford; specific
evaluation of use of new air/argon drilling technique for microbial sample
acquisition. Scientific:  Substantiation of lack of organisms in
low-permeability formations; determination of organism distribution
patterns in fracture flow terrain at DOE sites; determination of organism
physiology and distribution in high-flow ground water.

    o Aseptic Sampling Technology Development (Hanford). Operational:
Development and evaluation of new aseptic sampling methods for collection
of high-quality microbiological samples in varied and complex
hydrogeologic systems at DOE sites.

    o Western States Mixed Softrock/Hardrock Sequence (Hanford/Yakima
Barricade).  Operational: Use of verified aspectic techniques for mixed
soft- and hard-rock sequence; demonstation of particle/colloid and
microbial tracer efficiency under complex hydrologic conditions
representative of DOE sites. Scientific: Widening range of lithologies,
geochemistry and permeabilities to maximize comparative opportunities with
SRS; varied ground water age and recharge sources to make unique genetic,
physiological and metabolic comparisons to organisms at SRS and INEL.

    o Subsurface Hardrock Spatial Variability Experiment (NTS).
Operational: Refine statistical sampling strategy to assess
multi-dimensional distribution of organisms; improve techniques for
isolation of microbes from hard-rock samples.  Scientific: Document rock
fracture control on organism distribution; identify minimum sample size to
define macroscopic population characteristics; unique data-set on microbial
distributions for application of geostatistical techniques.

    o Contaminated Site/Bioremediation Research Site (FY'91). Operational:
Use of specialized aseptic sampling techniques in chemically contaminated
environments; co-quantification of chemical and microbiological
distribution with depth; use of proven tracer technology to document sample
integrity. Scientific: Effects of organic/inorganic contaminants on
microbial populations, activity and diversity; indentification/isolation of
contaminant-adapted or contaminant-using organisms; microbial distributions
in a representative site requiring bioremediaton.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNet
JANUARY 5, 1990

RISK OF CANCER FROM LOW-LEVEL EXPOSURE
TO RADIATION COULD BE HIGHER THAN THOUGHT

    The risk of developing cancer from exposure to low levels of X-rays and
gamma rays could be as high as 3-4 times greater than those previously
estimated, but epidemiological studies of nuclear weapons workers appear to
show only that the risks are as high as expected, says a National Research
Council committee.

    The committee updated findings of the BEIR III panel, which issued its
report on health effects from alpha particle emitters. Higher risk
estimates presented in the new report, BEIR V, stem from new risk models,
revised dose estimates for survivors of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki atomic
bombs, and additional epidemiological data on cancers and other health
effects experienced by both A-bomb survivors and persons exposed to
radiation for medical purposes.

    The new report notes several studies reviewed on nuclear worker
epidemiology "have yet to accumulate a sufficient number of deaths to reach
any sensible conclusions relating to individual types of cancer. The most
consistent result ...  is that the risk estimates for all types of cancer
combined and for all types of leukemia combined are consistent with the
risk estimates" in BEIR V.

    The worker studies include reviews of British Nuclear Fuels Ltd.
(Windscale Plant and Sellafield Plant) in the United Kingdom; Hanford Site,
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge Y-12 Plant, and Rocky Flats
Nuclear Weapons Plant, in the U.S.; and Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd. in
Canada, along with studies of workers at civilian nuclear plants.

    Energy Secretary James D. Watkins on Dec. 20 directed Peter Brush,
acting assistant secretary for environment, safety and health, to review
the BEIR V report and its potential implications for DOE's nuclear
operations, including making recommendations for modifying operations,
where needed. Watkins called for an interim report within 90 days and a
final report by June 30, 1990.

    Health Effects of Exposure to Low Levels of Ionizing Radiation is
available for $35 in paperback or $40 in hardcover from the National
Academy Press, 2101 Consitution Ave., N.W., Washington, D.C. 20418, (800)
624-6242 or (202) 334-3313.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNet
JANUARY 5, 1990

GAO OFFERS DOD ADVICE ON MINIMIZING AMOUNT
OF UNUSED HAZARDOUS WASTE SENT FOR DISPOSAL

    The Department of Defense fails to minimize unused hazardous materials
transferred for disposal, the General Accounting Office says in a newly
released report. The accounting arm of Congress based its analysis on a
random sample from 10 installations, finding that 40% of the waste was
unused hazardous materials.

    Hazardous materials with a $250 million acquisition value were
transferred for disposal during fiscal 1986-88, says the report, prepared
at the request of Rep. Vic Fazio (D-Calif.), chairman of the House
Government Operations Subcommittee on the Environment. Materials initially
worth more than $195 million were disposed of in FY'86-88 by sales to the
public (43%), disposal service contracts (31%), reuse within DOD (13%),
transfer/donation to non-DOD users (12%) and miscellaneous disposals (less
than 1%). The remainder will stay in storage until a decision is reached on
the manner in which the materials will be disposed of.

    The inventory control procedure of first-in, first-out (FIFO), which
can minimize the chance of hazardous materials becoming hazardous waste
due to shelf-life expiration, is not always followed because of a lack of
internal controls, GAO found. Some exceptions to the procedure are
permitted that do not fully take into account extra costs incurred in the
disposal of hazmat.

    DOD does not always follow its regulations that the condition of
hazardous materials be evaluated periodically, GAO points out. The rules
also say shelf life is extended after inspection and testing at the depot
or installation, when possible. Officials contacted by GAO blame the lack
of evaluations on funding constraints, inadequate emphasis by management or
a lack of guidance to users on how to evaluate hazmat conditions. Such
materials sometimes are transferred for disposal without testing or
evaluation to see if shelf-lives could be extended, GAO maintains, and some
Army installations keep hazmats in their inventories for an extended period
of time without evaluating their condition.

    DOD uses the same management procedures for hazardous and nonhazardous
materials, GAO notes. If it had special procedures for managing hazmat
inventories, the report concludes, the cost of unnecessary disposal and
potential liability for environmental damage and future cleanup costs could
be decreased.

    Some improvements are on the way, GAO adds. The Navy established
instructions June 20, 1989, to improve life-cycle management of its
hazmats. The rules address management of hazmat inventories, including
controls over their procurement, management procedures for excess hazmats
and waste, quality assurance evaluations, documentation, and record-keeping
and reporting. These elements bring a structure to the management of wastes
in the Navy, GAO contends, pointing out that the Air Force and Army have no
comparable effort under way.

    GAO wants each service to provide special attention to inventory
management procedures for hazmats. These should include directing the
Defense Logistics Agency and the General Services Administration, through
the memorandum of agreement between DOD and the GSA, to make greater use
of direct delivery contracts for hazmats with a short shelf-life; supply
organizations to make greater use of FIFO procedures for short shelf-life
hazmats and to discourage exceptions; and supply depots and installations
to evaluate the condition of hazmats consistently through periodic testing
or inspections before sending them out for disposal.

    Free copies of "Hazardous Waste -- Attention to DOD Inventories of
Hazardous Materials Needed," GAO/NSIAD-90-11, are available from GAO, Box
6015, Gaithersburg, Md. 20877, (301) 275-6241.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNet
JANUARY 5, 1990

EPA REGION 5 PROPOSES INCREASE IN PENALTY
AGAINST WESTINGHOUSE FOR FMPC VIOLATIONS

    Westinghouse Materials Co. of Ohio would receive a much stiffer fine
than initially proposed for violations at the Feed Materials Production
Center at Fernald, under a motion filed by the Environmental Protection
Agency Region 5. The amended complaint, filed Dec. 19, asks for $330,500
and is based on violations discovered at the facility after an initial
filing of a Feb. 9, 1989, complaint with a proposed fine of $196,500.

    During two inspections last August and October, EPA found more than 25
new and recurring violations of federal hazardous waste regulations.
Specifically, EPA alleges that Westinghouse has failed to complete required
waste analyses and waste determination plans; failed to designate itself as
operator on the hazardous waste permit application; continued to monitor
ground water inadequately; and submitted inadequate closure plans,
operating records, job descriptions and training records.

    EPA filed this latest motion with Administrative Law Judge Thomas Hoya.
If Hoya grants the motion to amend the original complaint and boost the
penalty, Westinghouse will have the right to request a hearing to contest
any new allegations made by the federal government.

    In a related note, the Department of Energy says it is dropping its
appeal of a $78 million judgment by the U.S. District Court for the
Southern District of Ohio resolving a $300 million suit filed in 1985 by
the facility's neighbors, who maintain that radioactive emissions over
three decades from the plutonium-processing plant have endangered their
health, caused emotional distress and lowered the property value of their
houses (DPW, July 7, 1989).

    "We're not going to pursue our appeal," explained DOE attorney Steven
Wakefield, but "the bad news is that the department discovered earlier [in
the week of Dec. 17] that it cannot pay the judgment from a fund it had
planned to use." DOE had wanted to use a federal contingency fund, but was
barred from doing so because the suit was initially filed against a
contractor, not the government.  DOE now must seek a separate appropriation
from Congress to establish the fund.

    The plaintiffs accepted the decision -- with the money earmarked for
lifetime epidemiological studies and health monitoring -- but the final
agreement and acceptance by Judge S. Arthur Spiegel was held up as DOE
disagreed with plaintiffs over the decision's interpretation (DPW, Sept. 1,
1989). Two private companies in the area had complained that some
of the industrial waste pollution for which they had been cited separately
was due to FMPC's operations. One corporate complainant said his firm's
property value also was diminished, but the court said he would have to
file separately for compensation.

    DOE had appealed the decision to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the
Sixth Circuit, arguing the accord barred any future claims, but plaintiffs
contended that it covered only emotional distress and reduction of property
values. They demanded they could still file to obtain funds to cover
cleanup work; DOE had said some of the $78 million could be earmarked for
cleanup.

    The suit had involved FMPC's operations by NLO, a subsidiary of
National Lead of Ohio, the former contractor, which went out of business.
Because of NLO's departure, DOE had to step in as defendant. The change in
the operations and maintenance contract came after the initial filing and
before the settlement. The contract was transferred to Westinghouse at end
of 1985. Activities at the plant were suspended last year to speed up
decontamination.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNet
JANUARY 5, 1990

BATTELLE SENSOR FOR DETECTING CONTAMINANTS
IN SOIL TO BE MORE ACCURATE, LESS EXPENSIVE

    Battelle Memorial Institute's device for improving detection of fuel
oil, stored gasoline, solvents and other organic liquids dumped or leaking
into soil (DPW, Dec. 22, 1989) is expected to be more accurate,
less expensive and simpler to use than current competing technologies.
Developed by researchers at Department of Energy's Pacific Northwest
Laboratory, operated by Battelle, the device will be made available for
commercialization and manufacture.

    Battelle's new sensor, constructed from materials costing less than
those employed in current devices, could be used by environmental
researchers to measure the amount and location of organic liquids that
have seeped into the soil.  "It could be used to detect leaks in new
storage tanks as well as to monitor the severity of leaks from older
storage facilities," suggests John W. Cary of Battelle's Earth and
Environmental Sciences Center.

    Cary created the sensor to assist Battelle researchers in their studies
of how organic fluids move in the subsurface environment and how to reduce
or repair their ecological effects. "Traditionally, devices such as 'gypsum
blocks' are used to measure water content within soil," he explained.
"These measuring instruments are more expensive and do not detect organic
liquids. On the other hand, most sensors that are used to detect organic
liquids in soils detect vapors rather than the presence of liquid. These,
too, are expensive."

    The sensor features an optical switch containing a solid-state
infrared-light-emitting device joined to a porous disk made of ceramic,
fritted glass, PTFE (Teflon) or various carbon-based materials. Which
material is selected determines whether water or organic liquid is absorbed
into the pores.

    The disk is placed into the soil where liquid, if present, is absorbed.
Light transmitted through the disk is measured and is proportionate to the
amount of water or organic liquid that is absorbed into the pores. The
amount of liquid in the disk can be related to the amount of liquid in the
surrounding soil. The disk remains in the soil the entire time the
measurement is made.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNet
JANUARY 5, 1990

ARMY TESTING COMPOSTING OF SOIL
TO ELIMINATE EXPLOSIVE CONTAMINATION

    The U.S. Army's 19,700-acre Umatill Depot near Hermiston, Ore., will be
the testing site for an experiment in treating soil contaminated by
explosives. The composting experiment will use microorganisms to consume
the contaminants in soils and sediments, explains Capt. Craig Myler,
project officer for the Army's Toxic and Hazardous Materials Agency
(USATHAMA).

    Because microbes do not naturally feed quickly enough on TNT particles,
they will be coaxed in tests in special greenhouses, where soil is enriched
with addi tional microbe food sources, such as hay, straw, manure or
livestock feed. Much of the contamination comes from dry ponds used 25
years ago to settle out high-explosive residues, Myler says. The explosive
material seeped through the ponds' sandy bottoms.

    Contamination also had spread across some 1,100 acres used for disposal
of rocket fuels, battery acid, explosives and propellants. Some of these
pollutants, which include nitrates, nitrites, cyanide and metals, have
migrated to ground water. The composting system is less expensive than
incineration, the only alternative. Burning the residue costs about $300
per ton, or as much as three times that for composting.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNet
JANUARY 5, 1990

DOE'S IDAHO AND RICHLAND OFFICES
SEEK BETTER CLEANUP TECHNOLOGIES

    The Department of Energy's Idaho and Richland Operations offices will
seek better technologies to solve waste management and environmental
restoration problems in Idaho and Washington under a new agreement. The
accord will address Secretary James D. Watkins' Environmental Restoration
and Waste Management Five-Year Plan initiatives announced earlier this year
(DPW, Sept. 1, 1989).

    The new agreement will run through Sept. 30, 1994, providing for
collaboration on waste management and environmental restoration issues
among the Boise and Richland offices, their contractors, and universities
in Washington, Oregon, Idaho and Montana. Funding for the activities will
be provided by DOE as part of Idaho and Richland Operations offices'
approved spending plans.

    The agreement encompasses, but is not limited to: (1) establishing a
DOE team to address parallel research needs and activities; (2) focusing of
combined expertise on objectives of regional interest and national
importance; (3) drawing on existing working relationships effectively to
use technical expertise and experience to assure appropriate resource
application in specific areas of waste management and environmental
restoration; and (4) developing a consortium of the laboratories and other
DOE contractors with northwestern and mountain states universities for
promoting waste management and environmental restoration education through
educational training support and research and development opportunities.

    The accord involves nine areas of collaboration: stabilizing or
destroying waste on site; quantifying potential health and environmental
risks and exposure reductions; processing wastes to recover potentially
useful materials; treating solid and liquid wastes using high temperatures;
developing robotic waste retrieval technologies; differentiating specific
waste sites; demonstrating technologies; developing waste minimization
techniques; and collaborating with universities on research and training.
Additional areas might be added.

    The first tier in a three-tiered management will be a committee of
operations office managers, laboratory directors and operating contractor
presidents/general managers. The second tier will be a six-member steering
committee from each operations office and up to two representatives from
their laboratory or operating contractor. It will be co-chaired by the
operations office representatives. The third tier will consist of activity
project managers, with an Idaho National Engineering Laboratory and a
Hanford project manager for each activity.

    "The collaborative agreement provides a means for better use of time,
talent and funds in solving waste management and environmental restoration
issues important to the Pacific Northwest and the nation," said Watkins.
"An important part of this agreement involves collaboration not just
between different groups in one federal agency, but with regional
universities as well.

    "We expect the universities to play an important role in research on
waste cleanup issues and in developing education and training programs in
waste management and environmental-related areas," Watkins added. "We
believe the education and training programs fostered by this agreement will
produce the additional skilled people needed to clean up both industrial
and DOE wastes." Since he first arrived on the job, Watkins has complained
that he could not find enough trained and experienced people to mount the
effort he would like.

    The agreement was signed by the two operations offices, Battelle
Pacific Northwest Laboratory, Westinghouse Hanford Co., Westinghouse Idaho
Nuclear Co., EG&G Idaho Inc., Mountain State Energy Co. and UNC Geotech.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNet
JANUARY 5, 1990

DROUGHT MAY BE TO BLAME FOR HIGH URANIUM
LEVEL OF CONTAMINATION IN GROUND WATER AT FMPC

    Surprisingly high uranium contamination levels found in wells drilled
70 ft.  into the Great Miami River Aquifer from a point in the southwest
corner of the Feed Materials Production Center at Fernald, Ohio, could have
been the result of last summer's drought, says Andrew Avel, deputy
environmental manager of the Department of Energy's Site Office.

    The contamination had been known for years, but the concentration
levels unexpectedly rose from 309 + 51 parts per billion (ppb) in
samplings taken in late February 1989 and reported the following month, to
851 + 136 ppb in tests made on May 11 and results received June 19, and
fell back down to to 232 + 39 ppb in samples taken July 28 and results
reached on Sept. 7, DPW was told by Avel.

    One theory is that the contamination results from a temporary, partial
drying of the aquifer during a drought last summer. All the readings are
many times higher than U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's unreleased
proposed standard of 30 ppb; there are no standards in place today. The
reduced rainfall could have caused the ground water flow to reverse its
normal southerly course and place the test wells downstream, instead of
upstream, of contamination sources in the nuclear weapons facility, DPW
was told. Renewed rainfall could have returned the gradient to its normal
course, according to this line of thinking at DOE.

    The readings were taken by Advanced Sciences Inc., contractor to the
Department of Energy, not to Westinghouse Materials Co. of Ohio (WMCO),
operations and management prime contractor at FMPC. They are part of the
remedial investigation/ feasibility study (RIFS) to characterize the
environment surrounding the plant.  Now in the effort's "RI" stage, the
tests on wells within the plant site were made to gather information for a
data base for future environmental restoration.

    The results were first released publicly about two weeks ago by WMCO's
Advisory Committee, an independent group of local citizens, who had been
briefed by WMCO in a regularly scheduled quarterly meeting that touched on
the results of the monitoring of the wells. The readings' results were
buried in the citizen group's press release and picked up Jan. 3 by the
Cincinnati Enquirer.

    The contaminated plume appears to be moving south at a rate of about
200 ft.  per year and now extends some 1.5 miles away from the plant. The
contaminated water wells tap into the Great Miami River Aquifer. No known
polluted water is used for drinking, but some water unsafe for drinking is
treated and used for industrial purposes. Ohio EPA wants to assure
availability of water supplies from the aquifer even though the main water
supply for Cincinnati is the Ohio River.

    The monitoring wells were drilled specifically for the test; they are
not used to draw water for other purposes. Production wells in the area are
checked often, Avel said, and those that have been identified as
contaminated are no longer being used for drinking water. The few outlying
wells in use for drinking water have readings essentially at background
level and are being monitored.

    DOE is working on an agreement with the state and EPA to find a
solution to the contaminated water. One option under consideration is to
pump out the water from the contaminated plume, treat it and return it to
the surface of the ground, DPW has been told, but there is no commitment
yet to take any particular action.  DOE maintains that the 1989 readings
pose no new threat to the public and are not evidence of any new instance
of contamination from FMPC, although that may be the public perception. "We
are concerned, but it's really nothing that surprises us," Avel told DPW.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNet
JANUARY 5, 1990

LAWRENCE LIVERMORE ASKS EPA TO REVIEW
REFUSAL ON HAZARDOUS WASTE PERMIT

    Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) has delivered the plans
for operating its incinerator and hazardous waste storage and treatment
facility to the California Department of Health Services (DHS) and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency. The 12 volumes are the documentation LLNL
needs to obtain a permit to run the facility.

    They were provided in response to notification of EPA's proposed
intention to deny a hazardous waste permit for nearly all waste operations
at LLNL. The material was delivered in person at a Dec. 18 meeting with
agency officials, but there has been no comment from EPA since, one
official from LLNL's Environmental Protection Department (EPD) told DPW.

    A second EPD official, Susi Jackson, said, "We have worked hard to
comply with regulatory agenda requirements and have documented our
accomplishements and plans for the future in this highly detailed
documentation." She noted that the report "includes a health risk
assessment of our existing incinerator and other documents that reflect our
response to regulatory agency concerns.

    Jackson said LLNL's goal is "to work with EPA and DHS to ensure that
our waste storage and treatment facilities are absolutely in compliance
with existing laws. We have worked closely with the agencies to resolve
all outstanding issues related to the permit applications.

    The lab has "made a strong effort to meet agency requirements and to
assure them of [LLNL's] commitment to operate its facility in an
environmentally sound manner, consistent with regulatory requirements. By
expediting our efforts, we have completed all construction and other tasks
that were scheduled for the next several years under regulatory
requirements.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNet
JANUARY 5, 1990

DOE 'TIGER TEAMS' TO CHECK
LIVERMORE LATE NEXT MONTH

    A Department of Energy "Tiger Team" will inspect the Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory late next month to assess its compliance with
environmental, health and safety regulations. These 25-person investigative
teams are visiting all 18 major facilities in the nuclear weapons complex
plus dozens of other laboratories and installations. They already have
been to Rocky Flats, Fernald, Mound, Pantex, Y-12 and a civilian nuclear
energy facility in New York State.

    Tiger Team members will visit LLNL within a few weeks to make
pre-assessments and develop an agenda for the full-scale investigation,
tentatively set for Feb.  26, explains John Clatworthy, a hazards control
officer. Clatworthy has just returned to LLNL after spending a year at DOE
headquarters as technical and science advisor to the director of the Office
of Weapons Safety and Operations.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNet
JANUARY 5, 1990

HOUSE PANEL TO VISIT ROCKY FLATS: The House Armed Services Defense Nuclear

HOUSE PANEL TO VISIT ROCKY FLATS: The House Armed Services Defense Nuclear
Facilities Panel will visit the Rocky Flats Plant in Golden, Colo., Jan.
16 to conduct its own investigation of safety concerns and review plans for
restaring the plutonium trigger manufacturing operations there. The
meeting, requested by Chairman John M. Spratt Jr. (D-S.C.), an ex-officio
member of the panel, follows a Dec. 1, 1989, decision by Energy Secretary
James D. Watkins to extend the planned Nov. 13 shutdown of activities there
until higher environmental and safety standards are imposed, the safety
corrections are verified by an independent group of experts, and a new
safety program implemented.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNet
JANUARY 5, 1990

    ICF Kaiser Engineers, Oakland, Calif., has received a task-order

    ICF Kaiser Engineers, Oakland, Calif., has received a task-order
contract from the Energy Department for environmental support services at
the Nevada Test Site. The contract, worth up to $5 million over the next
three years, was awarded by DOE contractor Reynolds Electrical &
Engineering Co., Inc. Under the accord, ICF will provide environmental
services, training programs, laboratory support, and quality assurance and
contol (QA/QC) assistance. ICF has opened a Las Vegas office to support the
work. Contact: ICF Kaiser Engineers, Renaissance Executive Suites, 2255-A
Renaissance Dr., Suites 22-23, Las Vegas, Nev. 89119, (702) 739-9011, fax:
(702) 798-4865.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNet
JANUARY 5, 1990

    Battelle Memorial Institute has selected Donald A. Kane to direct

    Battelle Memorial Institute has selected Donald A. Kane to direct
Hanford operations for the Energy Department's Environmental Management
Operations (EMO), created earlier this year. EMO, operated by Battelle,
offers environmental restoration services to DOE and other federal
agencies. Activities include risk assessment, environmental auditing,
regulatory compliance and occupational safety and health. Contact:
Battelle, Pacific Northwest Laboratories, Battelle Blvd., P.O. Box 999,
Richland, Wash. 99352, (509) 375-2242.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNet
JANUARY 5, 1990

    Defense Department Environmental Compliance will be the focus of the

    Defense Department Environmental Compliance will be the focus of the
17th Environmental Symposium of the American Defense Preparedness
Association (ADPA), April 18-20 in Atlanta. The conference is designed to
bring together DOD officials and private companies, educational
institutions, professional societies, and state and federal regulatory
agencies. Contact: Vincent Ciccone, Law Environmental Inc., Woodbridge,
Va., (703) 643-1489, or Col. Bruce Holt, ADPA, Arlington, Va., (703)
522-1820.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
REPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNet
JANUARY 5, 1990

    DOE's Epidemiological Research Panel met in Albuquerque, N.M., Dec.

    DOE's Epidemiological Research Panel met in Albuquerque, N.M., Dec.
28-29 to hear testimony from officials with the Centers for Disease Control
in Atlanta, New York University's Institute of Environmental Medicine, the
government of the Rongelap Atoll in the Marshall Islands, the New Mexico
Tumor Registry, the International Commission on Radiological Protection,
and several Department of Energy programs. A draft of the panel's report,
released last month, called on DOE to revamp its epidemiology program (DPW,
Dec. 8, 1989). Contact:  Nona Shepard, Secretarial Panel for the
Evaluation of Epidemiologic Research Activities for the Department of
Energy, 1000 Independence Ave., Rm. GF-209, Washington, D.C. (202)
586-3773.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-13</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B019-249</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev20.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002216 text/html 37135
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:20:18 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:26 GMT
Content-length: 36946
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev20.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 4, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>SLANTS & TRENDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(356 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>MID-SIZED FIRMS DID WELL, NOW POISED&nbsp;FOR MORE GROWTH, COMPANY REPORTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(332 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>'GREEN WALL' ON ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES&nbsp;SAID TO HURT CORPORATE MANAGEMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(277 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>STUDY SAYS MRFS ARE ENVIRONMENTALLY&nbsp;SOUND, CREATE NO HEALTH PROBLEMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(695 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>VARIABLE-RATE SYSTEMS REDUCE WASTE&nbsp;VOLUME IN SEVERAL CAROLINA CITIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(741 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>EPA OFFICIALS: BUDGET REDUCTIONS&nbsp;COULD CAUSE MAJOR STAFF LAYOFFS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(292 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>SEVERAL SENATORS BACK LEGISLATION&nbsp;FOR A 'MODEST' CWA MODIFICATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(316 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>EDF TAPS ACTRESS JOANNE WOODWARD&nbsp;FOR TV DOCUMENTARY ON RECYCLING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(97 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>BOTH PARTIES MISSED CHANCE TO CHANGE&nbsp;ENVIRONMENTAL REGIME, ANALYST SAYS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(394 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>INDUSTRIAL PARK WOULD START CYCLE&nbsp;OF LOCAL WASTE TO RAW MATERIALS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(305 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>INDIANA SEEKS SUBTITLE D APPROVAL&nbsp;AFTER YEARS OF FUNDING SHORTAGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(571 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>HYDRAPULPING CLAIMED TO INCREASE&nbsp;RECYCLING OF ASEPTIC PACKAGING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(158 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>SPORTS COMPANY USES RECYCLABLES&nbsp;TO MAKE BASKETBALL BACKBOARDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(292 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

SLANTS & TRENDS


SUPERFUND TAKES A HIT - EPA shut down the federal Superfund
program this week because the agency was unable to pay
nearly 2,000 of its employees in that program along with
8,000 contractors who perform remediation work. The
Superfund was not affected immediately by the shutdown of
the federal government because most of those employees are
paid directly from the fund, rather than from budget
appropriations, said Jim Mathews, deputy assistant
administrator for EPA's Office of Solid Waste and Emergency
Response.

     Although Congress has not reauthorized the program or
issued its allotment for the current fiscal year, Superfund
had operated since October from a surplus in last year's
fund, Mathews explained. That money ran out Jan. 2, and the
agency began shutting down the program. Only emergency
personnel will continue working, reducing the agency's
program employees from more than 3,000 to 80. Several
Superfund sites will continue cleanups during the shutdown,
although many will be forced to stop operations, he said.
Contact: Jim Mathews, EPA, (202) 260-4610.

* * *

IN ONE POCKET, OUT THE OTHER - EPA has fined the Department
of Interior's (DOI), National Parks Service for violating
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) by storing
hazardous waste at the Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. The
facility stored hazardous waste without a RCRA permit
between March and October of last year, EPA said. The waste
contained acetone, chromium, lead, xylene, phenol, arsenic
and mercury, EPA contended. EPA also cited DOI for storing
waste in rusted, leaking containers. EPA fined the DOI
facility $243,800 and ordered it to develop a hazardous
waste management plan.

* * *

EPA BACKS BACT - Proposed new source review (NSR) rules
under development by EPA probably will recommend a "top
down" approach for determining the best available control
technology (BACT) such as technology used to control
emissions from landfills, EPA officials said. The rules also
will give states some flexibility in determining which
control method to use. The proposal, EPA officials said,
will allow states to develop their own BACT determination
criteria as long as they consider the leading technologies
currently available.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

MID-SIZED FIRMS DID WELL, NOW POISED
FOR MORE GROWTH, COMPANY REPORTS


     Mid-sized solid waste companies had the most pronounced
growth in the industry during 1995, with revenues increasing
69 percent to $2 billion, and that trend should continue,
according to a report by Raymond James & Associates, a
financial analysis company in St. Petersburg, Fla.

     In general terms, the report said, acquisition growth
accelerated over the past 12 months. The top 13 solid waste
companies are expected to increase their revenues by 21
percent, with a major revenue component driven by
acquisitions, the report also said.

     The report cited USA Waste's recently announced merger
with Western Waste for $530 million (SWR, Dec. 21, 1995, p.
391). If completed, this transaction would raise USA Waste
to third ranking by size in the U.S. solid waste market,
Raymond James noted.

     In addition, the report said, considerably improved
financing costs over the past year made the financing
environment for solid waste companies, particularly smaller
growth companies, better than any time in the past.

Smaller Companies Cited

     On financing issues, the report explained, "We wish to
stress that the improvement in the cost of financing has
been most notable for the smaller waste service companies. A
longer track record leading to enhanced credibility has
enabled these companies to dramatically lower their costs of
capital and benefit not only from lower rates, but from the
access to longer term financing and attractively priced
equity."

     Those financing options were "very limited" as recently
as 15 to 18 months ago, Raymond James explained.

     However, the document also noted that presently, "The
low financing costs clearly provide more attractive dynamics
for public companies to pursue acquisitions."

     In general, the analysis said, long term financing
rates for all companies, as represented by 30 year Treasury
bonds, have dropped considerably, thus providing a backdrop
for continued aggressive acquisition.

     The report, Solid Waste 1995: Mid-Sized Companies Lead
Industry in a Torrid Acquisition Pace, is available from
Raymond James. Contact: William Fisher, (800) 237-5643.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

'GREEN WALL' ON ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES
SAID TO HURT CORPORATE MANAGEMENT


     Communication problems between business and
environmental staff members can prevent companies from
successfully managing corporate environmental issues,
according to a survey of major U.S. firms.

     In its primary finding, the survey done by Arthur D.
Little Inc. reported a "green wall" that blocks
communication exists in many companies. For example,
managers for environment, health and safety programs at the
185 corporations Arthur D. Little surveyed often cited their
failure to convince management that environmental programs
are important to their firm's success.

     Numerous company officials responded that environment,
health, and safety functions are often viewed as an outside
operation with a sole mission of "keeping the company out of
trouble," Arthur D. Little also reported. More than 70
percent of those responding cited either a lack of
acceptance of environmental issues, or a separate
environmental "culture" as blocking integrating
environmental functions into their firms' business plans.
Contact: Diane Millikan, (617) 498-5896.

* * *

     Norton Performance Plastics Corp., Wayne, N.J., has
introduced a line of plastic tubing the company said can be
incinerated without creating hazardous by-products. Contact:
Jackie Swartzberg, (201) 696-4700.

     Oracle Environmental Corp., Houston, is offering a
brochure and technical data sheets explaining information
management solutions for environmental compliance issues.
Contact: Larry Orecklin, (415) 506-9229.

     Scepter Recycling Inc., Bicknell, Ind., has acquired
Alumax Recycling's recycling centers in Houston and
Arlington, Texas. Scepter also acquired Alumax's interest in
Metales Ligas Especiales S.A., C.B., a recycling company in
Mexico. Contact: Larry Neal, (812) 735-2500.

     Solvent Kleene Inc., Peabody, Mass., has introduced its
"D-Greeze 1000" non-toxic, non-flammable degreaser/cleaner
that the company claimed is also non-hazardous. Contact: Tom
Kutai, (508) 531-2279.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

STUDY SAYS MRFS ARE ENVIRONMENTALLY
SOUND, CREATE NO HEALTH PROBLEMS


     Although they are not always the most economically
viable systems, state and local governments increasingly use
material recovery facilities (MRFs) for managing municipal
solid waste (MSW), according to a new study (SWR, Dec. 14,
1995, p. 383).

     "I suspect the reason is [the] public press for
recycling," said Philip Shepherd, coauthor of the report,
Environmental, Economic, and Energy Impacts of Material
Recovery Facilities, in making a personal assessment of
interest in MRFs.

     The report, by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), EPA
and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL),
evaluates the economic, energy and environmental aspects of
MRFs by studying six facilities.

     Although the report found nothing revolutionary, said
Shepherd of NREL, it is designed to be a decision-making
tool that helps solid waste managers weigh the outcomes of
different management options. The primary objectives of the
evaluation were to understand the effects of MRFs'
operations on public health and the environment along with
occupational health and safety functions, the document
explained.

     If the study found anything noteworthy, Shepherd said,
it was that MRFs do not use a significant amount of energy
when compared to other components of an integrated solid
waste management system (ISWMS). The fuel use associated
with collecting various recyclables, however, dominates the
overall energy consumption of MRF operations, the government
study also reported.

Environmental Effects

     The document details the six MRFs' effects on ambient
air quality, receiving waters and community noise levels.
The health and safety evaluation section addressed exposure
to chemicals, biological and energy aspects of MRFs based in
South Holbrook, N.Y.; Montgomery County, Md.; Albuquerque,
N.M.; Hartford, Conn.; Rice County, Minn.; and Orange
County, Fla.

     MRFs do not pose significant threats to either public
health or the environment, according to the study. Nuisance
conditions, such as fugitive dust and excessive noise, can
be easily mitigated through roadway maintenance and
enclosing equipment. Potential health and safety hazards for
workers can be controlled by implementing the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration's (OSHA) worker protection
programs, the study also concluded.

     The agencies also did a case study of the multi-purpose
recycling facility in South Holbrook owned and operated by
the Islip (N.Y.) Resource Recovery Agency. That facility has
the capacity to handle 240 tons of recyclables during an
eight-hour shift, including newspapers, corrugated
cardboard, mixed paper, metals, tin cans, plastics, flint
glass and aluminum. On alternate Wednesdays, vehicles
deliver either newspapers or mixed recyclables to the MRF.
The recyclables are then hand-sorted from conveyor belts.

     The federal evaluators found no air pollution levels
exceeding the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS)
at the Islip MRF. Values for carbon monoxide and mercury
vapor were considerably lower than the applicable OSHA
limits, the report also said. Measurements of volatile
organic compounds (VOCs) resulted in concentrations no
greater than 10 ug/m3, with the exception of three compounds
in the range of 1 to 60 ug/m3 range at a site upwind of the
facility.

Worker Exposure Low

     OSHA's portion of the evaluation there measured
workers' exposure to nuisance dusts, silica, and metals by
collecting breathing zone samples from selected workers
taken periodically over their eight-hour shifts. The highest
total of respirable dust levels were found on the tipping
floor, a total of 3.39 mg/m3 for all dust and 0.55 mg/m3 for
respirable dust. All exposure levels, however, were
considerably lower than the federal permissible exposure
limits (PELs), according to the report.

     Airborne and surface bacteria and fungi samples were
collected inside the building. Levels were relatively
consistent among locations inside the facility, with no
specific areas exhibiting unusually high or low levels.
However, OSHA has not yet established PELs for either fungi
or bacteria, the study noted. To determine the ergonomics
factors involved in the facility, the evaluators videotaped
several operations in the facility's picking booth.

     They found only one potential ergonomics risk factor:
the work station's configuration, which required workers to
reach across the full width of the conveyor for picking and
sorting various recyclable items. The report is available
from the National Technical Information Service, U.S.
Department of Commerce, 5285 Port Royal Rd., Springfield, VA
22161. Contact: (703) 487-4650.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

VARIABLE-RATE SYSTEMS REDUCE WASTE
VOLUME IN SEVERAL CAROLINA CITIES


     Several local governments in North Carolina have
lowered the amount of solid waste generated by up to 30
percent through charging customers for the volume of waste
they generate, rather than assessing a fixed fee, according
to the North Carolina Recycling Association (NCRA).

     The association surveyed several local governments in
that state that have converted to charging customers
variable rates based on the volume of waste they generate.
However, NCRA also reports there are several problems with
charging by the weight of solid waste generated.

     For example, Yadkin County, N.C., adopted a sticker-
based program in 1994 in which customers deliver trash in
their own 30-gallon bags to one of seven sites, NCRA said.
For additional trash, they can buy a 50-cent sticker for
each bag, and recyclables are accepted without charge.

     Yadkin County officials reported 30-percent reduction
in solid waste. Motine Kenney, solid waste coordinator for
that local government, said, "We did a countywide survey,
and people in the county said they'd rather go with a unit
price program than pay for someone else's garbage."

Wilmington Reports Waste Reduction

     In another example, the city of Wilmington, N.C.,
charges $12.90 per week to pick up a 90-gallon can of refuse
and $9.90 weekly for picking up a 40-gallon can. Excess
waste can be disposed of in 33-gallon bags that each cost
$1, and residents also can get twice weekly pickup of the
90-gallon can for $27.50.

     Wilmington officials reported a 10 percent reduction in
solid waste going to landfills, and a 42 percent increase in
both recycling and yard waste, NCRA said. However, NCRA also
reported the system there has created administrative
problems. In areas near low-income housing projects,
residents often dumped excess garbage in streets and into
commercial dumpsters, they said.

     Even after dropping the program for those low-income
housing projects, illegal dumping has increased in
Wilmington, according to Bill Reed, superintendent for
operations for Wilmington's solid waste department. "If you
institute a variable-rate program, be sure you have an
adequate enforcement mechanism set up," Reed cautions other
local governments.

     In another case cited by the state association, Jones
County in eastern North Carolina has operated a variable-
rate program based on volume since 1972. Under that system,
bags are sold wholesale to area businesses and then resold
to residential consumers for $1.25 each.

     The county has since added pickup of recyclables, which
are collected along with residential waste and stored in a
separate trailer towed by the refuse truck. Then, crews take
all materials collected to a transfer station, where the
waste is sent to a landfill and recyclables are sold.

     "It's been a good system for us," according to County
Manager Larry Matthews. "It's clean and it's well accepted
by our citizens. This was our first solid waste system, and
our first recycling system, so we can't really do a
comparison. But I'm sure it's an incentive to reduce and
recycle."

     However, those successful systems are based on the
volume of waste, rather than on its weight, NCRA stressed.
In addition, the association noted, there are several
drawbacks to charging residents by the weight of waste, so
there has been little interest in using that method.

     A primary obstacle to weight-based pricing has been
developing truck-mounted scales that can meet standards
developed by the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST), NCRA explained. For a typical residential
refuse can, NIST requires scales accurate to within a half
pound to two pounds, which can be difficult standard for
some local operations.

     Using those scales also adds to the processing time for
handling refuse, NCRA noted. In addition, those units cost
approximately $16,000 to retrofit per processor, NCRA said.

High Interest Level

     Despite some problems local governments have reported
with variable-rate systems, interest in those systems
remains high, the association also reported. Beth Graves, of
the North Carolina Office of Waste Reduction, said she
frequently gets calls from local governments interested in
pursuing  variable-rate programs and 80 North Carolina
officials participated in a satellite conference held on
those systems by EPA, NCRA noted.

     In addition, more local governments will consider using
variable-rate disposal fees as cost-cutting moves continue,
NCRA predicted. "I believe that unearthing the costs from
the general tax fund will provide tremendous incentives for
people to reduce their wastes," according to Craig Barry,
NCRA's Executive Director. Contact: NCRA, (919) 851-8444.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

EPA OFFICIALS: BUDGET REDUCTIONS
COULD CAUSE MAJOR STAFF LAYOFFS


     Up to one-fourth of EPA's staff may be laid off by
spring unless congressional Republicans substantially
increase the agency's long-term funding that is independent
of the current federal shutdown, according to EPA
Administrator Carol Browner. That means it may take longer
for the agency to act on solid waste issues.

     About one-third of the employees who promulgate
regulations, issue permits and perform inspections could be
laid off if Congress eventually prevails on the EPA
appropriations bill vetoed by President Clinton, agency
officials also said.

     Researchers and employees involved in environmental
cleanups would not be cut. The statement is a break from
previous announcements, where EPA said it could not predict
the depth of the personnel reductions.

Bond Defends Cuts

     At a press conference, President Clinton said he vetoed
the $5.7 billion spending bill - that called for a 21
percent decrease from fiscal 1995 allocations - because
environmental enforcement would be cut 25 percent, safe
drinking water aid to local governments would be slashed 45
percent and the air would become more polluted. The cuts
also would condemn "10 million children under the age of 12
to living near toxic waste sites that might not be cleaned
up for years," Clinton said.

     The spending bill (H.R. 2099) contains six policy
riders designed to prevent EPA from acting in several areas,
along with a 50 percent cut in funding to implement the
Montreal treaty for protection of the ozone layer.

     In response to earlier attacks by Democrats on EPA
funding cuts, Sen. Christopher Bond (R-Mo.), chairman of the
appropriations subcommittee that handles the agency's
funding, said cuts in the agency's funding were based on
recommendations from several organizations, including the
National Academy of Public Administration.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

SEVERAL SENATORS BACK LEGISLATION
FOR A 'MODEST' CWA MODIFICATION


     Key Senators on the Environment Committee support fine-
tuning the Clean Water Act (CWA) - and not the major
rollback of the law approved last year by the House.

     In the first of a series of hearings on reauthorizing
the CWA, Chairman John Chafee (R-R.I.) said he favors a
modest bill with a limited agenda. The Senate would be hard
pressed, he said, to pass a more ambitious package for
changing the CWA, such as H.R. 961, which the House approved
May 16, 1995.

     The CWA is a "major success story," said the panel's
ranking Democrat Max Baucus of Montana. House efforts to
"gut" it were "shortsighted, misdirected and wrongheaded,"
he said. "No CWA reauthorization would be better than the
one the House suggested."

     A frequent critic of environmental laws, Sen.
Christopher Bond (R-Mo.), said the CWA helped rehabilitate
the Mississippi River. Water quality has improved over the
past two decades, Bond said. Bond said he plans, however, to
"fix" CWA stormwater provisions he considers "broken." Local
entities and states should not be forced to spend exorbitant
sums, Bond added.

     "We have cities spending upwards of $650,000 to obtain
[stormwater discharge] permits. This expenditure does not
result in cleaner waters...Assessing humungous [CWA] fines
against small communities with limited resources is probably
the dumbest thing you can do if you want to improve the
environment," Bond said.

     Sen. Larry Pressler (R-S.D.) urged the committee to
consider his bill, S. 1390, that would allow CWA fines to be
invested in local pollution prevention and remediation.

     In order to make $2 billion in loans to states annually
for the next 30 years, $10 billion needs to be invested in
the wastewater state revolving fund (SRF) over the next
seven years, said Robert Perciasepe, head of EPA's water
office. President Clinton requested $1.59 billion in fiscal
1996 to support the SRF program.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

EDF TAPS ACTRESS JOANNE WOODWARD
FOR TV DOCUMENTARY ON RECYCLING


     Actress Joanne Woodward will appear in a television
documentary and in radio and television public service
announcements (PSAs) to urge consumers to buy products made
from recycled materials and save landfill space, according
to the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF).

     EDF said Woodward has made a half-hour documentary
describing for consumers the life cycle of recycled products
and how to find recycled goods in their local supermarkets.

     EDF said it will make the documentary and PSAs
available to broadcasters, and also will provide the
documentary to schools and community groups. Contact: EDF,
(202) 387-3500.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

BOTH PARTIES MISSED CHANCE TO CHANGE
ENVIRONMENTAL REGIME, ANALYST SAYS


     Both political parties share the blame for Congress
failing to pass meaningful reform of the nation's
environmental laws last year, including those that regulate
solid waste, according to an analysis done by Paul Portney,
president of Resources for the Future (RFF).

     Writing in the organization's publication, Resources,
Portney said the national debate over reform to require more
risk assessment and cost-benefit analysis for major federal
environmental statutes, including key parts of the safe
Drinking Water Act and the Clean Water Act, was framed
inaccurately. One side claimed the effort to require those
laws was an "heroic attempt to rescue the U.S. economy from
a welter of rules" made by unelected bureaucrats, Portney
said.

     The other side, led by congressional Democrats, argued
that the Republicans were making "thinly veiled effort" to
undo 25 years of environmental gains "just to benefit fat-
cat corporations," Portney's analysis said.

Both Sides Seen At Fault

     Portney contended that the Republicans "undermined
their own efforts" at regulatory reform by cutting EPA's
budget and tacking riders onto an appropriations bill to
prohibit the agency from enforcing some air and water
quality regulations.

     "If Congress thinks that particular regulations are
ill-advised, it can and should openly debate and change the
laws that gave rise to those regulations - not use the
appropriations process to make 'stealth' amendments," he
wrote.

     The Democrats, Portney added, also "bear responsibility
for the failure of regulatory reform" because they opposed
other measures backed by Republicans in the Senate and House
that would not have eliminated environmental regulations.

     Actually, he said, only the Senate bill would have
subjected existing regulations to any review at all, and
"even then, it would direct regulatory officials to undo
regulations only when they could not satisfy themselves that
their rules did more harm than good."

     Portney also wrote, "With the many possible advantages
of and reasonable concerns about the use of cost-benefit
analysis in regulation, the congressional debate ought to be
clear and focused."

     "Rather," he said, "the debate has been dominated by
false claims that regulation is strangling the economy or
that popular safeguards will be wiped off the books by
reform legislation."

     "We deserve and should insist upon more, though the
smart money is probably best wagered on more cartoon
caricatures," Portney concluded. Contact: RFF, (202) 328-
5025.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

INDUSTRIAL PARK WOULD START CYCLE
OF LOCAL WASTE TO RAW MATERIALS


     Wastes generated by one company could become useful raw
materials for a nearby firm under the concept of an "Eco-
Industrial Park" (EIP) now in the planning stages in
Baltimore.

     According to the Cornell Center for the Environment,
the concept being developed in an industrial area of
Baltimore would allow one firm to acquire a new source of
profit while reducing its waste disposal and transportation
costs, while a nearby company gets a convenient source of
raw materials with the additional benefit of reducing its
costs for transporting those materials.

     The area has been designated as a demonstration site by
the President's Council for Sustainable Development.
Cornell's environment center proposed the project and is
involved in its planning and implementation through its Work
and Environment Initiative (WEI).

     According to a study done by WEI, petroleum-based
industries in Fairfield must dispose of a waste mixture of
oil and water, which then could be separated into usable oil
and water. In addition, construction and demolition debris
from industries there could be reprocessed into aggregate
for asphalt production, or refining landscape mulch from
wood.

     In turn, WEI said, those waste materials could be used
by new industries as part of their production process. WEI
said the project could attract more than $1 billion in new
investments and thousands of new jobs to the area. The
incentives for that investment, WEI said, would be
inherently high-performance companies, several modes of
transportation, and skilled workers. WEI said the project
could provide "a high return on assets for employers, an
improved local eco-system for the community and sustainable
high quality jobs."

     Edward Cohen-Rosenthal, WEI's director, said the
project had the potential of "marrying high workplace and
environmental practices" and increasing profits while also
decreasing waste and pollution." Contact: Edward Cohen-
Rosenthal, WEI, (607) 255-8160.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

INDIANA SEEKS SUBTITLE D APPROVAL
AFTER YEARS OF FUNDING SHORTAGE


     Environmental officials in Indiana anticipate full EPA
approval of the state's solid waste program under Subtitle D
this summer, after years of delay.

     When severe budget cuts hit Indiana's solid waste
program in 1993, the U.S. EPA notified the Indiana
Department of Environmental Management (IDEM) officials that
approval of their state's Subtitle D program was contingent
on the Indiana agency finding sufficient funds to support
the program (SWR, Nov. 18, 1993).

     Funding dried up that year after IDEM ended the state
solid waste division's permit application and operation fee
programs because they resembled a water management program
fee structure that had been invalidated by a state court.

     Having straightened out funding problems, IDEM plans to
submit the application for complete approval of the Subtitle
D program this spring, and hopes for approval by summer,
according to Scott Dinwiddie, an official of the Indiana
Office of Solid and Hazardous Waste (OSHW).

     Meanwhile, OSHW has done considerable work to prepare
for that approval. Since 1994, the state has closed 10
municipal solid waste landfills (MSWLs), leaving the total
at 50.

     At the same time, the number of transfer stations has
grown to 48, according to the 1995 edition of the OSHW's
Summary of Indiana Solid Waste Facility Data. The state has
10 construction-demolition landfills, 17 restricted-waste
landfills, two incinerators and 49 composting facilities,
according to the government report. Except for a sharp
increase in 1992, the combined total annual disposal for all
landfill types remained fairly stable from 1991 through
1994, the document added.

     Despite the closing of several landfills, the total
remaining capacity at MSWLs has stayed fairly stable since
1991 because of landfill expansions, according to the
report. Indiana should have another decade of adequate
disposal at current facilities, OSHW predicted.

     Long-haul imports of trash, primarily from New York,
New Jersey and Pennsylvania, have declined since 1991, the
summary explained. However, OSHW said, total waste imports
from the bordering states of Illinois, Michigan, Ohio and
Kentucky have remained fairly steady, and exceed long-haul
imports. Waste shipments from Illinois comprise 75 percent
of Indiana's total waste imports. By 1994, 97 percent of the
waste imported to Indiana came from bordering states, the
state document also explained.

Recycling

     Indiana's laws require reducing materials going into
landfills through waste diversion, source reduction, reuse,
recycling and composting.

     The laws also require Indiana to reach an overall recy-
cling goal of 35 percent of the waste stream by Jan. 1,
1996, and they establish a goal of 50 percent due before
Jan. 1, 2001.

     OSHW's Dinwiddie said figures from 1995 are not
available on whether Indiana has met its recycling goal of
35 percent. By 1994's end, the state reached a 19 percent
waste reduction rate, he said.

     Copies of the report may be obtained from IDEM's Office
of Solid Waste Management, P.O. Box 6015, Indianapolis, IN
46206-6015, (317) 233-5156, or (317) 232-8885.


Profiles in Solid Waste Management, Volume III, a
compilation of all 50 state profiles - that provides a
comprehensive report on the most pressing problems faced and
most innovative programs developed in 1995 - can be
purchased by subscribers for only $77. You'll save $21 off
the regular Price Of $98. Let Swr Do The Job. Save Valuable
Time While Staying Up-to-date On Other States' Solid Waste
Management PraCtices. Order Your Copy Today! Call (800) 274-
6737.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

HYDRAPULPING CLAIMED TO INCREASE
RECYCLING OF ASEPTIC PACKAGING


     Recycling aseptic packaging, or those "drink boxes," is
increasing as the paper recycling process of hydrapulping
grows in use, according to reports from the Aseptic
Packaging Council (APC) (SWR, Dec. 14, p. 383).

     Since a pilot drink box recycling program began in
1990, the number of U.S. households recycling those
containers through curbside programs has grown to 5 million,
according to APC. Drink boxes are collected along with other
polyethylene-coated (laminated) paper products such as milk
cartons. Those products are then recycled using the
hydrapulping process.

     Hydrapulping separates the paper, which makes up 70
percent of the packaging, from the plastic and the aluminum.
The hydrapulper operates much like a large household
blender, says APC. The machinery is filled with water,
aseptic packages and milk and juice cartons, and large rotor
blades stir the water. The motion beats the paper fibers
away from the layers of polyethylene and aluminum foil.
Contact: APC, (703) 351-5062.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A><IMG SRC="/pubgifs/ev20.gif"><BR><BR>
Copyright
SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 4, 1996

SPORTS COMPANY USES RECYCLABLES
TO MAKE BASKETBALL BACKBOARDS


     Huffy Sports (HS), manufacturer of home basketball
systems, is the first backboard producer to include post-
consumer materials in its products, according to the
company.

     Composite Technologies Corporation (CTC) of Dayton,
Ohio, produces the Polymer Fiber Matrix - a compression-
molded thermoplastics recycled resin - used in the boards.
CTC also manufacturers highway signs and walls for sound
barriers from Polymer Fiber Matrix.

     Recycled products used in the Polymer Fiber Matrix
include: PET soda bottles, milk jugs and industrial
plastics. HS plans to produce the majority of its backboards
from recycled materials by the end of 1996. Contact: Wendee
Puccetti, Celtic Advertising, (414) 789-7630.

* * *

     CALIFORNIA - The Alameda County Waste Management
Authority (ACMA) has approved about $400,000 in grants to
seven local cities and a waste district for waste reduction,
recycling and public education programs. Allocations
include: $50,000 for a Garden Patch Greening Resource Center
in Berkeley; $12,500 for an enhanced green waste publication
campaign in Dublin; $80,770 for a yard-waste public
education program in Oakland; and $63,633 for the
development of a multi-material recovery facility in Union
City. Contact: Bruce Goddard, ACWMA, (510) 614-1699.

     NEW JERSEY - Environmental Resources Management (ERM)
recently completed its first full-scale installation of a
system based on its patented Advanced Fluidized Composting
(AFC) technology at a remediation site in Trenton, N.J. AFC
is a process technology used to treat high-strength organic
or biodegradable inorganic waste streams, or sludges. The
technology combines autothermal biological treatment of
high-strength organic waste streams with a proprietary
oxidation step. The result is a highly efficient rate of
organic destruction with little or no generation of waste
sludges commonly associated with most biological processes,
the company also explained. Contact: ERM, (800) 544-3117.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-14</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B019-276</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev22.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002236 text/html 50914
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:20:47 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:27 GMT
Content-length: 50725
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev22.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 19, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>PRPs to bid Waste Inc. dump cap </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(236 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>Bids near for CryoChem g.w. fix</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(163 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>C&D Recycling pre-design starts</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(191 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>AT&SF source removal eyed  </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(194 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>California Gulch capping eyed</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(187 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>More studies near at Valleycrest</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(201 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Bloomington cleanup plans near</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(213 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>North Bronson to get summer ROD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(205 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>A.I.W. Frank g.w. talks delayed</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(198 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>Nature to clean up Chevron g.w.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(188 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>Bids near for $34M Vineland pump-treat</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(519 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>Ottati & Goss g.w. bids eyed for summer</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(428 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>Buckeye cap, wetlands talks under way</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(350 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>Raymark cap construction subs needed</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(366 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>American Creosote design underway</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(249 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>Lexington cap to get summer bid</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(192 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>EPA to bid Arrowhead soil removal</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(173 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>NL Industries cap, g.w. design due in spring</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(488 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>Escambia Wood resident relocation eyed </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(344 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>Bill would give Corps all fund-lead work</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(359 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>EPA proposes Spokane stabilization, cap</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(344 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>Correction</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(68 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>Wyckoff/Eagle Harbor to get near-shore fill</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(405 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>Senate mulls liability deal</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(207 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>N.J. reps: restore CERCLA funding</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(164 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

PRPs to bid Waste Inc. dump cap 

     PRPs are expected to solicit bids this spring or summer for the 
construction of an $11.3 million capping and leachate collection project at 
the Waste Inc. NPL site in Michigan City, Ind.
     A group of 16 PRPs known as the Waste Inc. Remedial Action 
Organization Group (WIROG) agreed last week to comply with an EPA 
unilateral order to design and build the remedy. 
     The 1994 ROD calls for capping most of the 32-acre landfill with two to 
four feet of compacted clay and one foot of topsoil. The cap will be graded 
and vegetated. 
     A leachate collection trench also will be needed at the southwest end of 
the landfill. Groundwater, which has polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and 
PCBs, will be monitored.
     Also, an on-site well will need to be abandoned, an underground fuel 
storage tank removed and a sewer system rerouted.
     Capital costs were estimated at $11.3 million under the ROD, with 
another $290,000 needed for annual operation and maintenance.
     Montgomery Watson's Addison, Ill., office is managing the site for the 
PRPs and will do the design. A design work plan is due Feb. 5. The 
consultant also is expected to handle the construction bid solicitations.
     The design is expected to be completed this spring or summer. Pre-
construction work could begin as early as April.
     Contact: Dion Novak, EPA project manager, 312-886-4737; 
Maureen Grimmer, PRP Steering Committee attorney, 219-931-0560; 
Joe Adams, Montgomery Watson project manager, 303-938-8818.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

Bids near for CryoChem g.w. fix

     EPA is expected to solicit bids this spring for the construction of a 
groundwater treatment plant at the CryoChem Inc. NPL site in Worman, Pa.
     CH2M Hill Inc.'s Reston, Va., office is managing the fund-lead site as 
the agency's Alternative Remedial Contracts Strategy (ARCS) contractor. 
The design is at the 30% phase and is scheduled for completion in the 
spring. Construction is slated to begin this summer.
     Groundwater at the site will be extracted and treated with air stripping. 
Extraction and monitoring wells were installed last fall, and bids will be 
solicited for the construction of the on-site treatment building only. 
     Groundwater will be extracted at a maximum rate of 100 gallons per 
minute and discharged to an on-site creek.
     Groundwater samples taken between 1981 and 1985 at the 19-acre 
metal fabricating plant site revealed on-site and off-site contamination. The 
primary contaminants are TCA, DCA, TCE, DCE and PCE. 
     Contact: Joe McDowell, EPA project manger, 215-597-8240; Sunil 
Pereira, CH2M Hill project manager, 703-471-1441.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

C&D Recycling pre-design starts

     PRPs have begun sampling as part of pre-design work for a $12 million 
soil and sediment cleanup at the C&D Recycling NPL site in Foster 
Township, Pa.
     ERM Northeast will design the remedy for AT&T, which is paying for 
the work under a unilateral administrative order. Other PRPs were identified 
by EPA but AT&T is the only one that complied with the order.
     Under the September 1992 ROD, about 30,000 cubic yards of soil and 
sediment will be excavated, stabilized and hauled off-site for disposal.
     The prime contaminants are heavy metals, primarily lead and copper.
     Design work is scheduled for completion in July 1997.
     The 45-acre site operated as metals reclamation plant from the 1960s 
until the early 1980s. Lead- and plastic-cased telephone cables were burned 
in pits to melt off the lead and reclaim the remaining copper wire. Plastic 
coverings were mechanically stripped prior to the burning and stored in 
piles at the site.
     The state found high concentrations of lead and copper in ash piles, the 
burn pit and drainage pathways. 
     Contact: Joe McDowell, EPA project manager, 215-597-8240; Joe 
Chikowski, AT&T, 908-204-8249; Jim Perazzo, ERM Northeast project 
manager, 516-921-4300.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

AT&SF source removal eyed  

     EPA received a draft engineering evaluation/cost analysis (EE/CA) 
report Jan. 16 from PRPs at the Atchison Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad Co. 
(AT&SF) NPL site in Albuquerque, N.M., where a source soil and sludge 
removal likely is needed.
     The EE/CA is part of an RI/FS by Radian Corp. of Houston. Radian is 
doing the work for AT&SF, the only PRP identified by EPA.
     Possible removal options include excavation with off-site treatment of 
sludge and excavation, storage and on-site treatment of sludge with the rest 
of the site's contaminated soil. Contaminated soil extends to depths of 
about 40 feet, and the contamination has reached the bedrock aquifer.
     Sludge extends to depths of 1.5 feet to two feet. Earlier studies 
estimated about 1,000 cubic yards of sludge had to be addressed.
     The New Mexico Environment Dept. has the oversight lead at the site, 
which is an abandoned wood-preserving plant in the South Valley area of 
Albuquerque. Except for a waste water impoundment and sump, the plant 
was dismantled in 1972. 
     Contact: Mary Ann Menetrey, state project manager, 505-827-2944; 
David Clark, AT&SF project manger, 913-435-2210; Monica Smith, 
EPA project manager, 214-665-6780; Riaz Ahmad, Radian project 
manager, 713-556-1888.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

California Gulch capping eyed

     As expected, Asarco Inc. last week submitted a feasibility study for the 
Apache tailings operable unit at the California Gulch NPL site in 
Leadville, Colo., where about 600,000 cubic yards of tailings likely will 
need to be capped.
     The tailings could be capped with either soil or an impermeable clay 
layer at an estimated cost of between $1 million and $2 million, depending 
on which material is selected. The nature of the cap will be delineated 
during design.
     Asarco has not decided whether it will keep on Golder Associates 
Ltd., which did the RI/FS, to do the design or bid out the work. A decision 
is expected once the ROD is signed this spring. Asarco hopes to complete 
the work this summer.
     Community protection measures, such as blood lead screening, are 
expected for the residential soils operable unit. An FS for the unit is 
expected by the end of next month.
     Other operable units at the site are being addressed by Resurrection 
Mining Co. and Denver and Rio Grande Railroad (Superfund Week 
1/12).
     Contact: Rebecca Thomas, EPA project manager, 303-312-6229; 
Margaret "Poppy" Staub, Asarco project manager, 303-296-5104.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

More studies near at Valleycrest

     PRPs have completed sampling under the first phase of an RI at the 
North Sanitary Landfill NPL site (also called the Valleycrest Landfill) in 
Dayton, Ohio. The results are due next month.
     Phase two RI work will begin soon thereafter. During the first phase of 
the RI, about 10 groundwater monitoring wells were installed, along with 18 
soil gas probes. Landfill gas and geophysical surveys also were taken. 
     The geophysical surveys detected off-site burial areas, and much of 
second round of studies will focus on delineating those areas.
     The prime contaminants are volatile organic compounds, metals and 
semi-volatiles.
     TreaTek-Conestoga Rovers & Associates is doing the RI for a group 
of PRPs that agreed to an RI/FS last spring (Superfund Week 4/14/95). 
Parties agreeing to the investigations include General Motors Corp., 
AT&T Global Information Solutions, Cargill Inc., Duriron Co., 
Standard Register, Dayton Walther Co. and Peerless Transportation 
Co. Another 38 PRPs have been identified but have so far refused to step 
forward.
     de maximis inc. of Livonia, Mich., is managing the cleanup for the 
PRPs.
     Contact: Kurt Kollar, state site coordinator, 513-285-6052; Ramon 
Torres, EPA project manager, 312-886-3010; Roy Dane, de maximis 
project manager, 313-261-0280; Mark Klimin, Conestoga Rovers 
project manager, 513-326-7600.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

Bloomington cleanup plans near

     EPA, the Indiana Dept. of Environmental Management and PRP 
Westinghouse Electric Corp. are expected to give a U.S. District Court a 
schedule next month for the cleanup of up to five PCB sites in 
Bloomington, Ind.
     Alternatives to incineration, which was selected for the sites in a 1985 
ROD, are expected to be proposed  at at least two of the five sites this year.
     The five sites are: Lemon Lane Landfill, Neal's Landfill, Neal's Dump, 
Bennett's Stone Quarry Dump and the Winston Thomas site. The Lemon 
Lane Landfill and Winston Thomas sites should be addressed in 1996. A 
review of each site's history, new studies and a draft cleanup schedule are 
due Feb. 13.
     The studies are being done in compliance with a state law requiring 
them before an on-site incineration permit can be issued. Westinghouse is 
about mid-way through the collection the data, which will supplement 
earlier RI/FS reports.
     The state hired PRC Environmental Management Co. to study 
solvent extraction, chemical dechlorination, biological remediation, quick 
lime treatment, low temperature thermal desorption, desorption with 
vaporization extraction and plasma torch technology.
     Contact: Dan Hopkins, EPA project manager, 312-886-5994; Resa 
Ramsey, state project manager, 317-233-0645; Jim Patrick, 
Westinghouse Waste Technologies Service Div. site manager, 812-334-
0030; Michael Johnson and Robert Foster, PRC Environmental, 312-
856-8796.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

North Bronson to get summer ROD

     EPA expects to sign a ROD in June for a soil and groundwater cleanup 
at the North Bronson Industrial Area NPL site in Bronson, Mich., where a 
less stringent cleanup than originally anticipated might be allowed because 
of changes in state cleanup level requirements.
     The state is reevaluating Montgomery Watson's fund-lead FS because 
the studies were conducted before changes in the state law with regard to 
cancer risks. Last summer the state changed its cancer risk level from 10 -6 
to 10 -5.
     A ROD originally was scheduled for last summer. Another factor in the 
delay is that an industrial sewer system, which  connected two wastewater 
lagoons, was not evaluated as part of the RI/FS. Additional investigations 
might be required to further delineate the definition of the site. If more 
investigations are needed, the state likely will use Montgomery Watson of 
Novine, Mich.
     Two former industrial waste lagoon areas constructed by the City of 
Bronson around 1940 need to be cleaned up, along with groundwater 
contaminated by the lagoons and at least one other source area (Superfund 
Week 9/1/95). 
     Contact: Bill Harmon, state project manager, 517-373-4951; Rosita 
Clarke-Moreno, EPA project manager, 312-886-7251; David O'Rouke, 
Bronson city manager, 517-369-7334; Donna Courington, Montgomery 
Watson project manager, 810-344-0205.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

A.I.W. Frank g.w. talks delayed

     EPA is expected to begin negotiations this month for the design and 
construction of a portion of a $10.9 million soil and groundwater cleanup at 
the A.I.W. Frank/Mid-County Mustang NPL site in Exton, Pa. The talks 
were delayed by the recent federal furlough.
     Under the ROD signed in September, a groundwater pump-and-
treatment system with air stripping will be needed to treated solvents-
contaminated groundwater. 
     About a half-dozen wells will extract contaminated groundwater from a 
fractured bedrock aquifer. Treatment will continue for about 30 years.
     The only apparent discharge point for treated groundwater is a nearby 
river, but since the river is a trout stream EPA has left flexibility in 
the plan and is evaluating other options.
     Also, about 230 cubic yards of contaminated source soil needs to be 
excavated and disposed off-site. The soil is located at a former waste 
solvent tank storage area.
     A building demolition project and a small drum removal also is 
required.
     The entire cleanup will cost about $10.9 million, most of which (about 
$6 million) will be required for the groundwater cleanup. Design work is 
expected to begin in 1997.
     Contact: Charles Root, EPA project manager, 215-597-8240; David 
Garrison, PRP attorney, 610-293-4975.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

Nature to clean up Chevron g.w.

     EPA proposed natural attenuation and monitoring for pesticide-
contaminated groundwater at the Chevron Chemical Co. site in Orlando, 
Fla., where a ROD should be signed this spring.
     The plan contains a contingency for a barrier wall and air sparging if 
contamination levels do not decrease quickly enough. Samples will be 
taken quarterly to see if levels of xylene and alpha-BHC are dropping by 
10% to 15%.
     If levels do not decrease, a permeable filter wall will be used with 
limited air sparging or a hydraulic containment system. Monitoring is 
expected to last eight to ten years.
     The proposed plan is expected to cost $247,700 if natural attenuation 
works. The contingency will cost about $1.3 million.
     Chevron completed two removal actions to address soil contamination 
at the site. In 1991, the company removed 18,000 tons of pesticide-
contaminated soil at the plant property, and in 1994 230 tons of soil were 
removed from an adjacent trailer park.
     A pesticide formation plant operated at the site between 1950 and 1976. 
The contaminants of concern were chlordane, DDT, parathion and 
petroleum hydrocarbons.  
     Contact: Randy Bryant, EPA project manager, 404-347-3555, ext. 
6241.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

Bids near for $34M Vineland pump-treat

     EPA is expected to solicit bids this spring or summer for the 
construction of a groundwater pump-and-treatment system at the 
Vineland Chemical Co. Inc. NPL site in Vineland, N.J.
     Under the September 1989 ROD, about a dozen wells will be 
needed to extract contaminated groundwater at a rate of about two 
million gallons per day. Metals precipitation will be the primary 
treatment, and treated groundwater will be reinjected back into the 
aquifer as much as possible and/or discharged to a nearby river.  
     The cleanup is estimated at $34 million, including operation and 
maintenance costs.
     Arsenic is the primary contaminant of concern.
     The Army Corps of Engineers' Kansas City Dist. is handling the 
design for EPA and will solicit the construction bids. After a 
contract award, management of the cleanup will be deferred to the 
Corps' Philadelphia Dist. 
     Malcolm Pirnie Inc.'s White Plains, N.Y., office is designing 
the remedy under contract with the Corps. The design now stands at 
about 65% complete. Construction bids are scheduled to go out in 
May or June and will be advertised in the Commerce Business 
Daily, EPA said.

Soil cleanup takes back burner

     The cleanup of about 126,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil 
will be addressed after the groundwater cleanup, which EPA 
decided to make a priority to halt the off-site migration of arsenic.
     The ROD called for the ex-situ soil flushing of about 126,000 
cubic yards of arsenic-contaminated soil. But last spring design 
work for a soil washing cleanup was put on hold at about the 65% 
stage so other potentially more cost-effective technologies could be 
evaluated (Superfund Week 4/7/95).
     EPA treatability studies showed ex-situ soil washing will be 
more effective than soil flushing. Malcolm Pirnie did bench-scale 
column leaching tests on soil flushing and determined that due to 
chemical properties in the soil, flushing will not achieve the 
agency's surface cleanup goal of 20 parts per million (ppm) for 
arsenic in the top two feet of soil. The subsurface cleanup goal is 
120 ppm. 
     Therefore the plan was to excavate the soil and run it through a 
portable soil washing agitator, or hydroclone, to break the weak 
ferrous oxide bond of arsenic on soil particles and have the arsenic 
come off in the rinse water. But this would require much more 
money than the agency expected when the ROD was signed. The 
ROD estimated the soil and groundwater cleanups at $66 million.
     EPA will make a soil cleanup decision after the groundwater is 
addressed.
     The ROD also calls for the soil washing of contaminated river 
sediments. That cleanup also will take place after the groundwater 
is remediated.
     Arsenic salts were stored in open piles and in chicken coops at 
the 20-acre herbicide plant site at 1611 W. Wheat Rd. in 
Cumberland County. Untreated process wastes were discharged into 
lagoons. About 38 miles of watershed was contaminated with 
arsenic. The site made the NPL in September 1984.
     Contact: Matthew Westgate, EPA project manager, 212-637-
4422; John Bartholomeo, Corps project manager, Philadelphia 
Dist., 215-656-6927; Peter Latimer, New Jersey Dept. of 
Environmental Protection, 609-984-2990; Tom Simmons, Corps 
project manager, Kansas City Dist., 816-426-2296.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

Ottati & Goss g.w. bids eyed for summer

     EPA is expected to solicit bids this summer for the construction 
of a groundwater pump-and-treatment system at the Ottati & 
Goss/Great Lakes Container Corp. NPL site in Kingston, N.H., 
pending resolution of the Superfund budget.
     Another issue to be resolved before any bids are solicited is 
whether to pump-and-treat groundwater below a wetlands area at the 
site.
     Arthur D. Little Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., is designing the 
cleanup as EPA's Alternative Remedial Contracts Strategy (ARCS) 
contractor. The 90% design was reached in October 1995 but has 
since been stalled due to the budget and wetlands issues.
     The January 1987 ROD called for the installation of extraction 
wells in the wetlands area, but EPA's hopes a planned source soil 
cleanup will allow for the natural attenuation of groundwater there.
     Additional soil and sediment sampling was completed last 
month, and the agency expects to make a determination on the 
wetlands issue by mid-February. Contaminated wetlands sediments 
also need to be addressed, and EPA indicated it wants to 
synchronize a sediment cleanup with any installation of 
groundwater extraction wells to avoid having to disturb the wetlands 
more than once.
     In any case, wells will be needed in the plant site area. Design 
of the cleanup is scheduled to be completed late this spring. The 
ROD estimates the remedy at between $4 million and $6 million.
     The overburden aquifer is contaminated with volatile organic 
compounds and metals. The plume starts about 30 feet below the 
surface and stretches some 800 feet, flowing west to east. Although 
the plume has migrated off-site, contamination has diluted and the 
migration of contaminants has leveled off.
     After treatment, groundwater will be reinjected into the 
overburden aquifer via recharge trenching. A leach field similar to 
that of a septic system will be used.

Innovative soil technology still needed

     Between 10,000 and 15,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil 
need to be addressed. The ROD originally called for the incineration 
of all contaminated soil and sediment, but the burn was shelved last 
spring due to community opposition (Superfund Week 4/21/95). 
     At about that time EPA indicated it was open to any technology 
that treats PCBs and volatile organics in soil. No technology has 
been selected, however, and the agency said it is still open to 
proposals. Depending on the technology eventually chosen, 
treatability tests might be needed.
     EPA repeatedly has pulled back on incineration plans at 
Superfund sites around the nation, but generally appears willing to 
go with thermal desorption.
     Contact: Richard Goehlert, EPA project manager, 617-573-
5742; Dave Langseth, Arthur D. Little project manager, 617-
498-5878.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

Buckeye cap, wetlands talks under way

     EPA has begun preliminary negotiations with PRPs for a cap, 
constructed wetlands and french drain cleanup at the Buckeye 
Reclamation NPL site in St. Clairsville, Ohio, where the PRPs want 
to make some changes to the design.
     Neither EPA or a PRP representative would elaborate on the 
potential changes. 
     Under the $48.6 million August 1991 ROD, a solid waste cap is 
needed to cover a 66-acre waste disposal area. The cap will need to 
have a permeability of no less than 10 -7 centimeters/second and 
will consist of topsoil, a drainage layer, two feet of clay and a 
grading layer. No liner will be needed.
     The wetlands will have curves to slow the flow of water through 
them. Cattails will be planted on a compost carpet and an 
underlying plastic liner to keep contaminated water from seeping 
below ground.
     Environmental Strategies Corp. of Pittsburgh and Baker & 
Associates of Corapolis, Pa., designed the remedy for about 15 
PRPs on the Buckeye Steering Committee. The steering committee 
is headed by Consol Inc., a Pittsburgh-based coal mining company. 
Most of the PRPs were hazardous waste generators, including a 
number of steel makers.
     Volatile organic compounds and heavy metals are the prime 
contaminants of concern.
     The design estimates the cleanup at only about $21 million, but 
EPA said the design did not address some aspects of the cleanup, 
such as groundwater monitoring.
     Construction of the remedy was scheduled to begin this spring or 
summer but EPA indicated the work is not likely to get under way 
this construction season.
     The site was used for the disposal of coal mine spoils. In 1971 
the Ohio Dept. of Health licensed the site as a sanitary landfill. 
Between 1976 and 1979, the site also received industrial wastes 
including sludges and liquids. Industrial and asbestos wastes were 
dumped in the waste disposal area, where high levels of volatiles 
and heavy metals have been detected. The site made the NPL in 
September 1983.
     Contact: Debbie Siebers, EPA project manager, 312-353-
9299; George Gleich, PRP coordinator and Consol Inc.'s 
director of environmental services, 412-831-4528; Mike 
Berman, EPA attorney, 312-886-6837.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

Raymark cap construction subs needed

     Design is under way for a cap, gas collection and non-aqueous 
phase liquid (NAPL) cleanup at the Raymark Industries Inc. NPL 
site in Stratford, Conn., where subcontractors will be needed as 
construction of the remedy nears this spring.
     Foster Wheeler Environmental Corp. is doing the design 
under a Total Environmental Restoration Contract (TERC) with the 
Army Corps of Engineers. The Corps is managing the $60 million 
cleanup for EPA.
     Foster Wheeler will construct the cap under the TERC, but 
subcontractors will be needed to install NAPL extraction wells and 
to provide capping materials and site stabilization.
     The cap will cover 33 acres at a capital cost of about $25 
million. The cover will consist of a one-foot sand layer with 
perforated piping to vent gas, a geosynthetic clay liner, a flexible 
membrane liner, a geonet drainage layer and some select fill. Gas 
will be treated on-site in two treatment buildings. Cap construction 
should be complete by September.
     Bids for six- to eight-inch extraction wells screened at various 
depths likely will be solicited in March. The NAPL will be 
collected in tanks and taken off-site for treatment. The number of 
NAPL extraction wells needed has yet to be determined.
     Also still to be determined is the stabilization technology for the 
landfill. The Corps is considering pilings, surcharging peat and deep 
dynamic compaction and is expected to make a determination by 
the end of this month. Stabilization work could cost up to $5 
million. 
     The cleanup was outlined in a July 1995 ROD.      
     The cleanup of 37 residential properties was completed in 
September, and the wastes were stored on-site. About 100,000 cubic 
yards of contaminated material from the residential cleanup needs 
to be treated to reduce moisture before it is placed under the cap 
(Superfund Week 7/21/95). 
     Foster Wheeler is about one-third done with the demolition of 
buildings at the 15-acre site. That work is scheduled for completion 
in March.
     Raymark Industries Inc. manufactured asbestos-based products at 
the site and used PCB- and heavy metals-laden waste as yard fill 
throughout the town.
     Contact: Michael Hill, EPA project manager, 617-573-9653; 
Robert Hunt, Corps project manager, 617-647-8893; Mike 
Jasinski, EPA on-scene coordinator, 617-573-5786; Rick 
Gleason, Foster Wheeler project manager, 617-457-8200.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

American Creosote design underway

     EPA has begun design of a dense non-aqueous phase liquid 
(DNAPL) recovery system at the American Creosote Works 
(Pensacola Pit) NPL site in Pensacola, Fla. 
     The 1994 ROD called for enhanced DNAPL recovery via water 
injection, but preliminary groundwater design studies determined 
direct pumping was the most effective treatment. About 2 million 
gallons of DNAPL need to be addressed. The ROD estimated the 
remedy at $5.8 million.      
     The ROD also called for groundwater treatment via in-situ and 
ex-situ biological treatment, but EPA is expected to amend the 
ROD to allow scrapping biological treatment if the discharged 
groundwater meets alternative concentration limits. Groundwater 
will be surface discharged and monitored.      Bechtel 
Environmental is working on the fund-lead design, which is due 
late this spring. EPA does not yet have funds to do the work.
     For the source control operable unit, EPA is developing an 
amendment to a 1989 ROD, which selected biological treatment for 
100,000 cubic yards of surface soil and sediment.
     Treatability studies indicated biological treatment was not 
effective on PAHs, and EPA likely will propose thermal desorption 
as an alternative. Along with PAHs, the soil and sediment also have 
PCP and dioxin.
     A creosote plant operated at the 18-acre site from 1902 to 1981. 
Process wastewater was discharged into two unlined, on-surface 
impoundments. Under an emergency cleanup in 1983, EPA 
dewatered the two ponds, treated the water with coagulation and 
filtration and discharged treated water to the city sewer system.
     Contact: Mark Fite, EPA project manager, 404-347-2543, 
ext. 6263.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

Lexington cap to get summer bid

     Design is complete for a landfill cap at the Lexington County Landfill 
Area NPL site in Cayce, S.C., and the county is expected to solicit bids for 
construction of the remedy this summer.
     Lexington County agreed to pay for the cleanup, which is estimated at 
$3.5 million in capital costs. Bids will go out once the county completes its 
fiscal year 1997 (which begins in July) budget.
     The 20- to 30-acre cap will consist of 18 inches of cover material -- six 
inches of shredded tires and 12 inches of soil. Also, one portion of the 
landfill needs to be relocated and some garbage removal services will be 
needed.
     An existing gas recovery system not now in use might be converted to a 
passive methane gas collection system.
     The design was completed by G.N. Richardson of Raleigh, N.C.
     Two groundwater extraction wells have been installed at the site and 
will be used to treat about 25,000 gallons of water per day. Groundwater 
will be shipped to either a publicly owned treatment plant or used for 
irrigation. 
     Contact: John Fechtel, Lexington County director of public works, 
803-359-8201; Terry Tanner, EPA project manager, 404-347-7791.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

EPA to bid Arrowhead soil removal

     CH2M Hill's Milwaukee office is expected to solicit bids next month 
from a pool of 16 pre-qualified contractors for the removal of lead-
contaminated soil at the Arrowhead Refinery NPL site near Duluth, Minn. 
     About 27,000 cubic yards of visually-contaminated soil,  sediment and 
buried refuse will be excavated and taken off-site for disposal.
     EPA had expected to bid out the work last year, but the project was 
stalled because of budget cuts (Superfund Week 8/25/95).
     In November 1995, EPA approved $3 million in fund money to clean up 
the site. Another $2.39 million left over from previous site cleanup work 
will be used for the project. 
     A contract will be awarded in April and the work should be completed 
this summer. The work originally was estimated at between $4 million and 
$8 million.
     The Arrowhead Remedial Action Group has nearly completed the 
cleanup of a sludge lagoon area. Demobilization is scheduled for February 
or March.
     Contact: Ted Smith, EPA project manager, 312-353-6571; Beth 
Aschinger, state project manager, 612-282-2383; Bill Hubbard, CH2M 
Hill, 414-272-1052.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

NL Industries cap, g.w. design due in spring

     EPA has gone ahead with the design of a capping and 
groundwater containment cleanup at the NL Industries/Taracorp 
NPL site in Granite City, Ill., as PRP negotiations continue.
     Woodward Clyde Consultants is designing the remedy for 
EPA. Design work should be completed this spring.
     The cleanup will include the installation of a series of on-site 
extraction wells to contain metals-contaminated groundwater. 
Groundwater will be treated, if necessary, and discharged to a local 
sewer system. 
     Additional monitoring wells would be installed downgradient 
from the existing wells, where high lead or cadmium levels have 
been found. Additional monitoring wells would be installed in the 
remote fill areas, also.
     The groundwater fix will cost about $3 million and take between 
two and four months to implement.
     EPA also considered installing a slurry wall on the perimeter of 
the main industrial area to prevent off-site groundwater migration, 
but that would cost more than $18 million.
     Groundwater monitoring to detect any off-site migration will also 
be required, along with long-term air monitoring.
     No groundwater contamination had been identified when the 
ROD was signed (Superfund Week 10/21/94). But additional 
sampling in late 1992 confirmed site groundwater to be 
contaminated with lead.
     The 1990 ROD also requires the excavation of a slag pile and 
combining it with the main Taracorp pile. Soil from the main 
industrial area with lead concentrations above 1,000 parts per 
million and any soil containing hard rubber battery casings will be 
excavated and added to the new lined section of the main Taracorp 
pile. 
     The slag will then be covered with a multi-layer cap. A three-
foot layer of compacted clay would be used as a liner for the cap. 
The excavated area will be backfilled and topped with sod or 
asphalt.
     The source removal will cost about $4.8 million and take nine to 
15 months to conduct.
     Under criticism from town residents and officials for proposing to 
dispose of contaminated materials on an existing slag pile near City 
Hall, EPA changed the ROD in 1993 and 1994.
     The agency also considered excavating the slag and sending it 
to an off-site hazardous waste treatment, storage and disposal 
facility, but that would have cost more than $64 million. Also 
considered was building a landfill on-site to dispose of the slag, but 
that option would have cost about $29 million.
     Meanwhile, cleanups at remote fill residential areas have nearly 
been completed. Fill containing hard rubber battery casings is being 
excavated and segregated into hazardous and non-hazardous groups. 
Hazardous materials are being stabilized and disposed at an off-site 
landfill. Non-hazardous materials are being taken directly to an off-
site landfill. The excavated areas will be backfilled with soil or 
clean fill and capped. Contaminated fill in driveways or alleys is 
being capped with asphalt. 
     That work will end up costing between $1.3 and $1.4 million.
     Contact: Brad Bradley, EPA project manager, 312-886-4742; 
Dennis Reis, PRP attorney at Sidley & Austin in Chicago, 312-
853-7000.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

Escambia Wood resident relocation eyed 

     A second round of RI sampling is set to begin this month at the 
Escambia Wood Treating Co. NPL site in Pensacola, Fla., where 
EPA is considering permanently relocating nearby residents as part 
of an interim action.
     EPA is evaluating relocation options for 300 households with 
contaminated soil. The agency might propose a relocation plan this 
spring. Four areas are being targeted as part of a fast track 
relocation investigation. Permanent relocation of all the residents 
has been estimated at $23 million.
     However, EPA does not have funding for the relocation or any 
additional remedial action, so any cleanup work might be put on 
hold until fiscal year 1997.
     Meanwhile, a site-wide RI/FS, which began in November, is 
continuing to determine the nature and extent of soil and 
groundwater contamination. Thermal treatment and off-site disposal 
options will be considered.

Alternatives to soil burn needed

     Contaminants of concern include PCP, creosote, PAHs, dioxin 
and arsenic. 
     Also, a pile of 250,000 cubic yards of dioxin-contaminated soil, 
which was stockpiled during a removal in the early 1990s, needs to 
be investigated. The stockpile has the worst kind of dioxin (2,3,7,8-
TCDD) at levels as high as 12,000 parts per million. Creosote has 
been detected in the thousands of parts per million range. 
     The soil was excavated to stop leaching to groundwater, but no 
additional action was taken after residents objected to incineration 
of the stockpile in 1992 (Superfund Week 10/2/92). EPA estimated 
the cost of incineration at $40 million in 1994.
     Dense non-aqueous phase liquid (DNAPL) contamination is 
suspected in a quarter-mile plume that runs from the site to the 
downgradient Agrico NPL site.
     The RI/FS should be complete by February 1997. CDM Federal 
Programs Corp. is doing the studies as an EPA Region 4 
Alternative Remedial Contracts Strategy (ARCS) contractor 
(Superfund Week 1/27/95).
     The 26-acre site is located on the north edge of the Pensacola 
city limits and is the target of an environmental  justice initiative 
because a minority neighborhood is on the north side.
     Contact: Mark Fite, EPA project manager, 404-347-3555, 
ext. 6263.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

Bill would give Corps all fund-lead work

     Rep. Rodney Frelinghuysen, R-N.J., entered a bill in the House 
last month to give the Army Corps of Engineers contract oversight 
of all fund-financed Superfund cleanups.
     A staffer for Frelinghuysen said the bill has been referred to the 
House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, which is 
expected to take up the bill shortly after Congress returns on Jan. 22. 
Frelinghuysen is a member of the Appropriations energy and water 
development subcommittee, which has heavy oversight of the 
Corps. He is also a member of the VA-HUD and independent 
agencies subcommittee, under which CERCLA is funded.
     Once EPA selects a remedy at an NPL site, it tasks the Corps to 
manage the cleanup about 35% of the time. Frelinghuysen wants 
that percentage upped to 100%, saying giving the Corps 
management responsibility will "speed cleanups, reduce overhead, 
and provide better management of Superfund cleanups."

Focus is on Corps, EPA strengths

     "My bill would mandate that all contracting oversight of site 
cleanups under the Superfund program be managed by [the Corps]," 
Frelinghuysen said. He added it will "simply let EPA do what it 
does best, which is scientific analysis and site characterization. 
Once a remedy is selected, it then brings in [the Corps] to do what 
they do best, which is to manage large, complex construction 
projects."
     The House freshman, who served 13 years in the state 
legislature, represents New Jersey's 11th district, which has 13 
Superfund sites -- more than any other congressional district in the 
nation.
     H.R. 2801, the Site Clean-up Improvement and Acceleration Act 
of 1995, amends Section 104 of CERCLA.
     The bill says: "Except in the case of remedial actions carried 
out by a state or political subdivision ..., contract administration of 
awarded contracts for design and construction associated with fund-
lead remedial actions commenced ... after the date of enactment ... 
shall be performed by [the Corps.]"
     However, any such changes to the program have to make it 
through the House environment subcommittee, which has 
jurisdiction over Superfund. Rep. Mike Oxley, R-Ohio, who chairs 
the subcommittee, previously has said he wants to minimize fund-
lead cleanup projects and the Corps' role in Superfund (Superfund 
Week 3/31/95).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

EPA proposes Spokane stabilization, cap

     EPA proposed a $1.7 million to $2.3 million soil stabilization 
and capping project as part of a removal action at the Spokane 
Junkyard/Associated Properties NPL site in Spokane, Wash.
     Under the recommended alternative, all soil above residential 
cleanup levels (400 parts per million for lead, 1 ppm for PCBs) will 
be excavated and consolidated on the Spokane Metals property. 
     Soil above 5,000 ppm lead will be treated with chemical 
stabilization. The stabilized soil will be consolidated with soil with 
contamination levels between 400 and 5,000 ppm, which will not be 
treated, and capped with a geomembrane and soil cover.
     The 5,000 ppm standard will require that only about half as 
much material be stabilized as would be using the industrial lead 
level of 1,000 ppm.
     Other options EPA is considering include excavation and off-site 
disposal of all contaminated soil; off-site disposal of soil above 
industrial levels and capping of soil above residential levels; and 
capping of all soil above residential levels. The most expensive 
option, at between $6.8 million and $8.1 million, is off-site disposal 
of all soil above residential cleanup levels.
     Lead is found in surface soil on most of the site and PCBs are 
found sporadically in surface soil. The site has been zoned for 
residential use with the exception of the former Spokane Metals 
property. Between 8,000 and 15,000 cubic yards of contaminated 
soil will need to be addressed.
     EPA will make a decision on cleanup options after the comment 
period closes Feb. 16.
     The PRPs agreed to design the removal but another settlement 
will be needed for construction of the project.
     The PRPs at the site, Kaiser Aluminum, Washington Water 
Power, and Inland Power and Light submitted an EE/CA for the 
removal in December 1995 (Superfund Week 12/8/95). Alta 
Geosciences of Battelle, Wash., did the EE/CA.
     The 16-acre site is located in a light commercial and residential 
area. Asbestos and drums of hazardous wastes were removed and 
taken to an approved hazardous waste facility in 1987.
     Contact: Kevin Rochlin, EPA project manager, 206-553-
2106; Charles (Bud) Preston, Kaiser Aluminum, 509-468-5402.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

Correction

     A brief on the Boerke site in Wisconsin in the Jan. 12 edition of 
Superfund Week incorrectly stated when the site's dye manufacturing plant 
closed. The plant closed in 1938.
     Also, a story in the Dec. 22 issue incorrectly stated who is doing a 
cleanup design at the Cleveland Mill site in New Mexico. Adrian Brown 
Consultants' Salt Lake City office is handling all of the design work.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

Wyckoff/Eagle Harbor to get near-shore fill

     EPA has signed a ROD amendment that calls for construction of 
a near-shore fill and solidification of soil and sediments at the 
Wyckoff/Eagle Harbor NPL site in Bainbridge Island, Wash.
     Under the amendment, hot spot sediments will be placed in a 
confined disposal facility (CDF) and capped with clean material 
and asphalt. The one-acre fill will be built adjacent to the former 
shipyard. EPA proposed the change in September (Superfund Week 
9/29/95).
     Under the 1992 ROD, heavy metal hot spot soil and sediments 
were to be disposed in a hazardous waste or municipal landfill. 
     The amendment came largely in response to community 
concerns that a private boatyard would be forced to leave the harbor 
under the original cleanup plan. The fill will create nearly one acre 
of additional land that the Washington State Dept. of 
Transportation  (WSDOT) has committed to lease for private 
water operations. 
     A drainage system will be needed to prevent surface and 
groundwater from leaching into the harbor. 
     Also, a habitat migration plan will be needed. The outer walls of 
the CDF will be enhanced with gravel to provided a favorable 
habitat for barnacles and mussels.
     The primary contaminants at the site are PAHs and mercury.
     Design efforts begun by PRPs PACCAR Inc. and WSDOT will 
resume now that EPA has agreed to the near-shore fill. Hart-
Crowser Inc. is designing the cleanup for the PRPs and has 
submitted the 35% design. A final design should be complete early 
this summer, at which time EPA will begin negotiations with the 
PRPs for construction of the cleanup. In addition to PACCAR and 
WSDOT, the Washington Dept. of Natural Resources and the 
U.S. Dept. of Defense are potentially liable parties. The cleanup 
will cost about $4 million.
     Also at the Wyckoff site, building demolition is expected to be 
completed early in the spring. EPA recently replaced the wells in a 
groundwater pump-and-treatment system that has been operating 
since 1990. The system uses physical separation of oil from the 
water, biological treatment and carbon adsorption to treat about 100 
gallons per minute.
     CH2M Hill is doing an RI/FS at the facility, which should be 
completed sometime this year.  
     The design of an interim groundwater barrier wall to prevent 
water from reaching the harbor, prescribed in a 1994 ROD, is 
awaiting funding in addition to the RI results.
     Contact: Elly Hale, EPA project manager, 206-553-1215; 
Larry Sims, PACCAR Inc. project manager, 206-453-4901; Rick 
Singer, WSDOT, 360-705-7402.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

Senate mulls liability deal

     Senate Republicans soon could take up a reauthorization proposal 
freeing PRPs at multi-party sites from the Superfund liability net.
     Sources say GOP staff members have recommended the measure as the 
one for which the most broad-based support could be garnered. The move 
comes light of the disastrous response to other recently proposed liability 
exemptions such as the retroactive liability discount (RLD) and tax credits 
for PRPs. Sources said neither of those provisions are likely to be in a 
reauthorization bill.
   Included in a House proposal issued last fall was a provision for liability 
shielding at municipal landfill NPL sites (Superfund Week 9/29/95), an idea 
that has drawn less fiery criticism and is viewed by many as the best 
compromise. 
     The move reportedly eliminates about 250 sites from the Superfund 
liability scheme.
     However, even if an agreement can be reached on the multi-party 
liability exemption, issues such as clearly defining "multi-party sites" and 
setting a cut-off date for the repeal will remain to be worked out. Sources 
said the Senate plan most likely will include municipal landfills and other 
sites at which there are dozens or hundreds of small contributors and have 
1981 as the cut-off date.
     House leaders are batting around similar liability exemptions 
(Superfund Week 1/5).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet
JANUARY 19, 1996

N.J. reps: restore CERCLA funding

     All thirteen New Jersey representatives have signed a letter asking 
House Appropriations Committee Chairman Robert Livingston, R-La., to 
include Superfund in a targeted appropriations bill and restore Superfund to 
full 1995 funding.
     Under the continuing resolution, EPA is operating at 75% of its 1995 
budget, a level the letter calls "unacceptable." New Jersey has 114 
Superfund sites, more than any other state.
     The delegation calls for Superfund to be included in targeted 
appropriations bills that will fund selected programs for fiscal 1996 in the 
absence of a budget agreement.
     "The disarray that the Superfund program has been put through in recent 
weeks, as a direct result of the EPA's appropriations not having been 
enacted yet, threatens the program's underlying integrity and credibility," 
the letter stated.
     Rep. Marge Roukema, R-N.J., leading the New Jersey move said: "The 
104th Congress must take prompt action to remedy the situation by 
approving legislation that President Clinton will sign into law that provides 
the EPA with the needed funds."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-15</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B019-332</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev42.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002324 text/html 77261
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:21:13 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:36 GMT
Content-length: 77072
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev42.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
January 5, 1996   <BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(51 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>CANTOR FITZGERALD EBS SO2 ALLOWANCE PRICES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(162 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>U.S. APPEALS COURT AFFIRMS RULING THAT INDIANA COAL LAW IS&nbsp;UNCONSTITUTIONAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(673 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>CALIF. PUC TO STUDY ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF RESTRUCTURING ORDER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1091 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>EPRI ANALYSIS SAYS ELECTRICAL WORKERS HAVE 10-20% MORE RISK OF BRAIN&nbsp;CANCER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(660 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ELECTRIC VEHICLES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>CALIFORNIA RETREATS, BUT MASS. GOV. WELD HOLDS FIRM, ON EV MANDATES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(834 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>EMISSIONS TRADING</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>THE CLOSE OF 1995 SIGNALS BEARISH SENTIMENT IN MARKET IS CONTINUING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(612 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NO (SUBSCRIPT) X CONTROL</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>KEY TEXAS REP. SIDES WITH GAS INDUSTRY, CALLS FOR FUEL-NEUTRAL NSPS FOR&nbsp;NOX</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(472 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>SO2 ALLOWANCE OUTLOOK</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>SIERRA CLUB SEEKS INJUNCTION TO ORDER PS COLORADO TO CUT HAYDEN EMISSIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(191 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>B&W ACQUIRES JOY ENVIRONMENTAL TO BOOST POLLUTION CONTROL WORK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(149 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>STATE REGULATION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>CALIF. AIR DISTRICTS APPROVE PG&E NOX PLANS FOR DROPPING SCR REQUIREMENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(450 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>PA. UTILITIES APPLAUD DEP MOVE TO MAKE STATE'S RULES NO STRICTER THAN&nbsp;EPA'S</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(633 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>CALIF. COURT THROWS OUT SUIT CLAIMING SOCAL ED EQUIPMENT EMFS CAUSED&nbsp;CANCER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(471 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RENEWABLES ISSUES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>TVA'S FINAL IRP INCREASES COMMITMENT TO RENEWABLES, ENERGY CONSERVATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(401 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RENEWABLE ISSUES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>MISSOURI IOUS, STATE UNIVERSITY CREATE ENERGY COLLABORATIVE FOR RENEWABLES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(226 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>IP&L EYEING LANDFILL METHANE-FIRED PROJECT IN INDIANAPOLIS THIS YEAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(253 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>HYDROPOWER</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>STATE ENVIRONMENTAL OFFICIALS BACK ELEMENTS OF NHA RELICENSING PROPOSAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(564 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>LEGISLATION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><LI>WIS. UTILITIES OPPOSING BILL REQUIRING FREE SPARK GAS ISOLATORS FOR&nbsp;FARMERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(390 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>TUCSON ELECTRIC, NEW WORLD POWER JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECTS CHOSEN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(446 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INTERNATIONAL</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>CANADA DECIDES TO CONTINUE VOLUNTARY GREENHOUSE GAS PROGRAM UNTIL NOV. '96</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(810 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>BRIEFS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>TVA PCB WASTE EXCHANGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(177 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>N.Y. CHANGES OFFSET RULES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(143 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>PSE&G BERGEN REPOWERING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(189 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>VA. SCC COMPETITION PROBE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(117 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>EX-KAN. MUNI OFFICIAL SENTENCED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(140 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT

UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT
SO2 Allowance Market Prices*
Phase One - $105 - 107/ton
Phase Two - $100 - 102/ton

* Spot sales prices effective since the week of Dec. 18, 1995. Prices based
on occasional phone surveys with allowance traders, brokers and industry
experts.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

CANTOR FITZGERALD EBS SO2 ALLOWANCE PRICES

      Cantor Fitzgerald EBS SO2 Allowance Prices
                 (dollars/ton)
                                        Monthly
Month of        Bids    Offers  Trades  Price Index
December        104.00  111.50  111.12  108.87
November        108.33  119.50  122.85  116.89
October         121.85  126.33  122.25  123.48
September       124.00  127.00  126.50  125.83
August          126.00  133.10  129.50  129.53
July            128.00  132.38  130.11  130.16
June            129.00  133.58  131.75  131.44
May             129.83  135.50  129.25  131.53
April           128.75  137.92  129.53  132.07
March           130.15  135.33  134.13  133.21
February        133.00  137.00  134.30  134.77
January         135.07  140.33  137.27  137.56

Bids and offers are weighted averages of the highest and lowest spot
prices, respectively, for 1,500 allowances. Trades are weighted average of
actual trade prices determined from consummated trades and settling within
six months. Larger trades weighted on a maximum of 1,500 allowances;
smaller trades weighted normally. Monthly Price Index is average of bids,
offers and trades. All values based on trading period beginning with 25th
day of previous month and ending with 24th day of month MPI is published.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

U.S. APPEALS COURT AFFIRMS RULING THAT INDIANA COAL LAW IS
UNCONSTITUTIONAL

   The 7th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals has affirmed a lower court ruling
that struck down portions of an Indiana law that encourages the state's
electric utilities to find ways to burn high-sulfur coal and still comply
with the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments.
   In a Dec. 22 ruling (Case No. 95-2065), the appeals court said parts of
the 1991 law, passed in response to the Clean Air Act and strongly
supported by an Indiana high-sulfur coal industry that feared an influx of
low-sulfur Western coal, violate the Interstate Commerce Clause of the
Constitution and therefore are unconstitutional.
   Under the Indiana Environmental Compliance Plan Act (ECPA), the state
Utility Regulatory Commission can pre-approve a utility's Clean Air Act
compliance plan, but only if several criteria are met. One of the key
provisions is whether the utility will continue or increase its use of
Indiana high-sulfur coal.
   In challenging the legality of the law, the Alliance for Clean Coal
(ACC), a coalition of Western coal producers and railroads, has argued that
such a provision amounts to illegal protectionism and violates the
Constitution.
   Last March, U.S. District Judge John Tinder found that portions of the
Indiana law violate the Interstate Commerce Clause and should be
invalidated (UER, 14 April '95, 3).
   The appeals court concurred, saying a utility compliance plan that has a
negative impact on Indiana coal is ``subject to continuing annual
surveillance'' by the URC under the Indiana law.
   As a result, those portions of the ECPA ``discriminate against
interstate commerce based solely upon geographic origin...the clear intent
of the statute is to benefit Indiana coal at the expense of Western coal,''
the appeals court said.
   The fact that the Indiana law ``merely encourages'' utilities to use
high-sulfur coal does not make it ``any less discriminatory,'' the appeals
court said. The result, the court added, is ``discriminatory state action
that is forbidden by the Commerce Clause.''
   Concluded the court: ``Despite the fact that low-sulfur Western coal may
be a more efficient compliance option, the ECPA clearly attempts to prevent
Indiana electrical utilities from switching to low-sulfur coal. This
amounts to discriminatory state action that is forbidden by the Commerce
Clause. The defendants have not discharged their burden of demonstrating
that the statute serves a legitimate and compelling interest unrelated to
economic protectionism.''
   A spokesman for the Indiana Coal Council, a major supporter of the
Indiana law, said he was not surprised by the ruling. Indiana is not
expected to appeal the ruling to the U.S. Supreme Court.
   Terry O'Connor, vice president of government relations for ARCO Coal, an
ACC member, said the group expects to win a similar lawsuit it filed late
last year in Ohio (UER, 29 Sept '95, 1).
   Asked what the ACC hopes to gain by the Indiana victory, O'Connor said
the rewards would not be immediate. ``We recognize that utilities in the
various Midwestern states have already made their Phase-One [compliance]
decisions'' under the acid rain rules, he said.
   However, ``to the extent that those decisions may have been skewed by
the Indiana protectionist law, we're hopeful that those utilities will now
feel free to revisit those fuel decisions and look westward to inexpensive,
low-sulfur coal.''
   In the long run, the ACC hopes to pick up additional business when
Midwest utilities finalize Phase-Two compliance plans. ``With this decision
now hopefully behind us, we are optimistic that as Illinois, Indiana and
Ohio utilities prepare Phase-Two compliance plans for submission [to
regulatory agencies] in the next year or so, they will look favorably on
Western coal as a viable option,'' O'Connor said.
   A spokeswoman for PSI Energy, which is building a Phase-One scrubber at
its 3,149-MW Gibson plant near Princeton, Ind., doubted the appeals court
ruling would have much impact on her company.
   ``Since we didn't rely on the [ECPA] for Phase One, the ruling probably
won't have a great effect on PSI for Phase-Two plans,'' she said. ``But it
might eliminate some steps in the future that we might have had to go
through.''

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

CALIF. PUC TO STUDY ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF RESTRUCTURING ORDER

   The California Public Utilities Commission has decided to conduct an
environmental impact report to assess potential environmental damage from
the move to a competitive electric power industry.
   In issuing its final electric restructuring order last month, the PUC
agreed to conduct an EIR under the California Environmental Quality Act.
``The magnitude of our proposed electric policy favors reviewing the
possible environmental impacts of a new industry structure,'' the PUC
stated.
   The PUC responded to a motion filed by the Natural Resources Defense
Council in June 1994 for determining whether CEQA applied to the
commission's electric restructuring proceeding. The PUC noted that parties
disagreed whether electric restructuring fit within the CEQA definition of
a project and thus triggered the CEQA requirements for an EIR.
   While the California Supreme Court has interpreted CEQA's definition of
a project as not requiring a finding of a direct physical effect on the
environment, the courts have not clarified whether policy actions without
direct environmental effects are CEQA projects. ``We cannot make a finding
at this time about whether electric restructuring constitutes a CEQA
project,'' the PUC conceded. ``However, we can anticipate that there is no
harm, and abundant good, in moving forth with analysis under CEQA at this
time.'' The commission cautioned that delaying the preparation of an EIR
could severely hamper restructuring efforts, which it deemed vital to the
state's economy.
   In its restructuring order, the PUC adopted president Daniel Fessler's
proposal to create simultaneously an independent system operator to control
transmission, a wholesale power exchange and direct access phased-in over
five years beginning Jan. 1, 1998.
   The PUC established a five-year transition period to a competitive
industry, with a non-bypassable competitive transition charge, or CTC, on
all retail customers to ensure utilities full recovery of their stranded
investments by 2005.
   The PUC determined that preparation of an EIR rather than a negative
declaration was necessary because electric restructuring may potentially
impact the environment in several ways. The PUC cited NRDC's concern that
electric restructuring may reduce energy efficiency incentives and restore
the linkage between utilities' profits and sales volumes, which have been
decoupled by the Electric Revenue Adjustment Mechanism.
   The PUC also cited Pacific Gas and Electric's observation that electric
restructuring may result in shifts in energy production, resulting in a
different mix of energy resources with a potential for creating
environmental impacts.
   The PUC directed its commission advisory compliance division within 100
days to issue a notice of preparation of an EIR and retain the services of
an environmental consultant to be approved by the commission. The
consultant will work with the commission to prepare an EIR that will
analyze the environmental impacts of electric restructuring, compare
environmental effects of alternative policies and identify mitigation
measures for potential significant impacts.
   Given the broad restructuring policy, the EIR will contain a more
general discussion of impacts, alternatives and migitations than a
traditional site-specific environmental assessment, the PUC noted. Hence,
it will attempt to anticipate future scenarios that may develop under the
commission's restructuring policy.
   Moreover, the EIR may incorporate or refer to the environmental impact
statement the the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission is preparing under
the National Environmental Policy Act for its mega-notice of proposed
rulemaking on open access, the PUC said.
   The PUC also committed itself to maintaining the state's resource
diversity and developing policies that promote development of new renewable
energy resources in a restructured electric services industry. ``We
continue to believe that a minimum renewables purchase requirement is the
best approach to meet our resource diversity goals,'' the PUC said.
   However, the commission acknowledged that it had not determined whether
the renewables requirement should be imposed on retail suppliers or
generators. Accordingly, the PUC delayed consideration of this question
until its implementation phase and called upon its working group to provide
further guidance.
   The PUC stated its preference for setting the renewables purchase
requirement at the same level for all electric utilities statewide, but it
acknowledged that a transitional strategy may be appropriate given the
utilities' current resource portfolios.
   To provide flexibility in meeting the renewables requirement, renewables
``credits'' would be tradable similar to pollution credits under the
federal Clean Air Act Amendments and the South Coast Air Quality Management
District's Regional Clean Air Incentives Market.
   The PUC set a target date of January 1998 for establishing minimum
renewables levels continuing through 2000, at which time the commission
would review the requirement for possible modification. As with the Clean
Air Act and state air quality permit programs, the PUC plans to establish a
``meaningful penalty'' for noncompliance.
   This market-based approach would eliminate the need for a surcharge to
fund renewables development by allowing buyers and sellers to secure the
best bargains on renewables and include the costs in their prices, the PUC
said.
   By contrast, establishing a surcharge to fund renewables development
would require the PUC to administer and disperse the funds to ensure
compliance. However, after its disastrous experience with the ill-fated
Biennial Resource Planning Update independent power auction, the commission
stressed that it was extremely reluctant to do so.
   ``The minimum renewables requirement approach will allow the market to
provide the most cost-effective renewable resources, without our
intervention,'' the PUC predicted. Moreover, allowing providers to trade
renewables requirements could serve to minimize stranded costs from
qualifying facility contracts by providing new markets for QFs' power, the
PUC said.
   This approach would also likely stimulate research and development of
renewables as existing renewables are replaced by new resources to meet the
increased demand for electricity, the commission predicted.
   The PUC's renewables standard is being welcomed by officials at the
American Wind Energy Association, who with the Union of Concerned
Scientists and others, helped sell the PUC on the idea.
   ``There had been an expectation of a tax on generation, with the
revenues used to support the renewables industry,'' AWEA executive director
Randall Swisher said. ``That is one way to go, but from our perspective a
standard is less bureaucratic and more market oriented.''
   Swisher said the minimum renewable capacity requirement should be placed
on sellers, not generators, so that the state--not FERC--would have
oversight authority. The standard should be set at around 11.5% of total
capacity, the current share of the California market provided by
renewables, Swisher said.
   Sellers with no renewable capacity could purchase credits from another
company that owned renewables capacity or that had excess renewable energy
credits, he said.
   With a portfolio standard, ``you just set the minimum standard and sit
back and let the market do the rest,'' Swisher said.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

EPRI ANALYSIS SAYS ELECTRICAL WORKERS HAVE 10-20% MORE RISK OF BRAIN
CANCER

   A new Electric Power Research Institute study that assessed research on
workplace electromagnetic fields has found that electrical workers are
about 10% to 20% more likely to develop brain cancer than other workers.
   But because no clear relationship can be found between the amount of
exposure to EMFs and the level of risk, researchers cannot conclude that
EMFs cause brain cancer, the analysis said. The study found that ``the
apparent lack of a clear pattern of exposure and risk substantially
detracts from the hypothesis that measured magnetic fields in the work
environment are responsible for the observed excess of risk.''
   In other words, according to coauthor Dr. Patricia Buffler, who is dean
of the University of California at Berkeley, School of Public Health,
``there is something about employment in [the studied] occupations'' that
may or may not have anything to do with EMFs. She argued that the observed
association between work in electrical occupations, a broad category that
includes electricians and power plant operators, and elevated cancer risk
likely has more to do with limitations in the studies than any kind of tie
to EMF exposure.
   The study, published in the December issue of the Journal of
Occupational and Environmental Medicine, reexamined more than 50 previous
studies and pools the results of 29 of them for a new statistical analysis.
The pooled data showed a slightly elevated risk of brain tumors (10-20%)
for workers in the electrical occupations category, a result with
sufficient statistical strength to be considered reliable. Higher risks
were seen for some more specific job categories and for one subtype of
brain cancer, gliomas.
   The authors, who in addition to Buffler included Dr. Leeka Kheifets of
EPRI, and Dr. Abdelmonem Afifi and Zhong Zhang of the University of
California at Los Angeles, School of Public Health, assessed their findings
against three possible hypotheses on EMFs and cancer.
   First, they concluded that the analysis ``provides some evidence against
the hypothesis of no association between occupational exposure to EMF and
the risk of cancer.'' On the second possibility--a small but pervasive
cancer risk--they found ``some evidence to support the hypothesis.''
The third possibility is that ``the true EMF effect is large'' but only
impacts individuals who are in some way predisposed to develop cancer or
who are exposed simultaneously to another factor. On this count, the
researchers concede that their study ``provides no clues that could help to
identify a circumstance or condition'' to explain such a risk.
   Overall, the researchers found ``it is not possible to conclude that EMF
is causally associated with the observed excess of brain cancer in workers
employed in electrical occupations.''
   About one-third of the studies reviewed in the EPRI report were
conducted in the United States, another one-third in Scandinavia and the
remainder in Canada, Australia, Great Britain, Germany and other countries.
The earliest study was published in 1983, while the largest number of
studies, six, appeared in 1991.
   About half of the studies included follow-up before 1984 and were
published before 1990. Study designs used by the investigators included
proportional mortality, case control analysis of death certificate data,
case control and cohort studies.
   The U.S. and other studies showed relative risk increases of 40% or
higher compared to those with no occupational exposures to EMFs. The
Scandinavian studies, almost all of which were cohort studies based on
incident risk, showed the lowest relative risks for brain cancer. The
reasons for the lower relative risk reported in the Scandinavian studies
``are not exactly clear,'' the EPRI study said.
   A 1994 study of Canadian and French electric utility workers showed a
doubling of brain tumor risk by some measures, for example, but the result
was not statistically significant (UER, 1 April '94, 1).
   A large study of U.S. utility workers, funded by EPRI and completed
early last year, found a statistically significant increase in brain cancer
risk for those with the highest exposures (UER, 20 Jan '95, 1).

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

CALIFORNIA RETREATS, BUT MASS. GOV. WELD HOLDS FIRM, ON EV MANDATES

   Massachusetts Gov. William Weld (R) reaffirmed his commitment to the
state's zero-emission vehicle program, which includes a 2% electric vehicle
sales mandate beginning in 1998, despite recent action by the California
Air Resources Board to drop its own EV sales mandate that would have begun
in the same year.
   Bowing to pressure from the auto industry, CARB Dec. 21 said it will
lift the state's landmark mandate requiring auto makers to sell about
22,000 EVs in California beginning in 1998. CARB directed its staff to
finalize a plan by March 1996 to lift the mandate requiring that 2% of
vehicles sold in California have zero emissions by 1998 and 5% by 2001.
   The air board decided not to impose the mandate until 2003, at which
time 10% of vehicles sold in California will have to be exhaust-free in
order to achieve a statewide reduction of 14 tons/day of nitrous oxide and
hydrocarbons.
   In the interim, auto makers must aim to sell up to 3,700 EVs in the
smog-laden Los Angeles and Sacramento basins during the first three years
of the program--750 in 1998, 1,500 in 1999 and 1,500 in 2000. Based on auto
makers' reports, CARB estimated a statewide annual production of 5,000 EVs
in 1996 and 1997 and 14,000 in 1998.
   Massachusetts' EV plan is modeled closely on the California plan, and
that state has also faced tremendous pressure from automakers to drop its
minimum EV sales requirement.
   But Weld said Dec. 22 he thought CARB made the wrong decision to weaken
its program and noted ``that decision does not bind Massachusetts.''
Edison Electric Institute director of electric transportation Rick Tempchin
called the CARB decision ``a significant mistake,'' adding that EV
technology, consumer readiness and infrastructure are on track to launch EV
sales in California in 1998.
   ``What is missing is the political will to stand up to automakers, oil
companies and others who insist that token EV rollouts will ensure the
success of this technology,'' Tempchin said.
   CARB officials stressed that under the new plan, car makers must still
meet air pollution reduction goals through production of cleaner cars with
reduced exhaust, evaporative and refueling emissions.
   The air board adopted the zero-emission vehicle rule in 1990 to reduce
air pollution from passenger cars and light trucks. The mandate currently
applies to the seven largest auto manufacturers, with sales of more than
35,000 vehicles a year in California. By 2003, all auto makers that sell
more than 3,000 vehicles a year in the state will have to comply with the
mandate.
   The air board plans to hold a public hearing and vote on the revised
plan in March. However, CARB chairman John Dunlap said the air board had
reached consensus on lifting the mandate.
   CARB directed its staff in November to devise an alternative proposal
after the Battery Technology Assessment Panel reported auto makers'
conclusions that existing lead acid battery-powered EVs would have too
limited a sales demand to meet state pollution reduction goals (UER, 24 Nov
'95, 1).
   The air board received more than 200 comments to three staff proposals:
1) a market-based approach; 2) changing the zero-emission vehicle mandate
for early years but maintaining the rules intact for later years; and 3)
keeping the same basic format but reducing the 2% mandate for 1998.
   CARB agreed with auto makers that advanced lithium and nickel-based
battery technology for EVs--currently the only zero-emission vehicle--will
not be commercially viable until 2001. The auto industry contends that
existing lead-acid batteries have limited range and are too costly, making
them unattractive to consumers.
   Forcing manufacturers to introduce unaffordable vehicles that are
technologically unreliable would poison the fledgling EV market, CARB said.
``If you see them sitting in storerooms and no one buys them it sends a
negative message,'' said a CARB spokesman. ``No one wants to poison the
market.''
   In the interim, automakers will be allowed to build only the number of
zero-emission vehicles they think they can sell, which manufacturers
estimate at 2,000 to 3,000 in 1996 and 1997 and 14,000 a year after that,
Martin said. The 2% mandate would have amounted to about 22,000 EVs.
   Auto makers will be required to sign a memorandum of agreement
committing to a ``Cal/Big 7 Technology Development Partnership,'' to
continue research and development of advanced batteries and EVs.
Manufacturers would be given a market incentive for early production of
exhaust-free and longer-range vehicles through 2003. The state of
California would purchase some EVs each year.
   The revised mandate will not relieve auto makers from meeting their air
pollution reduction requirements based on their percentage of total vehicle
sales in California. However, CARB gave each vehicle manufacturer
flexibility to design their own individual plan for meeting their emission
reduction requirements.
   CARB directed its staff to prepare a proposal by March for meeting
statewide pollution reduction goals in lieu of the zero-emission vehicle
mandate. ``There will be absolutely no loss of pollution reduction,''
Martin stressed. ``They will individually be held accountable for them.''

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

THE CLOSE OF 1995 SIGNALS BEARISH SENTIMENT IN MARKET IS CONTINUING

   The sulfur dioxide emission allowance market ended the year with its
steepest monthly decline of the year, as prices nosedived in December,
oddly enough, due to the presence of a buyer.
   Bidding in a request for proposal from Illinois Power seeking 15,000
1995 allowances for immediate delivery was ``very aggressive,'' said Lynda
Clemmons of Enron Capital and Trade Resources. IP passed up prices that
``would have been leapt on'' three weeks earlier, said Carlton Bartels, a
director at Cantor Fitzgerald Environmental Brokerage Services. The winning
bidder, which was named Dec. 18, 1995, was thought to have offered prices
in the range of $105-110/ton.
   As a result, the Utility Environment Report SO2 Allowance Market Prices
have dropped to $105-$107/ton for Phase One and $100-102 for Phase Two (see
box, page 3). This is well below end-of-November prices of $119-121 for
Phase One and $118-120 for Phase Two.
   One observer noted that, with more than 3 million allowances out there,
an enormous supply was ``chasing Illinois Power's demand for 15,000.''
   Opinions varied, however, on the relative importance of an RFP the size
of Illinois Power's. One player argued that trades of 15,000 are ``not all
that large'' anymore. Another countered that a straight-out purchase of
that amount for the end of the year is still a ``pretty big deal.''
   There were few factors that could explain the increased market activity
that has been seen in recent weeks. The end of the year was having, at
most, a psychological effect, some said. There was no indication that
utilities had decided that they needed additional allowances for 1995
compliance.
   The most common explanation was that buyers are being motivated by
prices that are now ``just too good to pass up,'' and sellers may be
worrying that prices will continue to fall. One player suggested that
sellers were already anticipating a negative impact on prices from the
EPA's next auction in March.
   Cantor Fitzgerald's market price index for Phase One allowances was
$108.87 at the end of December 1995, down from $116.89 a month earlier.
Similarly, Emissions Exchange of Denver moved its value for 1995 allowances
to $105 and for 2000 allowance to $100, also a sharp drop from November
1995.
   Attention now is focused on how much lower prices will go. The market is
``pretty close to the bottom,'' Bartels argues. ``We are getting more
feedback from people who are saying that this is ridiculous, that they're
not going to sell at that price.''
   While some pessimistic studies in the past have shown that allowances
were worth less than they were trading for, Bartels noted that no reliable
study has put their value below current prices.
   Others see no evidence of the slide ending, however. ``Every seller who
has waited has done worse,'' said one player who declined to be named. The
$100 mark is a weak psychological barrier that ``is not going to stop the
downward trend,'' he said, and the barrier will likely be breached whenever
the next significant buyer comes along.
   ``It is not clear what would provide support to the market at this
point,'' said Bill Babcock, a consultant with Putnam, Hayes & Bartlett in
Cambridge, Mass. The marginal cost of producing these allowances is near
zero, he said, and demand for allowances for near-term use is almost
nonexistent.
   The partial government shutdown, meanwhile, was drawing complaints from
traders. With the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency essentially closed,
allowance transactions were not being processed. Contracts can still be
signed, one trader noted, but deals cannot be completed. The greater
uncertainty will come if the impasse drags on closer to the true-up
deadline at the end of January.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

KEY TEXAS REP. SIDES WITH GAS INDUSTRY, CALLS FOR FUEL-NEUTRAL NSPS FOR
NOX

   Rep. Joe Barton (R-Texas) lined up on the side of natural gas in that
industry's escalating battle with the coal industry over a proposal by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to establish a fuel-neutral new source
performance standard (NSPS) for nitrogen oxide emissions.
   EPA is pondering a 0.15 lb./million Btu standard for NOx, a standard
that gas-fired power plants could achieve with relative ease but that many
coal-fired units would be hard-pressed to meet.
   The coal industry has argued for a standard based on fuel types, which
the industry said would allow coal to be competitive with gas.
   But in a Dec. 21, 1995 letter to his congressional colleagues, Barton
called EPA's proposed standard ``welcome news and sound and equitable
approach'' to preventing additional NOx pollution from new sources.
   ``Single standards would treat all fuels and technologies equally,''
said Barton, who chairs the House Commerce Committee's oversight and
investigations subcommittee. ``It will focus future industrial and utility
output in an efficient and competitive manner while minimizing the impact
on our nation's environment..''
   Last year, Barton hosted a number of hearings on Clean Air Act issues
and is heading a group of House Republicans expected to introduce
amendments to the air statute sometime this spring.
   Barton said a fuel-neutral standard ``will enable all combinations of
fuel (coal, oil, and natural gas) and technologies to effectively compete
for new markets. Although reliable technology exists today, this
competition will spur the development of more efficient domestic
technologies that will allow operators to meet this standard even more cost
effectively in the future.''
Barton stressed that EPA should make the new standard apply only to future
plants and not to existing facilities.
   ``While we support the fuel-neutral standard, we strongly urge the
agency to apply the standard prospectively only,'' he said. ``This `new'
standard should not apply to existing equipment. The shift to competitive
fuel-neutral standards should not penalize anyone, only invigorate
competition among suppliers for new boiler markets.''
   If a full fledged battle breaks out over the issue, Barton will find
himself pitted against coal industry allies in the Wyoming and West
Virginia delegations, to name a few, who will try to pressure EPA to base
the new NSPS standard for NOx on fuel types.
   Barton urged EPA to consider only relevant information, and not
politics, in determining the form of the new standard.
   ``[W]e encourage the agency to determine an appropriate numerical
standard based on a thorough consideration of all available and relevant
information,'' Barton said. ``The Clean Air Act amendments define the
agency's responsibility on this matter, and we trust the agency to
promulgate a standard that meets those requirements.''
   The new standard, required under a court-ordered schedule, is not
expected to be issued in draft form before September. A final rule is due
by November 1997.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

SIERRA CLUB SEEKS INJUNCTION TO ORDER PS COLORADO TO CUT HAYDEN EMISSIONS

   The Sierra Club has petitioned the U.S. District Court at Denver to move
more expeditiously in assessing penalties against three utilities for
alleged air pollution standards violations at the 446-MW Hayden Generating
Station in northwest Colorado (UER, 18 Aug '95, 4).
   The group asked the court, pending determination of a final ruling, to
issue an injunction against the companies to stop ``excessive and illegal''
emissions at the plant operated by Public Service of Colorado. PacifiCorp
and Salt River Project also own interests in the Hayden facility.
   Judge Lewis Babcock found last August, in response to a Sierra Club
complaint, that the plant had exceeded Clean Air Act emission standards
more than 19,000 times in the past five years. The utilities are liable for
a total of $493-million in fines. However, the court asked the parties to
negotiate a settlement to correct the excessive emissions.
   In its latest filing in the case (No. CV-93-1749), the Sierra Club said
negotiations with PS Colorado have broken down, and it requested the court
to issue an injunction within 60 days ordering the company to take
corrective action at once.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

B&W ACQUIRES JOY ENVIRONMENTAL TO BOOST POLLUTION CONTROL WORK

   Babcock & Wilcox Power Generation has acquired the assets of Joy
Environmental Technologies (JET) from its parent company, Harnischfeger
Industries, for an undisclosed amount. B&W, based in Barberton, Ohio,
expects the acquisition to expand its pollution control work in the power
industry.
   JET, with offices in Houston and Malvern, Pa., specializes in
environmental technologies used in the utility industry. Product lines that
B&W Power Generation will acquire from JET include acid mist precipitators,
electrostatic precipitators, dry flue-gas desulfurization systems and
baghouses. In addition, Diamond Power Specialty, another B&W subsidiary in
Lancaster, Ohio, will obtain JET's ash handling system business.
   B&W, which is a unit of McDermott International, already markets
environmental controls, along with steam generation equipment and
engineering/construction services. The company also has a 50% stake in four
independent power projects that produce 160 MW and is building projects in
China and Pakistan.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

CALIF. AIR DISTRICTS APPROVE PG&E NOX PLANS FOR DROPPING SCR REQUIREMENTS

   Pacific Gas and Electric expects to save $150-million after negotiating
new rules with three California air quality districts that provide low
cost, short-term solutions for reducing nitrogen oxide emissions at six
power plants.
   The company said by combining its NOx retrofit program with PG&E's
regular maintenance outages, the final NOx rules provide a ``more workable
compliance schedule through 2004.''
   At issue, PG&E said, were local and state rules that ``effectively
mandated the use of costly selective catalytic reduction (SCR) technology
to achieve NOx emissions of 10 parts per million. By using front-end,
low-NOx combustion systems (LNCs) the company can reduce emissions,
previously ranging from 150 ppm to 300 ppm, to as low as 20 ppm to 30 ppm,
while future improvements in technology could lower the figure even
more.''
   The new rules apply to the Morro Bay plant in the San Luis Obispo Air
Pollution Control District; the Moss Landing plant in the Monterey Bay
Unified Air Pollution District; and the Contra Costa, Hunters Point,
Pittsburg and Potrero plants in the Bay Area Air Quality Management
District.
   Bev Alexander, an environmental attorney who serves as NOx strategy
project manager for PG&E, said, ``This was a win-win situation because PG&E
was able to propose additional amendments that would use pollution
prevention technology to achieve strict air-quality standards with greater
business flexibility and at a lower cost.''
   PG&E's NOx team began working in 1994 with state regulators on rules
originally scheduled to require significant NOx reductions by 1997. They
would have forced the company to either retrofit or retire most of its
fossil-fueled units by that year.
   SCR is a back-end method that cleans up NOx after it has formed, using a
chemical reaction involving ammonia. Use of the system requires
transporting ammonia to power plants, storing it on-site and emitting some
into the atmosphere. The system also requires construction of costly
facilities to house the heavy equipment involved.
   LNC is a front-end pollution control that reduces NOx formation by
precise flame control within the boiler. Ammonia is not required. The
company said for one of PG&E's generating units in the Bay Area Air Quality
Management District, the cost of retrofitting the boiler would be
$5-million to $12-million for LNC compared with $20-million for SCR.
   The amendments adopted by the three air districts cover all of PG&E's
power plants except the Humboldt Bay plant, which is in a district that
already meets air quality standards.
   The successful installation of LNC at the Morro Bay plant was a major
reason why the local air districts approved of PG&E's proposal. Emission
figures from the Morro Bay facility influenced the district boards in their
favorable decisions, the company said.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

PA. UTILITIES APPLAUD DEP MOVE TO MAKE STATE'S RULES NO STRICTER THAN
EPA'S

   Electric utilities in Pennsylvania are enthusiastically backing an
effort by the state Dept. of Environmental Protection (DEP) to streamline
regulations and ensure that they are no more stringent than federal
standards.
   DEP began the ``Regulatory Basics'' initiative in August at the
direction of DEP secretary James Seif, who said he wanted to overhaul
regulations that exceeded federal standards, as well as those that imposed
disproportionate economic costs, lacked clarity or were redundant or no
longer necessary.
   The department asked for comments to be filed toward the end of 1995,
and investor-owned utilities filed jointly through the Pennsylvania
Electric Association (PEA). The initiative is undocketed and no public
hearings are planned, though hearings might be scheduled later, a DEP
spokesman said.
   In its comments, PEA applauded Seif for ``attempting to minimize costs
on the regulated community, encourage performance-based outcomes and to
create a level playing field for Pennsylvania businesses.''
   The utilities complained that DEP has relied on a ``belts and
suspenders'' approach to environmental regulation, or using multiple
assumptions about environmental impacts. ``While this certainly ensures
that the goal of environmental protection is met, the regulated community
has incurred tremendous costs, often with little or no attendant
environmental benefit,'' PEA said. Aside from affecting the utilities, this
approach has helped drive out industrial firms and repelled new investment
in manufacturing.
   Specifically, PEA criticized DEP's water quality-based effluent
limitations as being based on a ``steady state'' model that assumes
worst-case scenarios and is far too restrictive. The group noted that each
condition measured in the model has a low probability of occurrence, while
the combination of conditions would rarely or never occur. PEA prefers
``dynamic'' models, which account for variations of flow, effluent and
environmental conditions, and which determine the actual probability that a
water quality exceedance will occur.
   PEA also complained that DEP applies human health criteria at the point
of discharge, instead of at the point of withdrawal for drinking water
supplies. This exceeds the requirements of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, as well as Pennsylvania's own written regulations, it
pointed out. PEA also contended that DEP applies aquatic life standards
when there are no substantial populations in streams.
   Regarding air pollution issues, PEA said that the state DEP uses a
broader definition of pollutants than EPA for requiring Title 5 permits
under the Clean Air Act. The state also does not follow federal standards
relating to permit revisions and flexibility, and does not allow an
``emergency defense'' for unforeseeable events. The utilities also think
the $37/ton permitting fee may be higher than necessary to fund DEP
programs, and they would eliminate the $14/ton fee for actual emissions
because it violates the federal Clean Air Act.
   The department also forbids the use of emission reduction credits (ERCs)
for compliance with nitrogen oxide ``Reasonably Available Control
Technology'' (RACT) standards, despite EPA efforts to develop emissions
trading, the group said. They also fear that ERCs generated from
over-compliance will not be applicable to future reduction requirements for
NOx.
   While utilities agree heartily with the direction of the Regulatory
Basics proceeding, the Sierra Club condemned the move to roll back DEP
standards to the federal level. Jeff Schmidt, government liaison in the
Harrisburg, Pa. office, told Utility Environment Report, ``The minimum
federal standards are just that--minimums. They are meant to provide a
safety net, but states should be able to design more protective standards
based on specific regional and climactic conditions. Federal standards are
a floor below which you should not go, but the administration seems to want
to make them a ceiling.''
   Schmidt also criticized Seif for developing many of the changes among
his staff, without allowing public access to records. He estimated that the
changes could take 18 months, and ``the cumbersome regulatory process
usually rewards economic interests.''

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

CALIF. COURT THROWS OUT SUIT CLAIMING SOCAL ED EQUIPMENT EMFS CAUSED
CANCER

   A California Superior Court judge has dismissed a lawsuit against
Southern California Edison brought by three people with cancer who claim
that strong electromagnetic fields from the utility's equipment caused
their diseases.
   In an order last month, Judge Warren Siegel wrote that summary judgment
must be granted in favor of the defendants because the plaintiffs ``cannot
show causation by any generally accepted scientific principle in the
medical community.''
   The only witnesses that the plaintiffs offered to address the question
of what caused the cancers, according to the order, were experts on
statistical studies of EMFs and cancer. The judge found that they were not
qualified to address the medical issue of whether the particular
individuals' cancers were caused by EMFs.
   The judge wrote that the plaintiffs were, therefore, ``relying on
statistical analysis to express a medical opinion that EMF may cause
certain types of cancer.'' This, he ruled, was insufficient to allow the
case to go to trial.
   The plaintiffs intend to file a motion with Siegel requesting a new
trial, according to their attorney, Annee Della Donna of the Wylie A.
Aitken law firm. The decision to dismiss was ``unbelievably erroneous,''
Della Donna said. The judge ruled on the sufficiency of the causation
witnesses, Della Donna argued, when he was supposed to be ruling on the
admissibility of the witnesses under various evidentiary rules governing
scientific testimony.
   If the request for a new trial is rejected, she said, the plaintiffs
will seek a writ from the appeals court. ``This is a clear violation of our
due process rights'' she added, since the judge ruled on something without
giving proper notice that the issue was up for consideration.
   John Tinker, senior counsel with SoCal Ed, countered that ``the judge
has recognized that there is no sound scientific evidence to bring this
before a jury.'' He added, ``The company and the industry are very pleased
with this result.''
   The three plaintiffs with cancer in this case all worked in a real
estate office on the ground floor of a 14-story office building in Orange
County, Calif. The office had unusually strong EMFs because it is directly
above a vault containing transformers, switching gear and distribution
circuits for the building. The building owners and the real estate company
are named as defendants in the case in addition to SoCal Ed (Johsz et al.
vs Koll Company et al., Case No. 726765).
   Two other individuals with cancer who also worked in the office have a
similar lawsuit pending against the same defendants. It is before a
different judge and was not directly affected by the dismissal of this
case.
   Della Donna, who is handling the second case as well, has said that the
excess incidence of disease among workers in the real estate office
constitutes a cancer cluster.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

TVA'S FINAL IRP INCREASES COMMITMENT TO RENEWABLES, ENERGY CONSERVATION

   The Tennessee Valley Authority said it has increased its commitment to
renewables and energy conservation in a final version of its integrated
resource plan made public in late December.
   TVA said the changes were made in part as a response to comments from
conservation and environmental groups, which had called on the federally
owned utility to adopt more aggressive policies in these areas.
   Among the short-term actions in the final plan, TVA said it would
intensify research into the use of wind energy and carry out at least one
wind project in its service area during the next two years.
   At the same time, TVA will begin tests this year of co-firing of biomass
waste products at its large coal-fired plants and then in 1997 move ahead
with the first commercial biomass co-firing project.
   In a third effort, TVA will step up reviews of ways to increase use of
coalbed methane and landfill methane to produce power in the region. TVA
hopes to sponsor an initial test of a fuel cell-landfill methane system.
   On energy efficiency programs, TVA said it is now committed to add 650
MW of demand-side resources by 2002 and as much as 2,200 MW by 2010. It
said this was an increase of 750 MW over previous versions of the plan.
   Also as part of the IRP, TVA detailed a longer term research plan for
renewables and conservation that will cover the use of photovoltaics for
service to remote areas and for cutting residential energy costs, electric
vehicle infrastructure development and use of communication techniques for
energy load management.
   Because TVA took an approach in its IRP that uses a portfolio of
options, the plan contained no set estimate of environmental impacts,
especially over the long term. But TVA said the need to comply with federal
and state regulations would create a ``safety net'' effect against
increased environmental impacts as different options were implemented.
   Outside groups will make one final round of comments on the TVA plan in
mid-January, after which it will be approved in final form by the TVA board
in February.
   TVA has moved ahead in the last two months to start up two nuclear
reactors at its Watts Bar and Browns Ferry sites, over strong protests from
the environmental community. It remains to be seen whether improvements in
the IRP will bridge the differences over nuclear policy.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

MISSOURI IOUS, STATE UNIVERSITY CREATE ENERGY COLLABORATIVE FOR RENEWABLES

   Missouri's investor-owned utilities and the University of
Missouri-Columbia, College of Engineering have formed the Missouri Electric
Utility Renewables Group (MEURG), an organization dedicated to identifying,
gathering information, researching and testing the feasibility of renewable
generation opportunities in the state.
   Participating utilities include Empire District Electric, Kansas City
Power & Light, St. Joseph Light & Power, Union Electric and UtiliCorp
United.
   The group will give member utilities a forum to discuss integration of
renewable energy into the state's electric power generation mix.
Technologies will include wind, clean biomass, photovoltaic, solar thermal
and low-head hydroelectric.
   MEURG will evaluate the potential benefits of renewable energy to
utilities and their customers and communicate renewable energy information
to the public. The university may also coordinate workshops, symposia and
seminars and seek federal and private funding for renewable energy
research.
   James Thompson, dean of the College of Engineering, said, ``We are
pleased to participate in this important initiative to explore renewable
energy resources for the state of Missouri. This collaborative effort has
strong potential to benefit the environment and conserve energy resources
by providing an efficient means for exploring renewable energy
resources.''
   Gary Huber, UE's representative in the group, said the university's
involvement offers research advantages. ``It also offers a vehicle for
leveraging research dollars and reducing costs associated with developing
renewable energy projects,'' he said.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

IP&L EYEING LANDFILL METHANE-FIRED PROJECT IN INDIANAPOLIS THIS YEAR

   Indianapolis Power & Light could give final approval this month for a
renewable energy project in which an internal combustion engine fired with
methane gas from a landfill would generate 3.5 MW of electricity.
   Dan Melvin, IP&L principal engineer in systems planning, said the
project is in the utility's budget for 1996. If final approval comes this
month, the project is expected to be in operation later in the year. Melvin
told Utility Environment Report., ``We looked at using used equipment. We
are now evaluating proposals from vendors.''
   IP&L included the landfill gas project as part of its ``short-term
action plan'' in an integrated resource plan it recently filed with the
Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission.
   In the IRP, the utility said the purpose of the project is to ``utilize
the favorable economics and environmental benefits that are sometimes
available with renewable energy systems.''
   The project would be located at the Southside landfill in Indianapolis.
The current landfill operator already burns some methane to heat a
greenhouse on the site. Under Indiana law, all landfills that accept leaves
and yard waste for disposal must be equipped with methane burners.
   Melvin estimated there is enough methane at the Southside landfill to
last for 10 to 15 years.
   The Southside landfill could set the stage for similar type projects by
IP&L. Melvin said IP&L is negotiating with Allison Engines, one of its
customers, to purchase an 11-MW gas turbine that could be installed at a
site by the late 1990s.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

STATE ENVIRONMENTAL OFFICIALS BACK ELEMENTS OF NHA RELICENSING PROPOSAL

   A national organization of state environmental officials said they
support key elements of a proposal by the National Hydropower Association
to revamp the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission's project relicensing
procedures, but said the NHA plan needs ``more explicit accommodations for
settlement provisions.''
   The Environmental Council of the States (ECOS), a national, non-profit
organization composed of environmental officials from 50 of the 55 U.S.
states, territories and the District of Columbia, praised the NHA proposal,
filed with FERC in September 1995.
   FERC in October called for comment on the proposal (Docket No. RM-16),
indicating it planned to undertake a rulemaking on relicensing issues. NHA
last month said a formal negotiated rulemaking would allow for timely
reform of the commission's relicensing procedures.
   ECOS praised the NHA proposal's emphasis on reducing the overall time
for reviewing FERC license applications, eliminating redundant reports and
involving all stakeholders at the earliest time possible in the
environmental review process.
   Nevertheless, ECOS said FERC should include provisions to assist states
in settling disputes among stakeholders.
   ``We strongly believe that more explicit accommodations for settlement
initiatives need to be provided by FERC beyond the encouragement given in
the NHA proposal,'' ECOS said, adding that many of its concerns likely
could be resolved by administrative reforms and would not necessarily
require additional rulemaking.
   ``Specifically, there should be provisions to ensure that formal
regulatory positions from involved agencies are not solicited by FERC on
draft [National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)] documents during ongoing
settlement negotiations,'' ECOS said. ``The outcome of negotiations can
greatly accelerate NEPA reviews. Conversely, the quest for reasonable
settlement terms could also be undermined by the continued pursuit of
formal regulatory positions that might constrain the flexibility of
participants in modifying their positions to work toward agreements.''
   FERC could include ``an escape clause'' that would allow the commission
to defer on regulatory steps during ongoing settlement negotiations, ECOS
said.
   ECOS agreed with NHA that the commission's ex parte rules on FERC
communications with participants in the licensing process are another area
in need of reform.
   ``Staff interpretations of ex parte constraints can be extreme and
result in a stifling of communications and early resolution of issues
between FERC and other agencies and participants,'' ECOS said.
   ``Other agencies of government, including our own, are sensitive to ex
parte concerns and yet are able to find ways to do business without
incurring these problems. Any reform proposal for hydropower licensing must
deal with this issue.''
   ECOS questioned the NHA provision that strongly encourages FERC to enter
into a memorandum of understanding with other agencies to coordinate input
on relicensing proceedings, saying that NHA makes no clear statement on why
such an MOU is necessary.
   Alternatively, ECOS suggested that regulations could mandate the
consolidation of federal agency input into hydropower relicensing in a
coordinated time frame.
   In addition, ECOS said the proposal would benefit from ``specific
provisions that facilitate comprehensive river basin planning by providing
financial and/or technical support.''
   ``Such planning is critical to providing a clear and reasonable context
to any cumulative impact assessment in river basins,'' ECOS continued. ``It
is essential to provide a vision of what agencies and the public want in a
river basin and not just the more traditional regulatory view of what they
don't want. This should be extremely valuable to power producers seeking to
secure their future in a given basin.''

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

WIS. UTILITIES OPPOSING BILL REQUIRING FREE SPARK GAS ISOLATORS FOR
FARMERS

   Wisconsin utilities are opposing a move by a state legislator to require
electric companies to provide spark gap isolators for farm customers who
raise livestock and believe they are experiencing stray voltage problems.
   Rep. Don Hasenohrl recently introduced Assembly Bill 725 that mandates
utilities to install spark gap isolators at no charge if a livestock farmer
hires an electrician who certifies that the farm electric system is wired
so that installation will not create ``a significant safety hazard'' to
persons, livestock or property at the site.
   The bill further provides that if the farmer requests it, the electric
utility must use spark gap isolators with a minimum breakdown voltage of
1,000 volts. A customer may bring action in any court to compel compliance
with these provisions, the bill reads.
   Isolation occurs when the physical connection is broken between the
neutral conductor of the utility system and the neutral conductor of the
farm's electrical system. The National Electric Safety Code states that if
this connection is broken, a device must be installed that reconnects the
conductors at low resistance to enhance safety if a fault occurs or
lightening strikes either the farm or utility system.
   According to Chuck DeNardo, senior engineer at Wisconsin Electric,
utilities oppose A.B. 725 on two major counts. First, it allows the
customer to initiate the decision to break the neutral connection without
evidence that the utility is contributing to the stray voltage problem and
without an understanding of what isolation means.
   Second, the bill eliminates use of lower-voltage reconnection devices
now used by utilities and replaces them with higher-voltage spark gap
isolators. DeNardo explains that the lower the reconnection voltage, the
safer the device. The ``electronic switching'' devices currently used by
utilities have reconnection voltages of about 25 volts, while the bill can
require spark gap isolators with minimum reconnection voltages of 1,000
volts.
   A spokeswoman for the Wisconsin Utilities Association said utilities in
the state have very serious concerns about the use of spark gap isolators
and will be opposing the proposed legislation. A.B. 725 was originally
referred to the Assembly Committee on Agriculture, but an effort is now
under way to have it transferred to the Committee on Environment and
Utilities, whose members are believed to have ``a greater appreciation for
the safety considerations involved,'' the association said.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

TUCSON ELECTRIC, NEW WORLD POWER JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECTS CHOSEN

   Projects developed by Tucson Electric and New World Power to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions in developing countries were among eight projects
selected to join the U.S. Initiative on Joint Implementation (USIJI), a
pilot program aimed at finding cost-effective ways to cut emissions and
promote sustainable development.
   Joint implementation, in which companies from developed nations team
with partners in developing countries to reduce emissions, is seen as a key
weapon in the Clinton administration's program for reducing U.S. emissions.
While participating companies may not now claim credit against future
requirements for emission reductions achieved overseas, U.S. treaty
negotiators hope to include amendments that will allow credit for such
projects.
   The eight projects, announced Dec. 19, 1995 in Washington by
undersecretary of state for global affairs Tim Wirth, represent private
sector investments that could top $200-million when the projects are fully
implemented.
   They were selected after a technical review and evaluation of how they
conformed with U.S. joint implementation guidelines by a panel of senior
officials from the Dept. of Energy, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
and six other federal agencies.
   This is the second round of projects to be included in the USIJI
program, which began in October 1993 as part of President Clinton's climate
change action plan. A first round of projects, representing more than
$40-million in private investment, was selected in February 1995 (UER, 17
Feb '95, 10).
   New World Power and its two Costa Rican partners will build a 16-MW
hydropower plant using the Puerto Viejo River and Quebradon Creek in
northern Costa Rica. The project will displace thermal units that burn
high-sulfur diesel fuels, bunker fuels and other fossil fuels.
   New World Power will participate in a second project, also in Costa
Rica, to develop a 20-MW wind power plant. The project will displace
fossil-fuel fired generation, and power will be sold to the Costa Rican
Institute of Electricity.
   Nations Energy, a subsidiary of Tucson Electric, will participate in a
project to develop a 10- to 15-MW biomass plant in Guaimaca, Honduras.
Sawmill and logging residues, currently burned in an uncontrolled manner
and left to decompose on the forest floor, will serve as the fuel source,
making the use of trees for fuel unnecessary and not cost-effective.
   The International Utility Partnership, an industrywide initiative, also
will participate in the Honduras project, whose power will be sold to the
Empresa Nacional de Energia Electrica, the Honduran national utility.
   The other projects selected are a carbon sequestration project in Costa
Rica, a geothermal plant in Nicaragua, a second wind plant in Costa Rica, a
forestry management project in Costa Rica, and a project to capture
fugitive methane emissions in Russia.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

CANADA DECIDES TO CONTINUE VOLUNTARY GREENHOUSE GAS PROGRAM UNTIL NOV. '96

   Canadian officials have decided to continue using a voluntary program to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions, despite a recent plea from the federal
Dept. of the Environment for more aggressive measures to ensure that Canada
stabilizes emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000.
   Canada's greenhouse gas program, called the Climate Change Voluntary
Challenge and Registry (VCR),was launched in 1994 by the federal and
provincial governments and is operated by Natural Resources Canada.
   Resistance to mandatory emission reduction measures is headed by the
province of Alberta, the heart of Canada's fossil-fuel industry, which
emits 30% of Canada's greenhouse gases. The three major utilities in
Alberta strongly favor voluntary approaches over traditional regulatory
plans.
   At a meeting late last year of Canada's federal and provincial
environment and energy ministers in Edmonton, Alberta, officials decided to
continue Canada's reliance on the VCR until November 1996, when ministers
will reassess the greenhouse gas emission picture. This is even though the
federal National Action Program forecasts that emissions will increase 13%
by year 2000 under the VCR.
   At the meeting, federal environment minister Sheila Copps argued that
``without a stronger plan from provinces like Alberta, we're not going to
be there. Alberta's plan is not going to work.''
   But Ty Lund, Alberta's minister of environmental protection, argued that
Alberta was the first province to register a plan with the VCR, and that
firms responsible for 70% of Alberta's greenhouse gases have either joined
the VCR or declared their intent to enroll.
   Alberta energy minister Anne McLellan added that the VCR is rapidly
gaining industry support, including from the Canadian Electrical
Association and the trade associations of the petroleum, natural gas and
coal industries. Initial responses to the VCR have been ``very
encouraging,'' she said, noting that over 475 companies and institutions
have expressed a commitment to participate.
   In the absence of any mandatory control program, Canada's greenhouse gas
emissions have increased by 4.9% from 577 million metric tons in 1990 to
605 million metric tons in 1994. The largest increases were in Saskatchewan
(24%) and Alberta (15%).
   The coal-fired plants of TransAlta Utilities, Alberta Power and Edmonton
Power account for 35% of the provincial emission total. TransAlta, Canada's
largest investor-owned utility with 3,676 MW of coal-fired capacity,
announced a plan last year to cut greenhouse gases to 1990 levels by 2000.
The plan is considered the most advanced in Canada.
   Gordon Lambert, TransAlta's director of sustainable development,
acknowledged that achieving the stabilization goal will be challenging for
TransAlta Corp., the owner of TransAlta and TransAlta Energy. This is
because greenhouse gas emissions from TransAlta Corp.'s Canadian
operations, which include two natural gas-fired, combined-cycle
cogeneration plants in Ontario, are forecasted to increase up to 15% over
1990 levels by 2000 to meet growing customer demand.
   TransAlta Corp. expects to achieve its stabilization target from
renewable energy purchases (13%), customer efficiencies (16%), internal
efficiencies (32%) and domestic and international offsets (41%).
   But Robert Hornung, climate change director of the Alberta-based Pembina
Institute for Appropriate Development, claimed that TransAlta is buying
renewable energy only because such purchases are required under Alberta's
Small Power Research and Development Act. Customer demand-side management
programs are behind schedule and are being scaled back. The agricultural
offsets planned by TransAlta in Saskatchewan are ``not credible,'' added
Hornung.
   The utility's Saskatchewan Soil Enhancement Project involves a
soil-tilling technique using ``low-disturbance direct seeding'' to increase
the carbon dioxide storage capacity of the soil. TransAlta claims the
project can offset up to 1.1 million metric tons of CO2.
   However, Hornung argued that the same logic should apply to TransAlta's
extensive coal mining operations and wetland drainage, which release
greenhouse gases to the atmosphere but are not included in the utility's
greenhouse gas inventory. Moreover, no nation has yet quantified the
changes in soil carbon content arising from human activities.
   TransAlta also is looking for a 13% contribution from international
offsets, which Canada cannot count toward meeting its commitment to
stabilize greenhouse gases, Hornung said. International offsets before the
year 2000 are not credited under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change.
   In general, Hornung said the VCR is flawed because governments have not
implemented supportive regulatory and fiscal policies.
   Nonetheless, Lambert said that by submitting an action plan, TransAlta
Corp. is making a ``visible commitment to Canada's international obligation
to address greenhouse gases.''
   The Pembina Institute examined 189 VCR submissions by corporations and
governments and reviewed 73 action plans. The review determined that 80% of
companies failed to provide the basic information needed to assess the
credibility of their plans; 37% did not provide a greenhouse gas inventory;
and 72% did not project emission levels by 2000.
   Saskatchewan Power, also a coal-based utility, emits 35% of the
province's total greenhouse emissions. SaskPower's system has 1,997 MW of
coal-fired capacity, but Saskatchewan has not yet developed a CO2
stabilization plan.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

TVA PCB WASTE EXCHANGE

   The Tennessee Valley Authority said it was able to save $20,000 in
disposal fees for polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) wastes under an innovative
exchange agreement with the Dept. of Energy's Oak Ridge weapons plant.
   Under the deal, TVA transferred 75,000 gallons of oil with slight PCB
contamination to Oak Ridge's K-25 plant site where it will be used to rinse
three 22,500 gallon tanks that had previously contained PCB wastes and are
now being decontaminated.
   Since the PCB level in the TVA oil is much lower than what had been in
the tanks, flushing with the TVA oil will be a useful initial step in the
decontamination process.
   According to Oak Ridge officials, without the oil from TVA they would
have had to spend up to $80,000 for new oil that would end up becoming
contaminated.
   Oak Ridge has a toxic waste incinerator at the K-25 site that is
licensed to destroy PCBs. It will eventually dispose of the TVA oil in the
facility at no extra cost to TVA or itself.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

N.Y. CHANGES OFFSET RULES

   The New York Dept. of Environmental Conservation has changed two rules
affecting the use of nitrogen oxide and volatile organic compound
``offsets.''
The first change, which amends Subpart 231-2 and Part 621 of New York's
Title 6 regulations, requires applicants for permits to construct air
contamination sources, such as power plants, to identify the source of the
NOx and VOC emission offsets prior to issuance of the final permit to
construct. Previously, applicants had to supply the information at the time
the application was submitted to the department.
   The DEC also has proposed extending the deadline for reporting
reductions of NOx and VOCs. Reductions prior to Oct. 14, 1994 would have to
be reported by Oct. 14, 1996, instead of 1995, as originally planned.
Reductions after Oct. 14, 1994 would have to be reported within two years.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

PSE&G BERGEN REPOWERING

   Public Service Electric & Gas expects significant emission reductions
and water benefits at its 650-MW Bergen Generating Station, which went back
into service with more efficient equipment.
   The station, built in 1959 to burn coal, was converted to oil and gas in
1970. In the $360-million repowering project, four combustion turbines were
installed, along with a waste-heat recovery boiler that uses heat from the
turbines to produce more power.
   Although the station will produce an additional 40 MW, nitrogen oxide
emissions will be reduced by 96%, or 10,000 tons/year, while carbon
monoxide will be cut by 63%, and carbon dioxide by 30%. PSE&G already is
marketing its NOx ``credits'' from this and other projects to businesses in
New Jersey and elsewhere in the region (UER, 9 June, 1).
   Along with the air benefits, PSE&G will cut water use and eliminate
thermal discharge at Bergen. The station will use treated waste water from
a county sewage treatment plant instead of water from Overpeck Creek, and
it will recycle the waste water back to the treatment plant instead of
discharging it into the Hackensack River.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

VA. SCC COMPETITION PROBE

   Virginia's State Corporation Commission said that as part of its formal
investigation into electric power industry restructuring, it will examine
its environmental policies ``to determine if they are compatible with
desirable competition'' (Case No. TUE950089).
   The SCC said its probe, which could lead to a plan for expanding
competition among utilities and other power suppliers, will include ``an
analysis of whether increased competition will impact a utility's
willingness to take appropriate steps to address environmental concerns.''
Environmentalists in other states moving toward competition have expressed
concerns about the impact those changes would have on conservation efforts,
the development of renewables and the use of dirtier coal-fired plants to
generate cheap power.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
January 5, 1996   

EX-KAN. MUNI OFFICIAL SENTENCED

   The former superintendent of the Stafford Municipal utility in Kansas
has been sentenced to six months of home confinement and fined $3,000 in
connection with the illegal dumping of nine capacitors filled with
polychlorinated biphenyls.
   William Kirkpatrick originally was indicted on two counts by a federal
grand jury, one involving ordering the illegal disposal and a second of
failure to report it (Criminal No. 94-10094-01) (UER, 2 Sept '94, 10). The
former charge was dropped after he pleaded guilty to the latter, the U.S.
Attorney's office in Wichita said.
   The original charges carried a maximum penalty of four years in prison
and a $275,000 fine. The revised charges could have cost Kirkpatrick
$250,000 and three years in prison.
   A spokesman for the U.S. Attorney said Kirkpatrick will be
electronically monitored during his home confinement.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-16</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B019-354</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev41.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002445 text/html 50290
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:22:16 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:36 GMT
Content-length: 50101
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev41.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
WASTE BUSINESS via NewsNet <BR>
January 3, 1996   <BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>USA, WESTERN SEEK TO MERGE; WOULD BE 3RD LARGEST SOLID WASTE FIRM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(515 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>HOUSE GETS LEGISLATION TO CREATE NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR ENVIRONMENT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(705 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGIES CORP. SAYS ACQUISITION IS PENDING.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(119 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>MFRI ACQUIRES ASSETS OF SZE, GERMAN PIPELINE LEAK DETECTION SYSTEM FIRM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(183 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>OHIO EPA ISSUES DRAFT SOLID WASTE PERMIT FOR AMERICAN LANDFILL EXPANSION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1156 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>BABCOCK & WILCOX POWER BUYS ASSETS OF JOY ENVIRO TECHNOLOGIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(262 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>EPA PICKS ECOLOGY & ENVIRO FOR UP TO $216 MILLION IN REGIONAL CONTRACTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(299 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>HI-RISE PURCHASING MAREN TO GAIN MANUFACTURER, DISTRIBUTION NETWORK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(203 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>N.Y.C. PLANS TO SEEK BIDS IN JAN. FOR BUILDER OF FRESH KILLS SLURRY WALL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(482 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>FERNALD VITRIFICATION PILOT DELAYED BY DESIGN, PROCUREMENT TROUBLES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(441 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>HAZWASTE MONITOR</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>HAZ WASTE BUSINESS MONITOR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(221 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>SOLID WASTE MONITOR</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>SOLID WASTE BUSINESS MONITOR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(226 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FINANCIAL PROJECTION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>PRINS RECYCLING CORP. EXPECTS RECORD LOSS IN FOURTH QUARTER.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(214 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INTERNATIONAL</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>GERAGHTY & MILLER AND PARENT, HEIDEMIJ IN OVERSEAS `ACQUISITION MODE'</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(143 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ACQUISITION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>RECYCLING INDUSTRIES DOUBLES BUSINESS WITH PURCHASE OF ANGLO METAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(347 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RFP</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>MONTGOMERY-OTSEGO-SCHOHARIE, N.Y., TO ISSUE RFP FOR SOLID WASTE MANAGER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(418 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RADWASTE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>DOE'S NIAGARA FALLS RADWASTE STORAGE SITE SEEN POSING LONG-TERM RISK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(684 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
WASTE BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996   

USA, WESTERN SEEK TO MERGE; WOULD BE 3RD LARGEST SOLID WASTE FIRM

By:
By Alexandra Rudenko

   The boards of directors of USA Waste Services Inc. and Western Waste
Industries have approved the terms of a merger that would create the third
largest waste management firm in North America.
   Shareholders will be voting this spring and, pending required approvals,
a closing is planned by May 1, 1996.
   Officials of the two firms have been ``long-term friends,'' and held
ongoing discussions for the past 12 months. During ``due diligence'' over
the past 30 days, senior management from Dallas-based USA Waste has ended
up sleeping at the house of Western Waste Chairman Kosti Shirvanian, one
official told analysts.
   This means there are few surprises in store. The chances are slight
that something might jeopardize the negotiations as happened several years
ago when Browning Ferris Industries considered buying Western Waste and
then changed its mind, USA executives assured the investors.
   Following the merger announcement USA Waste Chairman John E. Drury,
Shirvanian and other senior management of the two firms attempted to fly to
Boston to outline their deal to the investment community. However, a
winter storm interfered and the group hurriedly rescheduled meetings for
two days in New York City. Here again the bad weather caused a cancellation
of the second day's activities as the executives rushed back home to more
temperate climates.
   The merger agreement provides that the stockholders of Western Waste
will receive 1.5 shares of USA Waste common stock for each Western Waste
common share. USA Waste has received an irrevocable proxy from Shirvanian,
who is Western Waste's largest shareholder, to vote his shares in favor of
the merger. These shares represent approximately 31% of Western Waste's
shares outstanding.
   USA Waste already owns approximately 4.5% of the Western Waste
outstanding shares, with such shares scheduled to be canceled at the
effective time of the merger.
   Based upon Western Waste's approximately 16-million shares and
equivalents outstanding and existing indebtedness, the merger would be
valued at about $525-million.
   Drury will retain his position as chairman and CEO of USA Waste, and
Shirvanian will become a vice chairman of the board of USA Waste at the
time of the merger.
   The combined companies have annualized revenues of over $800-million and
total assets in excess of $1-billion.
   After the merger, USA Waste will have 61 collection operations, 35
landfills, 24 transfer stations and five recycling operations, serving over
1-million customers in 23 states.
   Drury said, ``We expect the merger to be additive to USA Waste's
earnings per share because of cost savings and operational improvements
expected to be realized by the combination.
   ``Savings should come from combining operations and reducing
administrative and staffing cost. There is also potential to grow and
expand in and around Western Waste's existing markets in California, Texas,
Florida and in other states,'' said Drury.
   At Smith Barney, vice president Leone Young viewed the merger as
positive and upgraded the USA Waste from an ``outperform'' to a ``buy.''
It's a good strategic move. They have a very experienced and sizable
management team. At worst it will be earnings neutral,'' she said.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
WASTE BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996   

HOUSE GETS LEGISLATION TO CREATE NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR ENVIRONMENT

By:
KH

   Rep. Jim Saxton (R-N.J.), chairman of the House Resources subcommittee
on Fisheries, Wildlife and Oceans has introduced into the House of
Representatives a bill that would create a National Institute for the
Environment (NIE).
   Similar legislation was introduced previously in 1994 in the 103rd
Congress, said an official with the Committee for the NIE, an organization
of more than 9,000 scientists, business leaders and environmentalists that
is backing creation of the NIE in its quest to improve the scientific basis
for environmental decision making.
   The institute would be an independent, non-regulatory federal entity
designed to serve as a single source of scientific information and research
on the environment, said the committee official. Its proposed budget for
its first year is $130 million, but proponents maintain that no additional
federal money will be needed because of the elimination of ``duplicative,
outdated federal programs'' that would be replaced by the NIE, the official
added.
   Although a definite timetable has not been set, Senate Minority Leader
Tom Daschle (D-S.D.) is expected to introduce the Senate version of NIE
legislation early this year, possibly in January. House hearings have also
been tentatively slated for this month before the Saxton subcommittee.
   The committee official was candid in admitting she could not confidently
predict the likelihood of passage for the NIE. However, she noted that the
NIE's ``diverse supporters'' include House Speaker Newt Gingrich (R-Ga.),
who had helped sponsor the legislation in its previous incarnation.
   Saxton, meanwhile, said: ``The NIE proposal has been truly close to my
heart for over five years. ``There have been changes in the political
arena which make the atmosphere on Capitol Hill more conducive to a `smart
government' initiative such as the NIE. The NIE will make government work
better, cheaper and more efficiently with smarter regulations and sound
science. It's time to move environmental policy out of the moody political
spectrum where it is now, and get it back on science where it belongs,''
Saxton said.
   Dr. Stephen Hubbell, chair of the Committee for the NIE and a professor
of ecology at Princeton University, along with Henry Howe of the University
of Illinois, Chicago, have been credited with the creation of the NIE
effort, which began with a meeting of 50 scientists, environmentalists and
policy experts in 1989.
   ``We have environmental groups with their agendas, industry with their
agendas and regulatory agencies with their agendas, but we don't have a
credible, independent science agency where people can go and say, `What do
we really know about this problem?' '' Hubbell said.
   The House bill calls for the NIE to assess the state of knowledge on
environmental issues and competitively award peer-reviewed research grants
at academic institutions, private companies, government laboratories and
non-profit organizations, said the committee official. The NIE will
support education and training to help prepare future generations of
environmental scientists, she added. However, to maintain credible,
politically neutral science, the NIE will have no regulatory role, nor will
it operate laboratories, she stressed.
   The NIE effort does appear to have a large and broad legion of
supporters in addition to such influential legislators as Gingrich and
Daschle. These backers include such leading environmental companies as WMX
Technologies, Browning-Ferris Industries, Safety-Kleen Corp., ENVIRON Corp.
and Law Cos. Group; corporate giants such as AT&T, Apple Computer, Monsanto
Co., ITT Corp., Amoco Corp. and Chase Manhattan Bank; and environmental
groups such as the Environmental Defense Fund and the Sierra Club.
   Following are some of the programs that have been suggested for
inclusion in the NIE:
   -- Environmental Protection Agency: Stratospheric Ozone Depletion
Research; Exploratory Grants and Centers; Science to Achieve Results (STAR)
program; Environmental Monitoring and Assessment Program (EMAP); Ecological
Risk and Assessment-Reducing Uncertainty in Ecological Risk Assessment
program; Education, Outreach and Information.
   -- National Biological Service: Ecosystem Research; Information
Transfer.
   -- Department of Energy: Bureau of Environmental Research; Global
Change initiative.
   -- National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration: Coastal Ocean
Program (COP); National Sea Grant College Program; National Undersea
Research Program; Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the
Environment (GLOBE).
   -- Redirection of money: Tennessee Valley Authority Environmental
Research Center; Clean Coal Technology initiative; Federal Construction
Projects, including the Bay City EPA facility and new EPA laboratories.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
WASTE BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996   

ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGIES CORP. SAYS ACQUISITION IS PENDING.

By:
KH

   The Lakewood, N.J.-based company said late last week that it had reached
an agreement in principal to acquire an unnamed privately-held firm ``that
would complement the existing operations'' of ETC.
   As Waste Business was going to press, an ETC official would say only
that the transaction was subject to a number of conditions, including
satisfactory completion of due diligence, the preparation and execution of
definitive agreements and the approval of the stockholders of both
companies.
   The unnamed acquisition target is projecting about $7 million in
revenues in 1995 and no significant indebtedness, said the ETC official. 
Its management will be incorporated into the management team of
Environmental Technologies, he added.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
WASTE BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996   

MFRI ACQUIRES ASSETS OF SZE, GERMAN PIPELINE LEAK DETECTION SYSTEM FIRM

   MFRI has acquired for an undisclosed amount of cash the assets of Kiel,
Germany-based SZE Spezial Electronik Hagenuk GmbH, a firm involved in the
development, marketing and servicing of pipeline leak detection systems,
said an MFRI spokesman.
   SZE, a subsidiary of Hanover, Germany-based Preussag, AG, posts annual
sales of about $3.6 million, he said.
   Why did Niles, Ill.-based MFRI buy SZE? ``MFRI has been providing
private label pipeline leak detection systems to the company for four years
and we have developed an understanding and appreciation of the growth
potential of the European market it serves,'' explained David Unger, MFRI
chairman, president and chief executive officer.
   ``We will expand the MFRI product line available to European customers
and aggressively seek to increase our market penetration. At the same
time, we will make the [SZE proprietary pipeline leak detection system]
available to our U.S. customers,'' said Unger.
   MFRI is a vertically integrated manufacturer and marketer of filter bags
under the Midwesco Filter name and specialty piping systems and electronic
leak detection and location systems marketed under the Perma-Pipe name.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
WASTE BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996   

OHIO EPA ISSUES DRAFT SOLID WASTE PERMIT FOR AMERICAN LANDFILL EXPANSION

By:
AR

   The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency has decided to issue a draft
solid waste permit to American Landfill for its plan to expand by
approximately 20-million cubic yards over 130 acres.
   A public information session and hearing is scheduled for January 10. 
When the expansion permit is issued the landfill will be able to accept
8,000 tons per day of waste, and have about 7.8-years of capacity,
according to the agency.
   The subsidiary of American Waste Systems began seeking permission for
this expansion in January 1991, and triggered a lengthy dispute with the
agency over environmental compliance issues. This was resolved in an
agreement announced in October 1995 covering all outstanding compliance
issues at the facility.
   According to the EPA official, the agency determined during a facility
compliance review that the operators had exceeded the maximum depth, height
and lateral limit for solid waste disposal as authorized in the landfill
permit. These violations increased the capacity of the landfill by at
least 2,424,342 cubic yards.
   Also it was observed that American was excavating and removing waste
tires from a closed portion of the landfill. These tires were placed on
other portions of the landfill and at the tire storage area for the
monofill. American failed to obtain prior agency approval or follow the
required rules for such activity, he said.
   In addition, American stored tires at the monofill and began
construction of the monofill prior to obtaining agency authorization. 
American Landfill was assessed a fine of $269,755 for environmental
violations at the landfill and tire monofill facility, he said.
   Under the permit granted by the agency to American in October 1995, the
company agreed to install an explosive gas extraction system. This system
was not required by the prior permit and will be an environmentally
beneficial project because it will extract potentially explosive gas from
the existing landfill, said a company official.
   As part of this environmental improvement, American was granted a
1,639,57 cubic yard increase in waste disposal capacity on top of the
northern portion of the facility. In addition, the permit allowed American
to relocate 625,815 cubic yards of waste from the center of the facility to
the northern portion of the landfill, said the state EPA.
   According to a statement issued by the Warren, Ohio-based firm, in order
to issue the expansion permit requested in 1991, the Ohio EPA was required
to perform a review of ALI's operating compliance under its existing
permit issued in 1985. During this review of the original application for
the 1985 permit, the Ohio EPA alleged that ALI was not authorized to
excavate soils at the landfill to the extent it had done and was not
required to install five feet of additional clay liner to the base of the
facility.
   ALI noted that the excavation and liner installation had occurred with
the full knowledge of the Ohio EPA since the issuance of the 1985 permit. 
However, on November 21, 1994, ALI received a notice from the Ohio EPA
alleging violations of its permit and related regulations. And the agency
asserted that ALI had significantly less remaining disposal capacity under
its 1985 permit than previously calculated by the firm, and very limited
capacity immediately available for waste disposal, explained the
statement.
   Additionally, ALI received a letter from the Ohio EPA alleging that its
April 1995 financial assurance deposit of $2.4-million was insufficient. 
Furthermore, the Ohio EPA said that the expansion permit could not be
issued until, among other things, ALI was operating in compliance or was on
a legally enforceable schedule that would result in compliance.
   During ensuing months, ALI provided information to the Ohio EPA in
support of its position. The subsidiary pointed out that hundreds of
inspections and compliance reviews that had previously been performed did
not allege any violation or raise any concern regarding ALI's excavation
activities. Additionally, it provided an opinion from a third-party
consultant who reviewed the 1985 permit, the application and other relevant
information.
   In mid-September, ALI recognized that the Ohio EPA would not be willing
to change its position, said the statement. It believed that if an
agreement with the Ohio EPA could not be reached, years of litigation would
ensue and at a minimum the expansion permit would not be issued until such
litigation was resolved.
   ``Although ALI continues to disagree with the Ohio EPA regarding
excavation depths and remaining capacity at the landfill, in light of the
time, costs and risks inherent in litigation and ALI's confidence in its
receipt of the expansion permit, ALI proceeded to negotiate so that the
expansion permit could be issued in an expedited manner,'' said the
statement.
   This resulted in the October agreement in which ALI agreed to comply
with the agency's interpretation of the 1985 permit and therefore has
agreed to excavate to depths consistent with such interpretation. The
agreement also provides for a schedule of compliance with respect to
financial assurance which ALI estimates to be approximately $10.9-million. 
The orders also address the management of scrap tires stored at and
received by ALI at the landfill and its tire monofill, said the statement.
   As a result of the agreement, ALI's total capacity is significantly less
than the 14,900,000 cubic yards ALI believed existed at the facility as of
the end of 1994, said the statement. Because of such reduced capacity, ALI
incurred a charge of approximately $9.2-million during the third quarter to
reflect the accrual of closure and post-closure monitoring costs based upon
the remaining capacity of the landfill.
   According to AWS's third quarter statement. the company incurred a net
loss of $5.6-million, or $0.19 per share, compared with net income of
$998,000, or $0.03 per share in the third quarter of 1994. The $9.2
million charge was recorded as $6.1-million net of tax or $0.20 per share.
   For the first nine months of 1995, the company incurred a net loss of
$5.4-million, or $0.18 per share, compared with net income of $1,049,000 or
$0.04 per share for the first nine months of 1994.
   In comparing the first nine months of 1995 with the first nine months of
1994, net operating revenues of the technical environmental services groups
decreased primarily due to a decrease in the level of environmental
engineering and remediation services performed.
   The company's disposal operations, including disposal brokerage,
recorded higher net operating revenues for the first nine months of 1995
compared with the first nine months of the prior year primarily due to a
significant increase in the disposal brokerage operations, partially offset
by lower disposal revenues resulting from a reduction in average disposal
rates and a decline in the volume of waste accepted by the company's
landfills.
   AWS, traded on the New York Stock Exchange, provides integrated waste
management and environmental services, including disposal, transportation
and transportation-related services, disposal brokerage and management
services, environmental engineering, site assessment, analytical laboratory
and remediation services to industrial, commercial, municipal and
governmental customers.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
WASTE BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996   

BABCOCK & WILCOX POWER BUYS ASSETS OF JOY ENVIRO TECHNOLOGIES

By:
By Steven Lang

   Babcock & Wilcox Power Generation Group has bought, for an undisclosed
sum, the assets of air services firm Joy Environmental Technologies from
Harnischfeger Industries, a diversified international holding company, said
a spokesman. Joy has offices in Houston, Texas and Malvern, Pa. as well as
a warehouse facility in Honeybrook, Pa., he said.
   The deal expands B&W's line of environmental equipment products,
including acid mist precipitators, electrostatic precipitators and dry
flue-gas desulfurization systems and baghouses, the spokesman explained. 
These products will be transferred to B&W's Power Generation Group, which
is based in Barberton, Ohio, he said.
   The agreement also calls for responsibility for ash handling systems to
be transferred to Lancaster, Ohio-based Diamond Power Specialty Co., a
division of B&W that supplies boiler cleaning and diagnostic equipment and
services to the power generation industry.
   ``This acquisition is excellent for B&W. It diversifies our
environmental product line and improves our ability to meet the full scope
of our customers demands,'' said Walt Boomer, B&W Power Generation Group
president. ``It is a particularly good fit for Diamond Power because Joy's
ash handling business gives Diamond an additional product line. We expect
that this will expand Diamond's market potential quite dramatically.''
   ``Merging the best of Joy's technology into ours will not only increase
our reach in the environmental equipment industry, it will also help us as
we continue to develop new environmental products for the future,'' he
said.
   The Babcock & Wilcox Power Generation Group is an operating unit of
energy services company McDermott International.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
WASTE BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996   

EPA PICKS ECOLOGY & ENVIRO FOR UP TO $216 MILLION IN REGIONAL CONTRACTS

   Ecology and Environment, Inc. (EEI) has been awarded up to $216 million
in five multi-year regional contracts over five years to provide the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency with support for its oil and hazardous
waste spill response, removal and prevention programs, according to company
officials.
   Three of the contracts were awarded in late December and two in the
middle of last month. All five of the ``level-of-effort, cost-plus-fee''
contracts, dubbed START for Superfund Technical Assessment and Response
Teams, are effective Jan. 1, 1996 and will contribute the revenues and
earnings of EEI's current fiscal year ending July 31, 1996, said a company
official.
   In the latest announcement, EEI was selected to provide EPA with
2,532,000 technical labor hours for Regions V, VI and VII. With all
options, the combined contracts could total $158 million, said an EEI
official.
   The Chicago-based Region V contract calls for delivery of up to 1,128,00
technical labor hours and totals $68 million with all options; the
Dallas-based Region VI deal calls for delivery of up to 887,000 technical
labor hours and could total as much as $60 million; and the Kansas
City-based Region VII award could involve 517,000 hours and total $30
million with all options, said an EEI official.
   The other two regional EPA contracts that could be worth as much as $58
million to the Buffalo area, N.Y.-based firm, and involve up to 981,000
technical labor hours to support the agency's oil and hazwaste spill
programs in Regions IX and X, he said.
   The San Francisco-based Region IX contract totals $34 million with all
options, while the Seattle-based Region X contract totals $24 million with
all options. Options amount to about half of the total hours and revenue
over the five-year performance period, said the spokesman.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
WASTE BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996   

HI-RISE PURCHASING MAREN TO GAIN MANUFACTURER, DISTRIBUTION NETWORK

   Hi-Rise Recycling Systems, with close to 50 employees and $3.25 million
in annual sales, is acquiring Maren Engineering Corp., a company double its
size, according to Brad Hacker, Hi-Rise controller.
   Chicago-based Maren--a manufacturer, servicer and distributor of baling
and recycling equipment--posts $7.5 million in annual sales and employs 95,
Hacker said.
   Why did Miami-based Hi-Rise, which provides recycling systems for
multi-story buildings, acquire Maren? ``It's a good buy for two reasons,''
Hacker told Waste Business. ``It gives us a manufacturing facility for our
product--the hi-rise system. And it gives us a distribution network.''
   In addition, Maren is now positioned to bring its product line further
into the recycling market with Hi-Rise's background, contacts and
international distribution network, said Floyd Tuominen, Hi-Rise chief
operating officer.
   Maren's client lists includes Coca Cola-USA, Georgia Pacific, Kimberly
Clark, TRW Automotive and Dunlop Tire Corp.
   Hi-Rise anticipates closing the Maren deal during the first quarter of
1996.
   Meanwhile, the firm is looking for one additional company to acquire
this year in its plans to develop a national presence, said Hacker. If all
planned acquisitions are completed, he expects the company will record 1996
billings of about $20 million and have 135 employees.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
WASTE BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996   

N.Y.C. PLANS TO SEEK BIDS IN JAN. FOR BUILDER OF FRESH KILLS SLURRY WALL

By:
By Anne Magnuson

   An $80 million contract to construct 13,000 linear feet of slurry wall
at Fresh Kills Landfill, Staten Island, will be let out to bid in January
by the New York City Department of Sanitation, city officials said last
week.
   Contractors have been watching for the long-awaited request for
proposals for the slurry wall contract, which will include the installation
of leachate collection systems at the landfill's two active disposal
mounds.
   Meanwhile, a $45 million contract won by SCS Engineers, Nyack, N.Y., is
currently utilizing six million square feet of geocomposite, 10 million
square feet of HDPE, and 2 million cubic yards of fill to close 237 acres
at Fresh Kills.
   As part of these colossal projects at what is believed to be the world's
largest landfill, a gas extraction system is under installation by SCS
Engineers. Sixty-five gas wells are being imbedded on the landfill's
closed 100-foot-high mound and 108 gas wells on the closed 140-foot-high
mound, said Duane Seaman, the landfill's project manager and designer from
1992 to 1995 when he was with SCS Engineers. Seaman is now senior project
manager, Roy F. Weston of N.Y., Valhalla.
   Closure of the two active mounds, together processing 14,000 t/d of
barged N.Y.C. waste, is not expected until 2015. These mounds are
eventually to stand at 200 feet and 460 feet, the highest point on Staten
Island.
   The SCS Engineers closure project began last February and is slated for
completion in June. The magnitude of the job staggers the imagination when
considering the amount of dirt for the cap that is being hauled from New
Jersey and the city's five boroughs. Seaman said 700 trucks a day arrive,
about one per minute, carrying soil costing $6/cubic yard to $20/cubic yard
depending on its application.
   The caps, when completed, will contain smooth HDPE on the flat areas and
textured liner and geocomposite on the slopes, not to exceed 3:1. A
two-foot barrier protective layer consisting of a variety of soils will
overlay the plastic, to be topped with six inches of top soil seeded later
with cool seasonal grasses and 4 pounds/acre of wildflowers. ``Somewhere
out there are 237 acres of top soil we will have to locate,'' Seaman said.
   SCS Engineers has designed a nearly unique gas duct venting system for
the closure mounds that precludes the purchase of expensive sand. Instead
of methane migrating through a costly porous layer, the gas will travel
along interconnected trenches to gas wells and vents. ``Over 380,000 cubic
yards of sand would be a lot of sand,'' Seaman noted.
   The overall gas extraction system, eventually to collect methane from
the two closure mounds and the two active mounds, will form networks to
flow into one main for use in a manner not yet determined. Selecting a
concessionaire to complete this construction is under negotiation at DOS.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
WASTE BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996   

FERNALD VITRIFICATION PILOT DELAYED BY DESIGN, PROCUREMENT TROUBLES

By:
By Mary Powers

   Design and procurement problems with the vitrification plant at the
Department of Energy's former uranium enrichment facility at Fernald have
delayed its startup 17 months, but officials said it will not delay the
10-year cleanup of the entire site.
   The pressure of Superfund-imposed deadlines forced the fast-track design
and construction of the $21 million vitrification pilot plant. Pieces of
the project were designed in parallel that needed to be designed in
sequence, say DOE and FERMCO officials. ``As a result, we had to retrofit
the melter into the facility,'' said John Reising, DOE associate director
for environmental restoration.
   The decision to vitrify the radioactive materials in four cement silos
was signed last December, which started the CERCLA clock ticking. FERMCO
had 15 months to start remediation. The first glitch came when DOE had
trouble getting bids for a melter with operating temperatures of up to 1450
degrees C for the pilot plant. The RFP was revised down from a five ton/day
to a one ton/day furnace, said Nina Akgunduz, DOE's project manager. The
melter supplier is GTS Durateck Inc., Columbia, Md., with technical support
from the Vitreous State Laboratory at Catholic University in Washington,
D.C.
   The original operating schedule anticipated 100% efficiency from the
pilot plant, which could have completed test burns in three months. But the
schedule was revised after a team of specialists from Europe that operate a
similar facility there said a more realistic estimate would be 30%
efficiency. ``That adds another nine months to the test burn,'' says
Michael Skriba, FERMCO's project manager for the pilot. The pilot is
scheduled to begin operations in late February.
   Data collected from the pilot will be used to design the $200 million
full-scale vitrification plant, which will handle up to 30 tons of material
a day. Reising says one lesson learned so far is to include operations and
construction people early on in the process. ``Design problems would have
been caught earlier,'' he said.
   The design and construction of that plant is also on a fast track, with
the first construction package to be awarded in March. The early design and
construction will be limited to site preparation, water, power and other
standard engineering pieces. Parsons is the design contractor for both
vitrification plants.
   Complete vitrification of 9,700 tons of contaminated materials in the
silos will take three and a half years.
   Meanwhile, a FERMCO spokesman said work on all contaminated areas at
Fernald have shifted out of the investigation stage.
   ``It looks like 1996 will be the year for design. All key remediation
decisions were made in 1995.''

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
WASTE BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996   

HAZ WASTE BUSINESS MONITOR

HAZ WASTE BUSINESS MONITOR

   Editor's Note:  As part of our new format, we are updating the hazwaste
business monitor table. Note that the companies and the unweighted hazwaste
average are presented just as before. However, for the hazwaste ``equal
dollar'' index we are, in effect, ``starting over'' by initially weighting
each company with $1,000 in the index. This will allow easy investment
comparison over time with the new solid waste business monitor.  Also, to
obtain a more representative basis for comparison with the general equity
markets, we have replaced the Dow Jones Industrial Average with the Russell
2000, an index of smaller companies, and the S&P 500.

                                         Stock Price
                Stock                  Dec.12  Dec.26 Percent Change
        1.      Allwaste                4.25    4.62      +8.7
        2.      Clean Harbors           2.88    2.82      -2.2
        3.      Groundwater Tech.       14.75   13.75     -6.8
        4.      Gundle Enviro.          5.50    5.68      +3.3
        5.      Int. Tech Corp.         2.38    2.75     +15.5
        6.      Molten Metal Tech.      37.25   31.12    -16.4
        7.      OHM Corp.               7.12    7.38      +3.7
        8.      Rollins Enviro.         2.88    2.88         0
        9.      Safety-Kleen            14.75   15.25     +3.4
        10.     Smith Env. Tech.        3.62    3.62         0
        11.     Versar                  3.57    3.62      +1.4
        12.     Roy F. Weston           6.00    5.25     -12.5

                Haz Waste
                Unweighted Average      104.95  98.74     -5.9
                S&P 500 Index           618.78  614.30    -0.7
                Russell 2000 Index      311.56  312.83    +0.4
                Hazwaste Equal-Dollar
                 Index                  12,000  11,980    -0.2

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
WASTE BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996   

SOLID WASTE BUSINESS MONITOR

                     SOLID WASTE BUSINESS MONITOR

   Editor's Note:  As part of our expanded coverage, we are launching a new
stock table to monitor the solid waste management industry. Our goal is to
provide a basis for investment comparison with the hazwaste industry and
other, broader market averages. The companies have been  selected to
represent geographical diversity and a broad range of industry segments,
including collection and disposal, recycling, waste-energy. The solid waste
unweighted average is a simple summation of the stock prices of all the
companies. The ``equal dollar'' index represents the stock market value at
any point in time from an initial investment of $1,000 in each of the
twelve companies.

                                         Stock Price
                Stock                  Dec. 12 Dec. 26 Percent Change
        1.      Browning-Ferris Ind.    30.75   29.00   -5.7
        2.      IMCO Recycling          22.75   22.50   -1.1
        3.      Laidlaw Ind.            9.62    10.12   +5.2
        4.      Mid-American Waste      3.75    3.38    -9.9
        5.      Prins Recycling         8.00    7.75    -3.1
        6.      Republic Industries     30.25   33.25   +9.9
        7.      TransAmerican Waste     1.25    1.43    +14.4
        8.      United Waste            39.12   36.50   -6.7
        9.      USA Waste               20.00   17.62   -11.9
        10.     WMX Technologies        30.75   29.00   -5.7
        11.     Wellman Inc.            23.50   22.62   -3.7
        12.     Western Waste           23.25   25.38   +9.2

                Solid Waste
                Unweighted Average      242.99  238.55  -1.8
                S&P 500 Index           618.78  614.30  -0.7
                Russell 2000 Index      311.56  312.83  +0.4
                Solid Waste Equal-Dollar
                Index                   12,000  11,912  -0.7

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
WASTE BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996   

PRINS RECYCLING CORP. EXPECTS RECORD LOSS IN FOURTH QUARTER.

By:
KH

   The Fort Lee, N.J. company, due to softness in the markets for
wastepaper, is projecting a record loss for the three months ended Dec. 31,
1995, said Chairman and CEO Fred Prins.
   Prins stock, which is traded on Nasdaq, slipped slightly after the
announcement on Dec. 22 (see Solid Waste Business Monitor on page 5). 
However, the firm's troubles over the year have brought the stock price
down into the $7-$8 per share range from a 52-week high of 19 3/4.
   ``While we are encouraged with our expected results for the entire 1995
fiscal year, we will sustain a loss in the fourth quarter due largely to
the precipitous decline in the markets for wastepaper during the third and
into the fourth quarter,'' said Prins. ``The fourth quarter loss cannot be
precisely quantified at this time, due in part to three evolving situations
consisting of a municipal contract and the collection of two accounts
receivable. As the fourth quarter draws to a close, however, we are seeing
a material increase in the sale price of old corrugated containers,''
historically a leading indicator of pricing trends in wastepaper, Prins
noted.
   ``We have, in fact, seen an improvement in prices for our old newspapers
recently,'' he added.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
WASTE BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996   

GERAGHTY & MILLER AND PARENT, HEIDEMIJ IN OVERSEAS `ACQUISITION MODE'

By:
By Steven Lang

   Geraghty & Miller and parent company Heidemij are ``in an acquisition
mode,'' according to Dee Farrell, Geraghty & Miller marketing coordinator.
   Heidemij has begun acquisition talks with Madrid-based Eptisa, ``one of
the three largest engineering companies in Spain with sales of
approximately $100 million from infrastructure, water, construction, energy
and environmental projects,'' said the official.
   In addition, Geraghty & Miller has acquired United Kingdom-based
Environmental Strategies, Ltd. The ``small firm'' employs six people and
has offices in Leeds and Chester, said Farrell.
   ``Recent growth in both our U.K. and worldwide business sectors requires
more consultants. By merging with Environmental Strategies, staff will be
able to expand our auditing and due diligence work and have a strong
presence in the northwest region of the U.K.,'' said Brian Crook, G & M
International manager.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
WASTE BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996   

RECYCLING INDUSTRIES DOUBLES BUSINESS WITH PURCHASE OF ANGLO METAL

By:
SL

   Recycling Industries has bought for about $4.3 million the business,
land, buildings and equipment of San Juan, Tex.-based Anglo Metal, which
does business as Anglo Iron & Metal. That purchase price includes cash, a
note, a non-compete agreement and 227,693 shares of Recycling Industries
common stock valued at $925,000, said a spokesman.
   The firm was acquired from Robert C. Rome and the Rome family and posted
estimated 1995 revenues of about $15 million, said the spokesman. It is
among the largest ferrous and non-ferrous metals recyclers in the South
Texas Rio Grande Valley with operations in San Juan, McAllen, Harlingen and
Brownsville, all in Texas, he said.
   ``With the Anglo acquisition, we have doubled the size of our
business,'' said Thomas J. Wiens, Recycling Industries chairman and chief
executive officer.
   In addition, the company plans to acquire more metals recycling
operations in 1996, he said. Englewood, Colo.-based Recycling Industries
recently acquired Las Vegas-based Nevada Recycling Industries and 20% of
The Loef Co., based in Athens, Ga., said Wiens. With the Anglo
acquisition, Recycling Industries anticipates annual sales of more than $30
million in 1996, he said.
   ``The one-time and non-recurring expenses associated with this important
acquisition will negatively impact our earnings in our first quarter which
ends December 31, 1995,'' said Wiens. ``We expect to begin recording the
positive impact of these revenues and earnings in the quarter beginning
January 1, 1996.''
   ``The geographic location of the four plants in south Texas are
important as they give us the ability to market, to purchase, and to sell
in Mexico,'' said Mike Price, metals division president and chief operating
officer. ``There is a tremendous amount of metals recycling business
occurring between the U.S. and Mexico.
   ``As the largest metals recycler on the South Texas/Mexico border, we
plan to expand the operations of Anglo to take advantage of the existing
business opportunities and those we expect to see in the next few years as
a result of the NAFTA agreement and the strong industrial growth in the
market,'' said Price.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
WASTE BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996   

MONTGOMERY-OTSEGO-SCHOHARIE, N.Y., TO ISSUE RFP FOR SOLID WASTE MANAGER

By:
AR

   The Montgomery-Otsego-Schoharie Solid Waste Management Authority (MOSA)
expects to issue a request for proposals for ``the operation and or
take-over of all or some'' of its functions within the next few months,
according to an official at headquarters at Howes Cave, New York.
   The authority was formed by the three counties in 1987 in response to a
state mandate to seek a regional solution to waste management. Since then,
however, it has become caught up in the national tumult over flow control,
and private haulers have shunned its facilities, which they claim are more
expensive than hauling trash to other facilities in or out of state.
   The last nail in the coffin for MOSA was a decision by the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation in early December not to
renew a permit for the landfill the authority has been using. Because of
the uncertainty regarding the entire waste management situation, the
authority would not be able to get financing to build another landfill in
time, said the authority official.
   This leaves the authority with no place to dump trash by the end of next
year, he said.
   The central New York region is undergoing rapid changes as large
national firms including Resource Recovery Systems of Greenwich,
Connecticut and Browning-Ferris Industries, Houston, have moved in, taking
over smaller locally-run firms and aggressively competing for business
(Integrated Waste Management, 6 Dec., 3). The authority has already
received a number of phone calls asking for details on its operations, said
the spokesman.
   The authority has $28-million in debt outstanding, continued the
official.
   Further details on what infrastructure is in place and the assets of the
authority will be contained in the request for proposals, he added. MOSA
has hired a bond counsel, general counsel and an engineering firm to
develop the RFP.
   In 1994, the authority processed 104,000-tons of waste. In 1995 this
volume was down to 75,000 to 80,000-tons due to loss of flow control, he
said. When the authority was formed the tipping fee was $85 to $90 per
ton. I t is currently down to $45 to $50 per ton, he continued.
   There are five transfer stations with the trash being landfilled at the
Eastern landfill northwest of Amsterdam, New York. While the state DEC has
not yet officially denied the authority's request to continue to operate
the landfill, DEC officials told the authority the landfill must close at
the end of next year, said the official.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
WASTE BUSINESS via NewsNet
January 3, 1996   

DOE'S NIAGARA FALLS RADWASTE STORAGE SITE SEEN POSING LONG-TERM RISK

   High-level radioactive residues currently stored at the DOE Niagara
Falls Storage Site (NFSS) pose a potential long-term risk to the public if
they are left permanently, according to an new analysis by the National
Research Council.
   The council prepared the report at the request of the Office of
Environmental Restoration of the U.S. Department of Energy. It examined
the existing and proposed modifications of the waste containment structure
in Lewiston, New York, which has been used since 1949 to store highly
radioactive residues separated during the processing of very rich uranium
ores from Zaire.
   The high-level residues remaining after the removal of uranium--used in
the Manhattan Project--along with other, less radioactive residues and
wastes, are currently stored at NFSS, buried under an interim cap to
prevent influx of moisture from precipitation and outflux of radon gas,
said the report.
   The report, ``Safety of the High-Level Uranium Ore Residues at the
Niagara Falls Storage Site, Lewiston, New York,'' is based upon
presentations from DOE and its contractors, a review of documents, and a
visit to the site. The residents of the area and others had the
opportunity to express their views and concerns.
   Based on available site sampling and monitoring information, there is no
immediate hazard to the off-site public from the residues in their current
configuration, said the report. However, DOE's proposed actions of
replacing the interim cap with a ``permanent'' cap and of long-term site
maintenance and monitoring do not address the potential risks to the public
for the long periods of time commensurate with the duration of that
potential risk, it concluded.
   An important alternative, that of solidifying the high-level residues on
site and shipping the solidified residues to an off-site location, has not
been considered. This alternative was chosen for managing essentially
identical residues of common origin currently stored in silos at the
Fernald Environmental Management Project site in Ohio, the study said.
   If this alternative is considered, the occupational as well as public
health safety aspects are important. Inputs from waste treatment
technology projects, such as the project for handling similar residues
currently being implemented at the Fernald site, will provide important
information for making such assessments, said the report.
   Furthermore, the present and potential future interactions between the
NFSS and disposal sites adjacent to it, where non-radioactive toxic
chemical and landfill wastes are currently disposed, have not been
addressed adequately, either in the NFSS final environmental impact
statement or in subsequent studies and documentation, said the analysis.
   The potential future health hazards posed by non-radiological, toxic
materials such as lead and barium that are constituents of the buried
high-level residues at NFSS have not been adequately assessed, it said. In
addition, there are substantial uncertainties in the estimates of costs and
associated risks for managing the residues at the Niagara site that have
not been fully assessed, cautioned the study.
   Current site monitoring activities are inadequate for the determination
of long-term site integrity and potential future risks to the public and
the environment from the movement off-site of radioactive and
non-radioactive wastes in the NFSS containment structure, as well as the
possible influx of waste materials from the disposal sites adjacent to the
NFSS, it said.
   The report made recommendations for future action by DOE to provide
protection to the health and safety of the public and the environment, both
in the short and long terms. DOE should complete studies of related or
similar treatment technologies such as the vitrification demonstration at
the Fernald site (see story on page 10) and related cost-risk-benefit
studies, it advised.
   Further, a program should be developed by DOE for removal, treatment,
and disposal off-site of the NFSS high-level residues. Because there is no
immediate hazard to the off-site public from the residues in their present
configuration, such studies will help ensure proper handling of the
residues when they are removed for disposal, as well as to provide an
example for future remediation of other sites containing radioactive
residues. After removal of the high-level residues, remaining wastes
should be buried under a suitable protective cap, counseled the report.

Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-17</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B020-42</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev26.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002510 text/html 72644
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:23:17 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:30 GMT
Content-length: 72455
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev26.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>SUPERCRITICAL FLUIDS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>Eco Waste License&nbsp;Goes to Sweden</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(490 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Catalysts Used to&nbsp;Promote Oxidation</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(345 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CHEMICAL TREATMENTS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>Discarded Medical&nbsp;Materials Disinfected</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(713 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>Hydrothermal Oxidation&nbsp;of Chemical Weapons</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(190 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>Iron Curtain Holds&nbsp;Back Contamination</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(532 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>Waste Stays Behind&nbsp;Wall of Iron Filings</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(505 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ADVANCED CONTAINMENT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>Creative Techniques&nbsp;Help Landfill Problem</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(482 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INDUSTRY NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>Million Dollar&nbsp;Challenge Extended</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(188 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>Nytest to Acquire&nbsp;GTI Subsidiary</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(233 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>Decrying Cement&nbsp;Kiln Absolution</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(587 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><A HREF = "#11"><LI>BFI Plans on&nbsp;One-Time Charge</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(178 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>VECTRA Delays Its&nbsp;EnviroGlass Startup</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(219 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>Briefly Noted:&nbsp;</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(299 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>GOVERNMENT</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>Committee Approves&nbsp;EPA's Use of TEFs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(106 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><LI>DOI Incurs&nbsp;Rath of EPA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(110 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>Lessor Responsible&nbsp;for Sham Operation</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(203 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><LI>EPA Discovers&nbsp;Something Fishy</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(376 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>Briefly Noted:</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(102 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MICROBIAL TREATMENTS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#19"><A HREF = "#19"><LI>GAC Improves&nbsp;Biofilter Effect</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(395 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><A HREF = "#20"><LI>Essex Team Treats&nbsp;Landfill Leachate</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(403 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NUCLEAR/HAZARDOUS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#21"><A HREF = "#21"><LI>Molten Metal, SEG&nbsp;Will Process Resins</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(187 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><A HREF = "#22"><LI>Oak Ridge Technology&nbsp;License Is Available</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(187 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>PARTICULATE REDUCTION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#23"><A HREF = "#23"><LI>Barrier Coatings&nbsp;Lower Pollution</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(148 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><A HREF = "#24"><LI>Ceramic, Metal Bond&nbsp;for Hot Gas Filters</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(230 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NITROGEN OXIDES REDUCTION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#25"><A HREF = "#25"><LI>New and Retrofit&nbsp;Coal Combustor</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(227 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><A HREF = "#26"><LI>Turbine Emissions&nbsp;Are Reduced</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(145 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>RECYCLING & MINIMIZATION</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#27"><A HREF = "#27"><LI>Plastics Council&nbsp;Focuses on Reuse</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(350 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><A HREF = "#28"><LI>Memphis May&nbsp;Achieve Goal</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(365 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>TESTING</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#29"><A HREF = "#29"><LI>BioChem Offers&nbsp;Online Monitor</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(123 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><A HREF = "#30"><LI>Device Will Sample&nbsp;Waterborne Residues</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(412 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>PUBLICATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(74 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>CALENDAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(180 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Eco Waste License
Goes to Sweden

Eco Waste Technologies (EWT, 2305 Donley Dr., Suite 108, Austin, TX
78758-4535; Tel: 512/837-9961; Fax: 512/837-9430) has licensed
Chematur Engineering AB of Karlskoga, Sweden to build a major
demonstration supercritical water oxidation facility with a
capacity of 1 gpm. Dick Lyon of Eco Waste says that the
demonstration plant will use the EWT technology that has been in
operation since 1994 at Huntsman Corp. in Austin, Texas.

Lyon reports that EWT has completed an advanced version of its
Huntsman plant for the University of Texas at Austin. This
experimental facility will replace the original pilot plant and
experiment with the treatment of more complex chemicals and sludges
with 20-30% solids from wastewater treatment plants. Its capacity
is 0.5 to 1 gpm.

R.N. McBrayer and J.W. Griffith of EWT disclose that the Huntsman
facility is treating 5 gpm of wastes from experimental chemical
processes and washdowns at Huntsman's Austin Research Labs. The
waste contains about 70% washwater and a mixture from three primary
waste streams of long-chain alcohols, glycols, and amines. The
mixture has a total organic carbon concentration of more than
50,000 mg/l and 6,908 mg/l ammonia. Effluent is required to meet
the pretreatment standards of the city of Austin which means a
monthly average below 100 mg/l organic carbon and less than 20 mg/l
ammonia.

A positive displacement pump pressures the feed to over 24.8 mPa
and passes it through a heat exchanger. The addition of oxygen in
the reactor raises reactor temperatures to 538-650C. Effluent
consisting of water saturated with carbon dioxide passes through
the heat exchanger, a heat recovery boiler, and an effluent cooler
before depressurization to atmospheric pressure in a liquid/gas
separator. Excess oxygen level measurements in the liquid/gas
separator are used to control the oxygen injection rate in the
reactor.

Liquid effluent is held for sampling before discharge. In
continuous operation, the effluent has less than 50 mg/l TOC
consisting of acetic acid or other simple organic acids, and the
chemical oxygen demand is less than 16 mg/l. Ammonia concentrations
are 2.7 to less than 1 mg/l, and nitrate levels are within
acceptable limits at 6.4 mg/l. Dissolved solids consist mostly of
sulfate, chloride, potassium, and sodium salts. Total bicarbonate
at 13,900 mg/l is high because the effluent is saturated with
carbon dioxide from the oxidation of organic matter.

EWT has determined that the alloy used in the Huntsman facility has
resisted corrosion caused by chlorides in feedwater. The unit is
designed for operation 24 h/d and 320 d/yr. It is scheduled for
descaling every 3 weeks using a nitric acid solution to remove
carbonate scale from the heat exchanger. Some pump seals and
packings have been replaced, but McBrayer and Griffith report no
safety-related incidents or problems with reactor operation and
system control in the first year of operations. They conclude that
it has demonstrated the ability to routinely treat the basic C-H-O-
N compounds in chemical process waters.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Catalysts Used to
Promote Oxidation

The University of Tulsa (Dept. of Chemical Engineering, Tulsa, OK
74104) has demonstrated an effective method of destroying organic
compounds contained within an aqueous waste stream.  Catalytic
supercritical water oxidation (SCWO) is effective in the
destruction of the original organic compound. Incomplete conversion
to low molecular weight partial oxidation products may be achieved.

For years, wet oxidation has been successfully used as a
destructive treatment for many organic species.  Increased
destruction efficiency has been obtained by increasing the reaction
temperature to that above the critical temperature of water or
through the addition of a catalyst.  During SCWO, advantage is
gained in that the organic components and the oxygen are all
present in a single, dense, fluid phase, minimizing mass transfer
resistance and providing relatively rapid reaction rates.

The oxidation of phenol is of practical interest since it is a
common pollutant in industrial waste streams and is also believed
to be an intermediate product in the oxidation pathway of higher
molecular weight aromatic hydrocarbons.  Catalytic wet oxidation of
phenol over a CuO catalyst has been previously investigated.  The
reaction kinetics were determined and were thought to proceed
through a homogeneous-heterogeneous mechanism.  The homogeneous
reaction pathway caused an induction period during which free
radicals were accumulated in the aqueous phase.  Numerous reaction
intermediates, including benzoquinones, acetic acid, and other low
molecular weight organic acids, have been identified.

Some of the products identified from supercritical water oxidation
of phenol represent compounds that are more hazardous than the
starting organic component.  In order to minimize the formation of
these partial oxidation products and to promote complete
conversion, it is feasible to either increase the reaction
temperature or add a catalyst.

The University of Tulsa study, published in Environmental Science
& Technology [29, 2748-2753, 1995], gives a more detailed analysis
of the use of a heterogeneous catalyst to promote the oxidation of
phenol.  Several partial oxidation products have been identified,
and a reaction model involving a sequence of parallel and series
reaction pathways has been developed.  The performance of several
heterogeneous catalysts has been compared.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Discarded Medical
Materials Disinfected

Engineers at the Southwest Research Institute (SwRI, 6220 Culebra
Rd., P.O. Drawer 28510, San Antonio, TX 78228-0510; Tel: 210/684-
5111) are testing the efficiency of a new medical waste treatment
system manufactured by Med Compliance Services (MCS, El Paso Dr.,
El Paso, TX 79905; Tel: 915/772-2288).  The Encore-2100 system
first shreds the material, reducing its volume, then disinfects the
waste by exposure to a chlorine dioxide solution.  The chemical
treatment system is an alternative to incineration processes which
have traditionally been used to dispose of medical waste but have
been threatened by the scheduled implementation of federal
regulations.

The EPA estimates that 3.4 million tons of waste are produced
annually by U.S. health care facilities.  Hospitals are the single
largest generator of that waste, contributing some 70% of the total
in the form of contaminated dressings, biopsy specimens, laboratory
wastes, needles and syringes, and blood and blood products.  About
3,000 hospitals now use incinerators as their primary means of
medical waste disposal.

The problem is that, as required by the Clean Air Act Amendments of
1990, the EPA has issued a proposed rule, to be finalized by April
15, 1996, that would impose stringent pollution control
requirements on medical waste incinerator operators to reduce toxic
waste emissions such as dioxins and metals.  Implementation of the
control measure is expected to significantly increase equipment and
operating costs, making on-site incineration economically
impractical for many hospitals.  Some waste treatment industry
sources estimate that the rule could force the closure of 80-90% of
existing medical waste incinerators.

James Scott, senior research engineer, has led the SwRI effort to
design test protocols for and perform third party, independent
testing of the Encore-2100 system to assess its compliance with
standards established by the EPA and the State and Territorial
Association of Alternate Treatment Technologies (STAATT), a
consortium of state medical waste regulators.  The Encore-2100,
with a maximum production rate of 2,000 lbs./hr., is designed to
effectively and safely treat infectious waste so the processed
materials can be disposed of in a conventional solid waste
landfill, says Scott.  Two specially configured industrial
shredders in series reduce waste volume significantly and enhance
contact between al the waste components and the chlorine dioxide
solution, which is introduced during and after shredding.

Chlorine dioxide, the key component in the chemical disinfecting
solution, is commonly used to treat drinking water and wastewater.
It can be generated through a reaction involving sodium
hypochlorite, hydrochloric acid, and sodium chlorite solutions, or
by mixing gaseous chlorine and sodium chlorite solutions.  The
method used in the Encore-2100 technology involves a reaction of
the chemicals under vacuum to create gaseous chlorine dioxide.

The key feature of the gas generation system, manufactured by Rio
Linda Chemical Co. (North 10th St., Sacramento, CA 95814; Tel:
916/443-4939), is its single ejector, which creates a vacuum,
bringing the premeasured chemicals together to form gaseous
chlorine dioxide, and introduces the gas into an aqueous solution.
The disinfecting solution is removed from the waste using a
helipress and then recirculated and returned to the desired
concentration prior to reuse in the treatment process.  Release of
airborne contaminants is controlled by a high efficiency
particulate air (HEPA) filter and scrubber units.

Scott explains the SwRI designated two protocols to measure the
effectiveness of the Encore-2100 system.  One protocol tests the
system relative to EP requirements for sanitizing inanimate,
nonfood contact surfaces.  This part of the study is being
conducted in accordance with EPA Good Laboratory Practices.  The
second protocol subjects the Encore-2100 to national standards
developed by STAATT.  To satisfy these standards, the system must
demonstrate a 99.9999% reduction in selected microorganism species
representing vegetative bacteria, viruses, fungi, parasites, and
tubercle mycobacteria.  In addition, the process must demonstrate
a 99.99% reduction in bacterial spores, including highly resistant
forms of Bacillus.

SwRI incorporated stringent quality assurance controls to encompass
all aspects of the study, including sources and culturing of the
microorganisms, processing of waste through the Encore-2100 system,
and microbiological analyses of the samples.  Quality assurance
documents generated during the study validate the sample results
and allow the complete reproduction of the experimental results.
SwRI has collected about 150 samples from the Encore-2100 process.
 The first commercial unit will be installed at an existing MCS
facility in Albuquerque, NM.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Hydrothermal Oxidation
of Chemical Weapons

The Dept. of Defense (DOD) and General Atomics (3550 General
Atomics Ct., San Diego, CA 92121; Tel: 619/455-3000, Fax: 619/455-
2263) demonstrated that a hydrothermal oxidation (HTO) technology
can safely destroy chemical weapons and solid rocket propellants
without incineration. HTO uses water heated to 500F  and
pressurized to 4000 psi to mix oxygen or air with organic
contaminants, forming carbon dioxide, water, and sometimes, mineral
salts or acids.  No harmful emissions are produced and all end
products can be safely disposed of, recycled, or released.

According to Jeff Broido of General Atomics, the unit destroys the
nerve agents VX, GB and mustard gas beyond the limits of detection.
Research is looking into how to deal with the heavy amounts of
chlorine generated, and the corrosion it brings, when destroying
such weapons.

While water usually repels such materials, the pressure and heat
allow it to mix and oxidize.  Broido says that the trick is that
the water's behavior is reversed.  It behaves like a non-polar
solvent. The bench-scale HTO unit General Atomics operates in San
Diego is being used to test a variety of hazardous materials for
commercial use.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Iron Curtain Holds
Back Contamination

Hydrogeologist Robert Gillham of the University of Waterloo Centre
for Groundwater Research (Waterloo, Ontario, Canada) continues
research on a permeable subsurface treatment wall containing iron
filings and sand to purify contaminated groundwater. Last fall
articles first began appearing in the scientific literature on the
use of iron filing walls to keep out toxic wastes. Since then, this
new technology has been rapidly attracting attention as an
economically competitive tool for groundwater remediation and
treatment.

Gillham's wall, located at a test site in Waterloo, separates two
water bodieson one side is contaminated groundwateron the other,
water almost clean enough to drink.  Goundwater contaminated with
volatile organic compounds flows through the wall naturally, and a
chemical reaction purifies the water.  The process could be used at
thousands of hazardous waste sites needing remediation, according
to Gillham.

Gillham started to develop the method when he noticed
irregularities in water samples taken from plastic-lined wells.
The plastic absorbed contaminants and biased water quality
measurement.  Samples taken from wells with metal casings showed
even lower contaminant levels without absorption into the metal.

The reason for this phenomenon was corrosion.  The contaminant
reacts with iron, forming harmless byproducts, including chloride,
ethene, and ethane.  The reaction leaves no waste material to
contain, transport, and dispose.  With a high enough iron content,
contaminated groundwater can be treated to meet drinking water
standards.

Gillham has used a 20% iron concentration for more than four years
at the test site to treat groundwater contaminated with 250 mg/L of
trichloroethylene (TCE) and 45 mg/L of tetrachloroethylene (PCE)
with no detectable deterioration of the medium.  Although the
treated water does not meet drinking water standards, Gillham says
this could be possible if a higher concentration of iron were used.

To use the corrosive reaction for groundwater cleanup, the
direction and depth of the contaminated flow must be known, a
trench dug, and the reactive formulation placed in the hole.  The
iron and sand wall has a higher permeability than the surrounding
soil, allowing the contaminated groundwater to flow freely through
the reactive material.  Residence times, depending on the
concentration of the contaminant, are about two days.

During the reaction, pH increases and minerals precipitate out of
the water to form calcium carbonate, which could clog the media and
cause the groundwater to flow around the wall.  To restore
permeability, the iron filings can be stirred to increase porosity.
Inorganic mineral precipitates cause 2-15% losses in porosity per
year.  Spent iron can be replaced.  No stirring or media
replacement is expected to be needed for at least 10 years at the
test site.

Capital costs for installing the treatment wall system are
comparable to pump and treat methods.  The only operation and
maintenance costs, other than periodic groundwater sampling, could
involve stirring up the media, according to John Vogan, manager of
EnviroMetal Technologies (42 Arrow Rd., Guelph, Ontario N1K 1S6
Canada; Tel: 519/824-0432), a company set up by Gillham to market
the patented technology.  A 180 meter long by 9 meter deep (600' x
30') funnel and gate system to treat 50-60 mg/L TCE and 10 mg/L PCE
in a high velocity aquifer would cost about $1.5 million.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Waste Stays Behind
Wall of Iron Filings

A proposed wall of iron filings to protect four Massachusetts towns
from contaminated water coming from the former Massachusetts
Military Reservation was first described in an article in Science
[269, 473, 1995]. Unlike slurry walls and similar physical
barriers, the iron filings will form a permeable but reactive
barrier to break down trichlorethylene, tetrachloroethylene, and
other chlorinated contaminants.

This proposed iron (Fe) barrier is a product of continuing research
into methods to treat groundwater contaminants in place without the
usual pump-and-treat operations. Engineers in Oklahoma have
conducted lab tests which explain how iron filings can reduce
Cr(VI) in groundwater to Cr(III).  Robert M. Powell (ManTech
Environmental Research Services Corp., P.O. Box 1198, Ada, OK
74821-1198), Robert W. Puls, Sharon K. Hightower, and David A.
Sabatini conducted stirred batch reactor experiments in darkened
500 ml reactors with simulated aquifer water, scrap iron filings,
and alluvial aquifer material.

The competitive desorption of CrO4-2 from surface absorption sites
by excess PO4-3 resulted in nearly full recovery of chromium from
experiments without iron filings. In experiments with iron filings,
chromium was reduced from 109 mg/l to below 0.3 mg/l and there was
no subsequent CrO4-2 recovery by PO4-3 desorption, confirming
reduction by iron. Powell's group found that different forms of
metallic iron have greatly different abilities to reduce chromate.
Impure and partially oxidized iron is the most effective.

Powell's observations of changes support the theory that an
electrochemical corrosion cell on the surface of an iron filing
causes the thermodynamic instability that drives oxidation-
reduction reactions without external energy input. Iron in the
zero-valence state is an electron donor, and chromate ions serve as
oxidants in such cells. Powell wrote in Environmental Science &
Technology [29-8, 1913-1921, 1995] that the corrosion cell is a
stable domain with clearly defined anodic and cathodic regions.

Differences in the surface potential of impure iron filings due to
composition or grain structure and orientation result in unstable
regions and electron movement. Previously rusted surfaces are sites
of dissolution where potentially unfilled electron shells exist
next to filled electron shells, and reaction rates are high. An
anodic region develops where there is an electron deficiency, and
it has a positive charge and Fe++ ions at the surface. They are free
to enter the solution.

Powell suggests that the positively charged zone electrostatically
attracts chromate and sulfate ions, promoting formation of the
Fe2SO4 complex and redox coupling of chromate ions. The negatively
charged cathodic region of the surface is dominated by cations and
non reducible sodium and calcium ions. Aluminosilicates in aquifers
are able to provide electron acceptors to maintain the dissolution
of iron surfaces.

In the case of the Massachusetts project, Fe++ ions in corrosion
cells on iron filings would strip chlorine ions from chlorinated
hydrocarbons in moving groundwater and turn them into harmless
ethene and ethane. Summary report EPA542-S-95-001 from the Solid
Waste Office of the Environmental Protection Agency states that
four demonstration projects are using metal-enhanced dehalogenation
under a patent held by the University of Waterloo.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Creative Techniques
Help Landfill Problem

Trial and error has been the "engineering" method used to develop
some of the most effective landfill management techniques.  This
has also been the case at Florida's Citrus County Landfill, where
erosion control has been aggravating operators since the facility
opened in January 1990.  The landfill is located in west-central
Florida, approximately 15 miles east of the Gulf of Mexico.

The current plan, a 17-acre plastic-lined cell, is the first of six
phases designed to last 30 years.  With a surface elevation of 120
ft. above sea level and a depth of 80 ft., the landfill is unique
in Florida, where shallow water tables can limit excavation depths.
Side slopes, three of which are lined, are a steep 2:1 (horizontal
to vertical) ratio.  The unlined side contains an entrance road
extending down into the cell.

Although ditches were used on the unlined slope to control erosion,
maintenance was a continuous nightmare.  Attempts to hydroseed
mulch were ruined by rainstorms that washed away the seed before it
took root.  The rain also formed gullies which deepened with each
storm.  The landfill was kept open only by periodically
reconstructing the slopes using bulldozers to excavate eroded soils
from the stormwater pond.

After a catastrophic 11 inch rainfall laid waste to slopes that had
been restored only months before, stapled sod was installed over
burlap cloth on all unlined slopes.  The solution has required only
minor maintenance since installation two years agohelping to make
the costly $4/sq. yd. installation price palatable.

When the price of sod can't be justified, operators use seed and
seaweed mulch on slopes that are angled at 4:1 or flatter.  Citrus
County used hydrilla and water hyacinth removed from nearby canals
to enrich the soil and facilitate seed germination by retaining
moisture.

The liners required by law have also contributed to the landfill's
erosion problems.  Erosion tends to occur at the edge of liners,
since the synthetic liner sheds nearly 100% of contacted
stormwater.  Sheet flow concentrates at the bottom of the line and
erosion occurs where flows become concentrated on steep slopes.
When the soil layer next to the liner is eroded away, solid waste
can become exposed and contaminate the stormwater.  Fortunately,
erosion can be controlled at the liner edge by constructing a ditch
lined with plastic sheeting.  Costs for manpower and equipment are
about $4.60/linear foot of ditch.

Officials at Citrus County landfill prefer a lined ditch to sod or
staked sod with burlap because it will stand up to most any flow
velocity.  Lined ditches also provide a barrier to leachate and do
not have to be watered or mowed.  LDPE sheets work well when
applied in 60 foot sections or longer.  A woven, coated, 3-ply
geomembrane of LDPE with carbon black for ultraviolet light
resistance is available for about $1.17/sq. yd. for 16 mils and
$1.80/sq. yd. for 20 mils.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Million Dollar
Challenge Extended

The results from Monsanto's (800 N. Lindbergh Blvd., St. Louis, MO
63141; Tel: 314/694-1000) first One Million Dollar Challenge were
so encouraging, the company is bringing the program out for an
encore.  Another one million dollars will be awarded to the
individual or team that develops the most cost-effective and
commercially practical technology for producing a clean sodium
chloride stream while recovering high purity amino acids and both
phosphoric and phosphorous acids from a complex wastewater stream.

The initiative supplements Monsanto's ongoing internal program to
eliminate waste and strengthen environmental performance.  An
independent group of experts from the Center for Waste Reduction
technologies (part of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers)
will evaluate the proposals submitted in response to the second
challenge.

From proposals submitted, technology which most effectively meets
the criteria will be funded with $500,000 for one year of
development.  A second $500,000 payment will be made following
successful demonstration of this technology in a continuous
laboratory unit.  All proposals must be submitted by March 31. To
obtain more information and an application, call 800/366-0339 or
send a fax request to 314/426-6935 (email: MonChalng@aol.com).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Nytest to Acquire
GTI Subsidiary

Nytest Environmental Inc. (60 Seaview Blvd., Port Washington, NY
11050-4618; Tel: 516/625-550) has acquired the operating
laboratories of GTEL Environmental Labs, Inc., previously a wholly-
owned subsidiary of Groundwater Technology, Inc. (GWTI, 100 River
Ridge Dr., Norwood, MA 02062; Tel: 800/635-0053 or 617/769-7600,
Fax: 617/769-7992).  The transaction took effect December 31, 1995.

Nytest acquired the GTEL laboratories in Milford, NH, Wichita, KS
and Tampa, FL which employ about 150 people.  This transaction
substantially increases the assets of Nytest and the company
further anticipates that the acquisition will substantially
increase the company's revenues and cash flow in the future.

John Gaspari, president and CEO of Nytest, said his company is
excited about this acquisition.  In 1995, the GTEL laboratories
generated revenue of more than $11 million.  Gaspari added that
GTEL has a quality reputation and an excellent management and staff
of experienced chemists and technicians.  The addition of the GTEL
staff and laboratories will enhance Nytest capabilities and expand
its facilities' presence to new geographic regions.  The combined
companies will offer a broader range of analytical testing and
services than either company individually while serving
complementary market segments.  The GTEL staff and management will
continue under the direction of Guy Sylvester.

Nytest is a leading provider of specialized analytical services for
the analysis of hazardous waste.  Groundwater Technology, Inc. is
one of the world's leading environmental consulting, engineering
and remediation firms.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Decrying Cement
Kiln Absolution

One month after the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission
(TNRCC) released a study that absolved Midlothian's cement and
steel plants of producing hazardous emissions, activists have
expressed skepticism over the study results.

Sue Pope, leader of the environmental group Downwinders at Risk,
was one of about 300 residents who attended the TNRCC's meeting in
Midlothian.  State officials at the meeting reviewed results of
their soil-and-air samples study, which has been conducted in the
Midlothian area since 1991.

The report summarized the results of over a thousand samples
collected which indicated that exposure to the monitored levels are
not likely to result in adverse health effects. Where relevant
comparison data were available, air and soil concentrations
measured in Midlothian were found to be similar to those measured
in other Texas communities.

But Pope said her family's deteriorating health is proof enough
that the emissions from Midlothian's steel and cement industries
are harmful.  Pope said the family had some very unexplained
illnesses that began in 1986.  Pope's own health problems since
1986 have included malignant tumors, endometriosis, respiratory
problems, chronic fatigue and autoimmune disorders.  She said her
family's livestock has developed mysterious problems as well,
including cancer, tumors and high numbers of multiple births.  The
Midlothian area also has a higher-than-normal occurrence of
children born with Down's syndrome and adults with cancer and
tumors, Pope said.

The TNRCC's study detailed how 176 soil samples were conducted at
160 sites in and around Midlothian, Center, Carthage, Cleburne,
Terrell and Quitman for polychlorinated dibenzodioxin and
polychlorinated dibenzofuran concentrations.  They found no
significant emissions or high levels of toxins.  Additionally, the
state agency conducted a screening risk analysis for Midlothian's
Texas Industries Inc. (TXI) plant and concluded that based on the
estimated emissions and the assumptions made during this analysis,
the excess lifetime carcinogenic risks and non-cancer hazards that
result for exposure to contaminants potentially emitted from the
Texas Industries Inc. facility are considered to be within an
acceptable range.

But Pope and other residents do not believe the TNRCC's study went
far enough in trying to determine potential health risks from
emissions.  She questioned why a screening analysis, rather than a
health-risk assessment, was conducted about TXI's emissions.  Pope
and others believe that the study's results were released at this
time to hush up the subject and may have been due to political
pressure from the Republican-led state legislature and governor's
office.  Downwinders at Risk has asked the EPA to investigate
emission levels from Midlothian's industries, and expect
preliminary results of the study within a few weeks.


Waste Treatment Stock Watch
(At Close, January 2, 1995)


                                          Current      Last
      Company                 Symbol        Price     Month     Change

Allwaste Inc.                    ALW        5.125     4.375    +0.750
Browning-Ferris                  BFI       29.500    30.500    -1.000
Catalytica Inc.                 CTAL        4.375     4.500    -0.125
Celgene                         CELG       13.000    10.125    +2.875
Dow Chemical Co.                 DOW       71.125    71.375    -0.500
Environmental Elements Corp.     EEC        2.000     1.750    +0.250
EnviroTest Systems Corp.        ENVI        3.000     2.750    +0.250
Groundwater Technology          GWTI       13.750    18.250    -4.500
IMCO Recycling                   IMR       23.625    22.875    +0.750
Met-Pro Corp.                    MPR       14.250    13.750    +0.500
Molten Metal Technology         MLTN       32.750    36.250    -3.500
North American Technologies     NATK        0.531     0.781    -0.250
Noxso Corp.                     NOXO        5.500     5.875    -0.375
Republic Waste                  RWIN       34.000    27.625    +6.375
Rohm & Haas Co.                  ROH       64.625    61.250    +3.375
Rollins Environmental            REN        2.875     3.125    -0.250
Sybron                          SYCM       10.750    12.375    -1.625
USA Waste Services Inc.           UW       18.750    21.000    -2.250
U.S. Filter                        USF        26.625       22.500      +4.125
Vectra Technologies               VCTR         2.000        2.750      -0.750
WMX Technologies, Inc.             WMX       30.000        29.875      -0.125

Source:  BCC, Inc.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

BFI Plans on
One-Time Charge

Browning-Ferris Industries Inc. (BFI, 757 N. Eldridge Pkwy.,
Houston, TX 77079; Tel: 713/870-8100 ) announced plans to record a
one-time charge of $0.05/share in its second quarter, ending March
31, from the redemption of $745 million in debt.   The company said
it called its $400 million of 6-3/4% convertible subordinated
debentures due 2005 and its $345 million of 6-1/4% convertible
subordinated debentures due 2012 for redemption on February 2,
1996.

BFI said it believes the redemption will enhance shareholder value
because the debentures would have been convertible for about 16
million shares of the company's common stock.  The redemption also
allows the company to refinance the debt at more favorable rates,
the company said.

The 6-1/4% debentures will be redeemed for 101.25% of face value
plus accrued interest, with a conversion price of $41 per share.
The 6-3/4% debentures will be redeemed for 101.00% of face value
plus accrued interest, with a conversion price of $52.50/share.

The announcement comes two weeks after Browning-Ferris filed a
shelf registration for $1 billion in debt and equity securities.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

VECTRA Delays Its
EnviroGlass Startup

VECTRA Technologies Inc. (1010 S. 336th St., No. 220, Federal Way,
WA 98003; Tel: 206/874-2235, Fax: 206/874-2401) said Thursday it is
temporarily suspending all construction and startup activities
associated with its EnviroGlass vitrification program.

VECTRA, which supplies technology and services to the power
industry, said suspending the vitrification program will have a
near-term positive effect on cash flow since the company expected
to spend a considerable amount of money to complete and transport
the unit.

The company said that it is too soon to tell if the suspension will
have any serious long-term effects.  VECTRA said suspending the
vitrification program was necessary because delays in placing its
transportable vitrification unit at its lead client's site made it
impossible to meet the client's schedule to dispose of the low-
level waste.  VECTRA is now negotiating to remove and process the
waste on a subcontract basis.   However, if it is not successful in
these negotiations, VECTRA may be forced to accept contract
cancellation.

The company said it will be actively pursuing new contracts for the
vitrification technology and if VECTRA wins another project, the
program will be reactivated.   VECTRA also said it continues its
previously announced program to sell assets or raise additional
capital in an effort to eliminate long-term bank debt by the first
quarter of 1996.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Briefly Noted:


WMX Technologies Inc. (3003 Butterfield Rd., Oak Brook, IL 60521;
Tel: 708/572-8800) will exchange its 28% minority interest in
ServiceMaster Consumer Services for 18.1 million unregistered
ServiceMaster (75th & Lemont Rd., Downers Grove, IL 60516; Tel:
708/759-1003) shares.  This represents about 19% of the outstanding
shares.

Molten Metal Technology, Inc. (51 Sawyer Rd., Waltham, MA 02154;
Tel: 617/621-1315) announced a letter of intent for a strategic
alliance with Uhde GmbH (D-44128 Dortmund, Germany), one of the
world's largest engineering and construction companies.  The
companies have agreed to work together to market Molten Metal's
proprietary Catalytic Extraction Processing (CEP) technology to
Uhde's worldwide customers.

Envirotest Systems Corp. (ENVI, 2525 E. Camelback Rd., No. 720,
Phoenix, AZ 84016; Tel: 602/912-1110) has reported results for the
company's fiscal year-end.  Revenues for the year were $104.8
million, up from $96.4 million recorded in the fiscal 1994.
Reflecting extraordinary factors, including costs associated with
its contract dispute with Pennsylvania, charges related to the
start up of its programs in Connecticut and Colorado and a $5.4
million valuation allowance to reduce the deferred tax asset,
Envirotest had a net loss for the year of $14.9 million, or $0.93
per share.

IMCO Recycling Inc. (5215 N. O'Connor Blvd., Irving, TX 75039;
Tel: 214/869-6575) and Alchem Aluminum Inc. (425 Jay St.,
Coldwater, MI 49036; Tel: 517/279-9596) have announced a joint
venture to build a new aluminum recycling plant.  IMCO will own 75%
of the project and Alchem will own 25%.  A site has not been
selected as of yet, but the companies are looking at Michigan, Ohio
and Indiana.  Bill Warshauer of Alchem Aluminum said that the two
companies hope to begin construction next year.  The planned plant
will have an annual capacity of 150 million pounds and will cost
about $10 million.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Committee Approves
EPA's Use of TEFs

The Environmental Protection Agencys (EPA) Science Advisory Board
has supported the agency's use of "toxic equivalency factors"
(TEFs) in a draft review of dioxin risk reassessment.  TEFs are
calculations that equate dioxin with several other dioxin-like
chemicals (polychlorinated biphenyls, for example) to assess human
health risks.

Although individual board members questioned the use of TEFs, the
committee supported the calculations as the best available tool for
risk assessment.  A peer review of TEF that would focus on
interactions between chemicals that affect toxicity was suggested
by the committee, however. The agency is revising the dioxin
reassessment and expects to report to the board next year.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

DOI Incurs
Rath of EPA

The Dept. of the Interior (DOI) has incurred the wrath of the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) by operating a hazardous
waste facility without a permit at an Indian reservation.  The DOI
stored over 2000 gal. of ignitable hazardous waste containing
chromium and lead at its Fort Defiance Navajo Agency facility (Fort
Defiance, AZ), some of it for more than 10 years.

The EPA is recommending a $269,019 fine for this violation of the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) and demanded DOI move
the waste to a treatment, storage or disposal facility within 30
days.  The EPA recently cited DOI for a similar violation in
another part of Arizona.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Lessor Responsible
for Sham Operation

In the late 1980s, Asphalt Recovery Systems (Chicago, IL) began
piling asphalt debris on a seven-acre site in Chicago leased from
D. Raymond Shane.  The company claimed to be stockpiling the
material to recycle for road patching work.  In 1989, the city sued
Asphalt Recovery for operating a landfill on a site without a
permit and won a $4.8 million judgment for cleanup costs.

After Asphalt Recovery went out of business in 1993 leaving no
usable assets, the city sued Shane, contending that he had a duty
to check up on his tenant.  Having failed to do so, Shane was, in
the city's eyes, responsible for any environmental damage.  The
city code contains a provision in place that assigns financial
responsibility for environmental cleanups to landlords.

A Cook County circuit court judge ruled that, under the city code,
Shane was responsible for cleaning up the 300,000 tons of debris on
his property.  Henry Henderson, Chicago's environmental
commissioner, said that the decision sends a clear message to
unscrupulous operators masquerading as recyclers that they are
operating under a false assumption if they believe they can dump
their trash in Chicago and let taxpayers clean it up. Shane's
attorney has promised an appeal.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

EPA Discovers
Something Fishy

A 20% increase in the number of fish consumption advisories were
reported by state health agencies during fiscal 1994, according to
a survey compiled by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
The agency reported that 46 states have issued advisories, and
seven have statewide noticesFlorida, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Missouri, New Jersey, and New York.  Since the survey was
compiled, New Hampshire and Vermont have also issued statewide
advisories.

Fourteen percent of US lakes, 4% of U.S. rivers, all of the Great
Lakes, and most coastline are currently under advisories.  More
than 60% of the advisories are for mercury, primarily from coal-
burning power plants, incinerators, and industrial sites.  Other
contaminants triggering advisories include polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs), the pesticide chlordane, DDT, dioxin, and other
toxic substances that can accumulate in fish tissue.

The increase in advisories does not necessarily mean that lakes and
rivers are more pollutedit could signal an expansion of state
monitoring and assessment efforts.  Minnesota, for example, listed
565 advisories, more than double that of any other state.

And simply because a state has more waterbodies under advisory does
not mean that these states have the worst fish contaminant
problems.  According to Jeff Bigler of the EPA's Office of Water,
the high number of advisories more likely characterize both the
level of effort put into identifying waterbodies of concern and the
assessment methods used by the state for developing fish
consumption advisories.

Bigler says that the criteria for issuing an advisory often varies
from one state to another, with different thresholds used as the
basis for issuing advisories.  EPA Administrator Carol Browner
announced the release of a new EPA database, the National Listing
of Fish Consumption Advisories, during a speech at the American
Fisheries Society in Tampa, FL.  The database includes information
on the types of advisories, the species of fish affected, the
chemicals included in the advisory, locations, dates of issue, and
contact names and telephone numbers.  Maps allow users to select
between regions, states, chemicals, species, and a number of other
parameters for narrowing an advisory search.

The National Listing of Fish Consumption Advisories is available to
the public on five computer disks and will be upgraded annually.
The listing also is available on the Internet at
http://www.epa.gov/water.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Briefly Noted:

The European Union will ratify a treaty that protects lakes and
water sources that cross international borders.  The treaty, aimed
at establishing pollution prevention and control standards in
member nations, hopes to protect human health, promote prudent use
of natural resources, and address regional environmental problems.

Carol Browner, EPA administrator, announced a package that
includes Superfund reforms designed to make cleanups more cost-
effective, reduce litigation, and help communities and states
become more involved. The EPA reforms will establish a National
Remedy Review Board to control costs, establish reasonable national
assessment criteria, and provide stakeholders a role in risk
assessment design.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

GAC Improves
Biofilter Effect

A team of researchers from the National Tsing Hua University (Hsin
Chu, Taiwan, ROC) and Union Chemical Labs (ITRI, Hsin Chu, Taiwan,
ROC) have joined together to systematically investigate the
transient behavior of biofilters during shut down, restart
operations and shock loading.  Toluene was used as the gas
pollutant in the study.

Biodegradation processes have been validated as a promising
alternative to other conventional air pollution control
technologies.  Toluene is a toxic air pollutant and a common
constituent emitted from many industrial processes, such as
chemical manufacturing, painting, and petroleum refining.  An
economically feasible control method would be advantageous in light
of increasingly stringent regulation for air emissions of volatile
organic compounds (VOCs).

With the easily biodegradable nature of toluene, biofiltration of
air emissions containing this pollutant is considered a preferable
alternative to other traditional physical and chemical air
pollution control methods, including scrubbing, incineration, and
activated carbon adsorption.  Advantages of this process include
low investment and operating costs, high removal efficiency and
reliable operational stability.  Furthermore, high destruction
efficiency of the pollutant in the biofilter causes no secondary
pollution.

Biofiltration can be described as a process that utilizes microbial
activity for the aerobic degradation of pollutants.  A biofilter
contains filter materials (mainly compost or peat) on which
microorganisms are immobilized to form a biolayer.  When waste
gases pass through the reactor, target pollutants diffuse into the
biofilm with subsequent aerobic biodegradation.  In general,
natural filter materials provide sufficient inorganic nutrients for
microorganisms, thus the addition of inorganic nutrients is not
required.

In the Taiwan study, experiments were conducted in three
laboratory-scale biofilters with mixtures of chaff/compost,
diatomaceous earth (DE)/compost, and granular activated carbon
(GAC)/compost, respectively, as the filter materials.  The response
of each biofilter to shock loading was studied by abruptly changing
the concentration or flow rate of the inlet gas.  For each
transient operation, toluene concentration was continuously
measured until a new steady state was achieved.

According to their report, published in Hazardous Waste & Hazardous
Materials [12, 3, 1995], the researchers found that the biofilters
responded effectively to the shut down and restart operation and
shock loading of toluene concentration or gas flow rate.  In
addition, the highly adsorptive GAC could improve the biofilter
performance, especially for the treatment of less water soluble
compounds.  The GAC/compost biofilter had the highest maximum
elimination capacity of 97 (g hr-1m-3).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Essex Team Treats
Landfill Leachate

High concentrations of sulfate in wastewater streams subjected to
anaerobic digestion have been considered undesirable because of the
production of sulfide during digestion, which can inhibit
methanogenesis.  It has been reported that a >76% removal of
organic COD is possible when high sulfate wastewater (from an
edible fat manufacturer) was anaerobically digested, although only
21-45% overall COD was removed because of sulfide remaining in the
effluent.

Appreciable sulfate may be present normally in effluents, and
anaerobic digestion results in low biogas formation and high
concentrations of sulfide in the effluent.  Anaerobic digestion has
also been successful in removing high sulfate concentrations from
mine waters and contaminated groundwater.

Scientists at the University of Essex (Dept. of Biology, Colchester
CO4 3SQ, England) have finished a study in which landfill leachate
was treated in upflow hybrid (sludge-bed/fixed-bed) anaerobic
reactors by both methanogenic digestion and by sulfate-reducing
digestion (Water Resources; 30, 1, 1996).

The University of Essex study achieved steady state removal
efficiencies of COD under methanogenic digestion of 81-97%,
depending upon organic loading rate; and effective treatment
occurred up to a volumetric COD loading rate of 3.75 kg COD m-3 d-1.
In sulfate-reducing digesters SO24- was converted stoichiometrically
to dissolve H2S, driving organic matter mineralization.  Sulfate
concentrations of 35, 105 and 175 mM in the feed resulted in SO24-
removal efficiencies of 92, 52 and 35%, respectively.

Steady state removal efficiencies of organic COD in the sulfate-
reducing digesters averaged 62% at 35mM, 80% at 105 mM, and 84% at
175 mM feed SO24- concentrations.  The ratio of COD:SO24- (g/g)
utilized was dependent upon the concentration of SO24- present, and
at 35 M SO24- was 0.67.

At an organic loading rate <1 kg COD m-3 d-1 the sulfate reducing
digesters offered organic removal efficiencies comparable to
methanogenic digesters, but were less effective at higher loading
rates.  Propionate accounted for the majority of the residual COD
in the effluents from the methanogenic digesters, but acetate in
the effluent from the sulfate-reducing digesters.

Removal of sulfide from the reactors was achieved by addition of
iron and by off gassing sulfides, but there was no increase in COD
removal after sulfide removal which indicated that sulfide toxicity
was not significant.  Both methanogenic and sulfate-reducing
reactors completely removed up to 100 ppm Cu, Mn, Ni and Zn added
in the feed, indicating that even methanogenic reactors produce
sufficient sulfide to precipitate these metals completely.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Molten Metal, SEG
Will Process Resins

Scientific Ecology Group, Inc., (SEG, 1560 Bear Creek Rd., Oak
Ridge, TN 37830; Tel: 423/481-0222, Fax: 423/481-0827), a
subsidiary of Westinghouse Electric Corp. (11 Stanwix St.,
Pittsburgh, PA 15222-1384; Tel: 412/244-2000) and the world's
largest processor of low-level radioactive waste, has teamed with
Molten Metal Technology, Inc. (51 Sawyer Rd., Waltham, MA 02154;
Tel: 617/621-1315) to build a Quantum-CEP (Catalytic Extraction
Processing) facility for processing ion exchange resins.  The
facility is capable of processing 650 High Integrity Containers or
130,000 cu. ft. of ion exchange resins per year, representing 65%
of the U.S. market for low level radioactive ion exchange resin.

The facility has all required regulatory permits, is mechanically
complete, and has been turned over to operations.  Major systems
have been tested and the instrumentation and controls have been
calibrated.  Bud Arrowsmith, SEG president, said he is happy that
the facility is available on schedulethe facility has already
received spent ion exchange resins from customers.  William M.
Haney, III, president and CEO of Molten Metal, added that the
facility is the largest and most sophisticated system in the world
for handling this difficult radioactive material.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Oak Ridge Technology
License Is Available

A method for the destruction of chlorinated volatile organic
compounds (CVOCs), especially trichloroethylene (TCE) and
chloroform, using vapor phase off-gas treatment is available for
licensing from the Dept. of Energys (DOE) Oak Ridge National Lab,
Earth and Atmospheric Environmental Sciences Division.

The process can be used for both groundwater and soil remediation.
A basic bench scale proof of principle apparatus has been
constructed and tested.  The principal advantages of the process
are expected to be high efficiency, cost effectiveness, and minimal
production of secondary waste.  In addition, production systems
based on this technology are expected to be very compact for a
rather large capacity of CVOCs, should not be subject to fouling,
and are expected to require very minimal maintenance.

Commercial firms interested in procuring a license for this
technology may obtain more detailed technical information about the
invention by requesting and executing a Proprietary Information
Agreement (PIA).  To request a PIA, please contact James R. Palmer,
licensing executive at Lockheed Martin Energy Systems, Inc. (Office
of Technology Transfer, Building 701SCA, M/S 8242, P.O. Box 2009,
Oak Ridge, TN 37831; Tel: 615/574-7472, Fax: 615/576-8543).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Barrier Coatings
Lower Pollution

Nanostructured thermal barrier coatings for use on high efficiency,
low emission, natural gas-fired turbines are the subject of a
research project at Nanomaterials Research Corp. (NRC, 10960 N.
Stallard Place, Tucson, AZ 85737; Tel: 602/575-1354).  The ready
availability of clean natural gas at low prices accelerating the
use of gas turbines.  Over the next 10 years, NRC scientist Tapesh
Yadav projects advanced gas turbines and combined cycles will
account for about 45% of additions to global power generation
capacity.  In order to operate at minimum emission and high
efficiency levels, such equipment will require materials than can
withstand the anticipated high inlet and operating temperatures and
contain the pollutant-laden exhaust.

Nanostructured coatings, which are capable of withstanding the
additional heat, are based on powders with nanoscale dimensions in
the 10-7 - 10-9 meter range.  Such materials could be used in turbine
combustor, blades, vanes, and transition pieces.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Ceramic, Metal Bond
for Hot Gas Filters

Intumescent materials for joining ceramics to metals at high
temperatures in hot gas filtration systems have been formulated by
scientists at CeraMem Corp. (12 Clematis Ave., Waltham, MA 02154-
7035; Tel: 617/899-0467).  Other potential applications for the
materials include heat exchangers, high temperature vehicle
emissions control systems, and heat protection and control systems
for new jet engines.

The cost effective sealing of ceramic components such as
particulate filters to high temperature metal alloys in advanced
coal-based power systems operating at temperatures of up to 1000C
is extremely difficult, reports Robert J. Higgins.  The problem
stems from the large disparity in thermal expansion coefficients of
these two types of materials.

This requirement to seal large gaps between ceramic and metallic
components, coupled with the need to maintain appropriate stress
levels on the ceramic components at all temperatures, places
extreme demands on the properties of the material used to seal the
ceramic-metal gap.  Similar systems operating at lower temperatures
utilize vermiculite-based intumescent mats for this purpose, but
such materials have limited lifetimes when used at temperatures in
excess of 500C and degrade at temperatures above 800C.

CeraMem scientists are investigating the use of multilayer,
biceramic composites that can reversibly expand and contract
between room temperature and 1000C.  These composites will include
various combinations of high temperature oxides fabricated by the
surface modification treatment of thin, tape cast ceramic sheets.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

New and Retrofit
Coal Combustor

A new, ultralow nitrogen oxides (NOx) pulverized coal combustor is
under development by engineers at Busek Co., Inc. (19 Kearney Rd.,
Needham, MA 02194-2505; Tel: 508/655-5565). The concept, reports
Vladimir Hruby, is applicable to both new and retrofit wall- and
tangentially-fired utility and industrial boiler systems.

The process focuses on a new method of controlling the
stoichiometry, kinetics, and fuelbound nitrogen evolution in the
fuel devolatilization and initial combustion stages.  An extremely
fuel-rich reaction zone is sustained by the low temperature, highly
oxidizing plasma environment.  The plasma contains highly reactive
oxygen radicals and permits fuel devolatilization at
stoichiometries where fuelbound nitrogen conversion to compounds
other than oxides are favored.

The power consumption required to create the plasma is less than
0.5% of the thermal input of the combustor.  Thermal management
techniques for primary zone combustion limit the formation of
thermal NOx, which results in NOx emissions several times lower
than those in commercially available low NOx burners.  The first
part of the Busek project will involve the expansion of earlier
experience with the plasma ignition and rapid devolatilization of
coal, followed by the demonstration of the new concept.
Experiments will be performed to measure NOx emissions and power
consumption as a basis for the design of a 6 million Btu/hr.
combustor.  Later, the combustor will be built and tested in a
commercial boiler.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Turbine Emissions
Are Reduced

An advanced technology catalytic combustor (ATCC) for application
on ground-base, natural gas-powered turbine engines is under
construction at Precision Combustion, Inc. (PCI, 25 Science Park,
New Haven, CT 06511-1968; Tel: 203/786-5215).

William C. Pfefferle reports that the ATCC will represent an
ultrahigh efficiency, environmentally superior, cost competitive
technology.  He predicts that design innovations will overcome the
limits of earlier catalytic combustion designs and result ultralow
emissions of nitrogen oxides (NOx) and carbon monoxide (CO) of one
and five parts per million (ppm), respectively.

PCI will first build at least one laboratory prototypes for
demonstration at atmospheric pressure and will then explore design
variations.  Subsequently, a full scale combustor will be built for
demonstration at full pressure in preparation for testing on an
engine. High combustion stability, operability without a preburner,
high turndown, and durability are said to be other advantages of
the ATCC.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Plastics Council
Focuses on Reuse

There are several challenges unique to the recycling of plastics,
including the difficulties associated with identification and
separation, high contamination levels, and costly equipment.  In an
effort to reduce the effect of these problems and boost recovery
rates, the American Plastics Council (APC, 1275 K St., NW,
Washington, DC 20005; Tel: 800/243-5790) is investing in innovative
technologies.

In 1994, the APC opened the Multi-Products Recycling Facility
(MPRF) in Boston, MAthe first large-scale U.S. research and
development facility for plastics recycling.  The facility
transforms plastic contaminated with materials such as metals and
fabric into clean, reusable plastics.  To date, the facility has
processed more than 100,000 lbs. of used plastics from automobiles,
computers, business equipment, and appliances.

Last spring, a new project, operated by MBA Polymers Inc. (829
Heinz Ave., Berkeley, CA; Tel: 510/704-7585) and sponsored by the
APC, was started in Berkeley, CAthe Advanced Plastics Recycling
Pilot Line Facility.  This 10,000 sq. ft. plant aims to develop and
demonstrate advanced mechanical recycling technologies for
plastics.  Specific goals include improving recycling economics by
increasing throughput and reducing capital costs; cleaner post-
processed plastics; and investigation of new separation processes.

The pilot recycling line is reported to process all types of
plastic materials including those containing foreign materials such
as ferrous and nonferrous metals, labels, foam, and wiring.  High
temperature, high pressure water is used to remove paints and
coatings.

Another goal of the APC is to improve identification methods for
used plastics.  For example, the P/ID 28, a near-infrared
instrument developed by Bruker Instruments Inc. (15 Fortune Dr.,
Billerica, MA; Tel: 508/667-9580), under APC sponsorship, is
reported to classify at least 23 different types of plastic,
including black plastics, which are generally difficult to
identify.  The P/ID 28 uses the unique make-up of different
plastics, primarily the long chains of specific chemical species
which determine plastic type, as well as its mechanical, chemical
and physical properties.  When infrared light impinges on the
various chemical species along a polymer chain, they vibrate at
different frequencies, absorbing energy at wave lengths that are
characteristic of specific types of plastic.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Memphis May
Achieve Goal

Recycling appears to be a Memphis, TN growth industry.  With three
new initiatives under way, the local recycling business seems to be
on the verge of a boom.  Construction of the city's $3 million
recycling center has just begun, while the community's curbside
recycling recently spread to another 40,000 homes in the Midtown
area.  Champion Recycling Corp. (4939 Gasmer Dr., Houston, TX
77035; Tel: 713/723-6397, Fax: 713/723-3648) has launched a city-
wide recycling program in Memphis businesses as well as public and
private schools, churches and community centers.

All this activity is expected to help Memphis achieve and come
close to the state of Tennessee's mandate to reduce its wastestream
volume by 25%.  Benny Lendermon, the city's division director of
Public Works, said that Memphis may miss the end-of-the-year
deadline, but the city is well ahead of most areas in Tennessee.

According to the state's Solid Waste Act of 1992, Tennessee
communities are required to show that they have reduced their waste
stream by 25% by the end of the year.  If a community hasn't met
this mandate, it must explain why and what it plans to do to
achieve this waste reduction.  The measure is up for re-
authorization before the Tennessee General Assembly during the
coming session.  It appears most communities will have failed to
meet this requirement, so state lawmakers may discuss extending the
25% reduction mandate.

A contract has been signed between the city of Memphis and FCR Inc.
(1373 E. Moorehead St., Charlotte, NC 28204; Tel: 704/347-0312) to
build a nearly $3 million recycling center on a city-donated six-
acre piece of property.  FCR already operates nine recycling
centers along the Eastern Seaboard and other communities in the
South.  As part of the 10-year contract with the city, Memphis will
receive $50 per ton for the recyclable materials which public work
crews will deliver to the facility as part of its soon-to-be
citywide curbside recycling program.  FCR guarantees Memphis $1
million in revenue a year for the estimated 20,000 tons of material
expected to be generated annually.  The community will save about
$400,000 a year in tipping fees by not taking this waste to the
local landfill.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

BioChem Offers
Online Monitor

BioChem Technology Inc. (100 Ross Rd., King of Prussia, PA; Tel:
610/768-9360) has a new biological technology for monitoring
wastewater treatment processes.  BioGuide technology is a real-time
online monitor of bacteria in activated sludge wastewater treatment
plants that allows more accurate control of the treatment process.

Samples are taken and analyzed in the bioreactor and results are
fed to a computer system that can control the pumps and valves of
the treatment process. Jaw Lee, president of BioChem, explains that
the company monitors the bacteria activity inside the process
instead of the conventional way of monitoring bacteria involvement.
The process was developed, Lee says, because BioChem believed that
the wastewater treatment process needs to be controlled just like
any other biochemistry process.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Device Will Sample
Waterborne Residues

Scientists from the Dept. of the Interior (DOI, National Biological
Service, Midwest Science Center, 4200 New Haven Rd., Columbia, MO
65201) and the Fish and Wildlife Service (Vicksburg Field Office,
Vicksburg, MI 39180) used semipermeable membrane devices (SPMDs) to
passively sample aqueous polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs)
and polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs) in Bayou Meto, AR.  The
two sites were upstream and downstream from the confluence with a
tributary that delivers PCDDs and PCDFs to the Bayou.

Bayou Meto is a turbid, low-gradient stream that originates in the
highlands of central Arkansas and empties into the Arkansas River
290 km to the southeast.  Near Jacksonville, AR, about 40 km
downstream from Bayou Meto's source, a tributary joins Bayou Meto
from the North.  This tributary, Rocky Branch Creek, is a point
source of PCDDs and PCDFs, especially of 2,3,7,8-
tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and 2,3,7,8-
tetrachlorodibenzofuran (TCDF) to Bayou Meto.

In 1971, the Vertac Co. began manufacturing phenoxy acid herbicides
at a plant in Jacksonville.  Based on extensive contamination with
PCDDs and PCDFs, the Vertac site is ranked 18th on the EPA's list
of 1301 Superfund sites.

Aquatic biota, including fish and amphibians, from Rocky Branch
Creek and Bayou Meto have been found to contain elevated
concentrations of PCDDs and PCDFs.  Wood duck eggs collected from
Bayou Meto 9 km downstream from the confluence with Rocky Branch
Creek contained concentrations of TCDD as high as 510 pg/g on a wet
weight basis.  TCDD exhibits endocrine- and reproduction-disrupting
effects in fish and wildlife.  Laboratory studies indicate that
extremely low concentrations of TCDD can impair reproduction in
these animals.

The semipermeable membrane device and its use as a sampler of
aqueous hydrophobic organic contaminants have been extensively
characterized.  The SPMDs used in the present work can be briefly
described as segments of layflat polyethylene tubing with thin
films of triolein sealed inside.  The devices function as passive,
in situ aquatic samplers that sequester dissolved hydrophobic
contaminants from water.

Following dialysis, cleanup, and fractionation, four replicate 17-g
SPMD samples from each site were analyzed by GC/MS, and four were
evaluated by H4IIE bioassay.  As reported in Environmental Science
& Technology [29, 2886-2892, 1995], traces of only PCDD and PhCDDs
were detected in samples from the upstream site. The TCDD
equivalents obtained by bioassay of replicate SPMD samples agreed
well with results obtained by GC/MS.  The quantities sequestered by
SPMDs at the downstream site were used to estimate the aqueous
concentrations for both compounds as 2 pg/L.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

PUBLICATIONS

Lab Directory
Now Available

The 1996 Directory of Environmental Testing Labs is available from
DynCorp (Directory Dept., 300 N. Lee St., Alexandria, VA 22314;
Tel: 703/519-1000).  The directory is aimed at those who require
laboratories that provide analyses for dioxins, radiochemistry,
organics, metals, air, geochemistry, and microbiological
parameters.

Information on the analytical capabilities, instrumentation,
certifications and special services performed by over 600
environmental testing laboratories in the U.S. and Canada is
available.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

CALENDAR

February 25, 1996, Waste Management '96 will be held in Tucson, AZ.
For more information, call 520/624-8573.

February 28-March 1, 1996,  Emerging Solutions to VOC & Air Toxics
Control will be held in Clearwater, FL.  Contact: A&WMA Registrar,
Tel: 412/232-3445, Fax: 412/232-3450.

March 3-8, 1996, Pittcon '96 Conference on Analytical Chemistry &
applied Spectroscopy, will be held in Chicago, IL.  Contact:
Pittsburgh Conference, Tel: 412/687-1113.

March 18-21, 1996, The American Defense Preparedness Assn. will
hold its Environmental Symposium & Exhibition in Orlando, FL.  Call
703/522-1820 for more information.

March 19-23, 1996, ENTSORGA, the International Fair for Waste
disposal and Recycling, will be held in Cologne, Germany.  Contact
the conference for more information at (02 21) 821-2494/29 07 or
fax (02 21) 821-10/28 26.

May 21-23, 1996, The Fourth Annual International Environmental
Visualization Exposition (IEVE '96) will be held at Research
Triangle Park, NC.  Contact: Registrar, Tel: 412/232-3445 or Fax:
412/232-3450.

June 23-28, 1996, The Air & Waste Management Association Annual
Meeting will be held in Nashville, TN.  Contact: Registrar, Tel:
412/232-3445 or Fax: 412/232-3450.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-18</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B020-70</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev59.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002534 text/html 68490
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:23:41 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:42 GMT
Content-length: 68301
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev59.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>PHYSICAL TREATMENTS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>Moringa Seeds&nbsp;Remove Turbidity</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(446 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>Adsorption Power&nbsp;for Separations</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(218 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>Microfiltration&nbsp;Removes H2S</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(383 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>Multimedia Filters&nbsp;Remove Oocysts</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(201 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>Coated Fiber Optic&nbsp;Helps Degrade Phenol</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(494 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>BIOLOGICAL TREATMENTS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>Anaerobic Breakdown&nbsp;of Some Toxic Organics</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(373 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CHEMICAL TREATMENTS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>Growth Ahead for&nbsp;Treatment Chemicals</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(315 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>TESTING/MONITORING</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>DNA Test for Live&nbsp;Crypto Oocysts</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(530 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>Differing Views&nbsp;on Compliance</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(693 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>Overtones in&nbsp;Budget Stalemate</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(116 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>Briefly Noted:</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(168 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>WASTEWATER</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><A HREF = "#12"><LI>Regeneration Won't&nbsp;Bog this Absorption</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(428 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>Champion Closes the&nbsp;Loop for Pulp Mills</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(261 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ACTIVATED CARBON</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>Tailoring to Meet&nbsp;Application Specs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(293 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>ULTRAPURE WATER</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><A HREF = "#15"><LI>Membrane Reactor&nbsp;Purges Dissolved O2</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(412 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INDUSTRY NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><A HREF = "#16"><LI>U.S. Filter Is&nbsp;Dealing Again</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(237 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><A HREF = "#17"><LI>DSI, Osmonics&nbsp;Nearly as One</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(131 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><A HREF = "#18"><LI>European Bank&nbsp;Offers Loans</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(541 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><A HREF = "#19"><LI>Wheelabrator, Betz&nbsp;in Strategic Alliance</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(171 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><A HREF = "#20"><LI>Goodbye Water&nbsp;Meter Readers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(113 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><A HREF = "#21"><LI>Life Industries Wins&nbsp;Mexican Concession</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(196 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><A HREF = "#22"><LI>French Do Adore&nbsp;the British Water</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(229 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><A HREF = "#23"><LI>Philly Suburban&nbsp;Keeps Growing</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(128 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>Briefly Noted:</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(317 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>POTABLE WATER</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#25"><A HREF = "#25"><LI>Bone Charcoal, Sand&nbsp;Clear the Water</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(419 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><A HREF = "#26"><LI>Can Structured&nbsp;Water Be Good</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(284 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>REVERSE OSMOSIS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#27"><A HREF = "#27"><LI>Daicel Increases&nbsp;It's Production</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(218 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><A HREF = "#28"><LI>Countertop System&nbsp;from Premier</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(212 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><A HREF = "#29"><LI>Profit Margins&nbsp;Can Be Slim</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(362 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>CALENDAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(162 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Moringa Seeds
Remove Turbidity

Suleyman A. Muyibi and Lilian Evison (Dept. of Civil Engineering,
University of Newcastle, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 7RU, U.K.) have
continued their tests documenting the usefulness of seeds of
Moringa aptera, the horseradish tree, for water treatment,
especially in tropical developing countries.

Evison reports that the goals of the lab tests were to determine
the multiple effects of five physical factors: rapid and slow
mixing rates, mixing time, dosage of coagulant, and initial
turbidity on the coagulation of turbid water with Moringa seeds.
The engineers wanted to find the best dosage rate and the optimal
values for rapid mix velocity and time and slow mix velocity and
time for turbidities of 50-750 NTU.

For their tests, the investigators used stock dilute kaolin
suspensions with 5 g kaolin, 500 ml distilled water, and 500 ml of
50 mg/l sodium carbonate solution. They prepared samples of
different turbidities by diluting the stock suspension. They ground
dry Nigerian Moringa seeds to a powder and blended 5 g of powder in
200 ml distilled water to extract the active ingredients. They
filtered the suspension and diluted it to make a stock solution of
1,000 mg/l.

To measure the degree of coagulation achieved, an optical
tachometer was used to measure changes in the speed of rotation of
a glass paddle in the test vessel, a 1 l glass beaker. They carried
out 32 randomized tests to determine the effects of operating
variables. Each test used 500 ml of turbid water with a dose of
Moringa solution. After different times of slow and fast mixing,
the mixtures were left to settle for two hours before measurement
of supernatant turbidity.

Evison writes in Water Research [29-12, 2689-2695, 1995] that the
initial turbidity and the strength of Moringa dosage were the most
significant factors in coagulating kaolin suspensions. Within a
dosage range of 50-300 mg/l, Muyibi and Evison found optimum
dosages of 50 and 100 mg/l for initial turbidities of 50-150 NTU
and 250-550 NTU, respectively. An increase in Moringa dosage leads
to a decrease in turbidity up to the optimum dosage, when floc
restabilization begins to increase the residual turbidity.

At an initial turbidity of 50 NTU and an optimum dosage of 50 mg/l,
the optimal velocity gradient for rapid mix is 432/s and 1 minute
at 50 NTU initial turbidity. At 225-750 NTU, the optimum rapid mix
velocity gradient and time were 443/s and 4 minutes. The residual
turbidities at the optimum velocity gradient for rapid mix and time
were <10 NTU at both high and low initial turbidities. It was found
that the higher the initial turbidity of a sample, the lower its
residual turbidity.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Adsorption Power
for Separations

Kent S. Knaebel (Adsorption Research Inc. (6185D Shamrock Ct.,
Dublin, OH 43017: Tel: 614/798-9090) writing in Chemical
Engineering [102-11, 92-102, 1995] set out to review the principles
and capabilities of adsorption. Knaebel defines adsorption as a
separation process that selectively transports components of a gas
or liquid phase to the surface of a solid adsorbent. Adsorption has
the power to make separations beyond the limits of distillation,
absorption, or membrane systems, and that advances in adsorption
technology are opening up new applications in environmental
applications and industrial processes.

Knaebel explains that most adsorption systems consist of a pair of
fixed beds in parallel so that one is regenerating while the second
is adsorbing. The common adsorbent media are silica gel, activated
alumina, activated carbon, zeolites, mordenites, and carbon
molecular sieves. Many other minerals, organic materials, and
synthetic substances are adsorbents. Their key properties are
capacity, selectivity, regenerability, kinetics, compatibility, and
cost. Capacity is a function of surface area, pore size
distribution, iodine number, and molasses number.

Key factors to consider in choosing an adsorbent are adsorption
equilibrium, heat effects, and the dynamics of bed behavior.
Equilibrium and heat effects limit adsorption capacity and
selectivity, as Knaebel shows at length in a detailed discussion of
heat effects, adsorption isotherms, and adsorption dynamics in
relation to design.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Microfiltration
Removes H2S

Air stripping by cascade aeration is the usual method of removing
hydrogen sulfide from groundwater in central Florida. Air stripping
may be economical, but Mark A. Thompson, Uday G. Kelkar, and James
C. Vickers (Malcolm Pirnie Inc., 11382 Rock Landing Dr., Suite 400,
Newport News, VA 23606-4206; Tel: 804/873-8700, Fax: 804/873-8723)
point out that it has many shortcomings. By precipitating elemental
sulfur, air stripping raises turbidity and often creates a smell
around treatment plants. Aeration is not efficient over 6.5 pH, but
a lower pH increases corrosion in the system. Aeration actually
removes about 20% of H2S, and chlorination oxidizes the remainder
to S0.

As an alternative to aeration, Thompson's group conducted
feasibility studies of microfiltration in combination with H2S
chemistry manipulation at Oviedo, FL. Their procedure begins with
reducing pH of alkaline groundwater to <6.5 in order to make H2S
the dominant sulfur specie and make oxidation of H2S to So the
prevailing chemical reaction. They did this by oxidation with
chlorine.

The authors filtered their groundwater supply and pumped it
directly into a chlorination unit, bypassing aeration. This
expedient reduces dissolved oxygen levels. The investigators held
the oxidation/reduction potential (ORP) of the feedwater near zero
by regulating the chlorine dosage and preventing it from turning
positive when So is oxidized to SO4-2.

The goal was to keep the ORP as close to zero as possible in order
to obtain maximum So production. The best dosage was about 6 mg/l
Cl. Jar tests were made to determine the best chlorine dosage.
After chlorination, the authors sent the feedwater through a
microfiltration test unit at a constant flow of 2 gpm or 0.5 g/m2
of membrane area for 3 days. The test unit had a membrane area of
4 m2 with 0.2 micron average pore size. The authors monitored raw
and finished water with a particle counter to observe turbidity.

Thompson reports in Desalination [102, 287-291, 1995] that the test
unit reduced turbidity to <0.2 NTU without any trace of hydrogen
sulfide or any flux reduction. They reduced trihalomethane levels
by 40% from 80-90 micrograms/l by adding alum before chlorination.
Thompson concludes that microfiltration is technically an
alternative to aeration. The product water is odorless and less
corrosive, and the procedure is sensitive and flexible when well
managed.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Multimedia Filters
Remove Oocysts

Because Cryptosporidium parvum oocysts and Giardia lamblia cysts
resist disinfection, two Washington engineers have tested
controlling the cysts by using multimedia filtration. The pilot
study shows that multimedia filtration is potentially an important
alternative to disinfection.

Jerry E. Ongerth and Julie Proctor Pecararo (Environmental Health
SC-34, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105) conducted the
study with a system consisting of direct filtration with inline
flocculation, multimedia filtration, low turbidity and alkalinity
raw water with optimum alum coagulation, and constant rate
operation at 1 gpm or 5 gpm/ft2 of filter. Their feedwater was
Seattle city water seeded with Giardia and Cryptosporidium. The
multimedia filter consisted of a flanged 15.2 cm diameter acrylic
tubing with 45.7 cm anthracite coal, 22 cm silica sand, 14.7 cm
garnet sand, and three grades of supporting gravel.

Ongerth reports in AWAA Journal [87-12, 83-89, 1995] that the pilot
multimedia filter achieved nearly 3 logs (99.9%) removal of
Cryptosporidium parvum oocysts and better than three logs removal
of Giardia lamblia oocysts. In view of the 5 micron size of
Cryptosporidium oocysts, Ongerth concludes that direct filtration
by multimedia is effective and that it can be a practical
alternative to disinfection under consistent, well-regulated
operating conditions.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Coated Fiber Optic
Helps Degrade Phenol

While the effectiveness of titanium oxide in photocatalyzing the
degradation of organic and inorganic pollutants is well known, the
development of a practical photodegradation reactor has not been so
easy because absorption and scattering have limited the efficiency
of light utilization in conventional fixed bed and slurry reactors.
Two California engineers believe they have solved this problem by
inventing a fixed-bed photocatalytic reactor system which uses a
TiO2-coated fiber optic cable to transmit light to the
photocatalyst.

Nicola J. Piell and Michael R. Hoffmann (W.M. Keck Labs, California
Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125; Fax: 818/395-3170)
used 3 mm quartz rods and 1 mm quartz optical fibers as substrates
for bonding three coats of titanium oxide from concentrated
suspensions. The reactor system consists of a light source, a
coated fiber-optic bundle, and a reaction vessel. The UV light
source is a 1,000 W xenon arc lamp. The fiber bundle consists of 72
1 mm quartz optical fibers. The reactor is a 227 ml cylindrical
Pyrex vessel with a glass frit and a bottom inlet for introducing
atmospheric oxygen.

Fibers at one end of the cable are inserted individually into the
vessel through holes drilled concentrically 1.5mm apart in the cap.
The vessel has 3 sample ports arranged vertically 1.5 mm apart.
Piell and Hoffman used the system to test the degradation of 190 ml
of a 0.1 mM solution of 4-chlorophenol (4-CP). They monitored
chloride ion production during oxidation by means of a chloride-
selective electrode and ion chromatography. pH changes were
monitored with a pH meter. The disappearance of 4-CP was observed
spectrophotometrically and by high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC).

Peill reports in Environmental Science & Technology [29-12, 2974-
2981, 1995] that complete degradation of 4-CP took 5-13 hrs.,
depending on the input light flux and its incident angle.
Increasing the minimum incident angle of light input increased the
measured efficiency of degradation. Increasing the concentration of
titania in the suspensions for coating the glass fibers increased
their light absorption efficiency.

The overall light absorption efficiency of a bundled array appears
to be a function of both the density of fibers in the array and the
titania coating characteristics. Peill reports that the fiber-optic
reactor has a maximum quantum efficiency of 0.011 for 4-CP
oxidation compared to 0.0065 for a slurry reactor under similar
conditions. This is two orders of magnitude better than previous
fixed bed reactors. The fiber-optic system appears to have the
advantages of a fixed bed reactor and a higher efficiency than a
slurry reactor. There was no heat buildup in the reactor and no
degradation of fiber coatings, except for the heaviest coatings.

It was concluded that coated fiber-optic reactors should be
adaptable to continuous flow or batch operations for treating gas
and liquid streams. The fiber-optic cable frees the photocatalyst
from direct dependence on a light source so that the fiber-reactor
system could be used for in situ remediation in the subsurface.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Anaerobic Breakdown
of Some Toxic Organics

Engineers at Tulane University have quantitatively determined the
anaerobic biodegradability of some toxic organic compounds in
petrochemical wastewaters.

Advantages of anaerobic over aerobic systems include lower energy
consumption, less sludge, and potential recovery of energy from
biogenic methane. John M. Stewart (Dept. of Civil & Environmental
Engineering, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70118) and four
associates at Tulane and Union Carbide investigated the effects of
different concentrations of ethylene glycol, acrylic acid,
acrolein, and allyl alcohol on acetate uptake by methanogenic
bacteria. They quantified the biodegradability of each compound and
identified intermediate degradation products.

Stewart reports in Water Research [29-12, 2730-2738, 1995] that the
group used a glucose and acetate fed enrichment culture that was
developed from an anaerobic digester. Anaerobic toxicity assays
were made at 35(C in 150 ml serum bottles filled anaerobically with
45 ml of glucose-acetate medium, 3 ml of nutrient medium, and 2 ml
of 50 g/l yeast extract. Acetic acid was added daily for 11 days
and daily gas production measured. They spiked the test bottles on
the 12th day with different concentrations of the four selected
toxic organic compounds and measured inhibition as the decrease in
methane production in comparison with a control.

It was found that ethylene glycol in concentrations of 5,000-20,000
mg/l completely inhibited acetate utilization by exhausting
alkalinity within 4 days. Lower concentrations are degraded to less
than 5 mg/l. Acetic acid, ethanol, and possibly acetaldehyde were
intermediate products before inhibition.

Acrylic acid inhibited methane production one day after spiking,
but slow recovery followed as volatile acids degraded. Acrylic acid
concentrations up to 100 mg/l can be treated to avoid inhibiting
methanogenesis. Concentrations of 500-1,500 mg/l acrylic acid
inhibit methane production for longer periods but bacterial
degradation to less than 1 mg/l takes place within 40 days.

Acrolein inhibited methane formation at concentrations as low as 10
mg/l immediately after spiking. A slow recovery followed. Recovery
time is directly proportional to acrolein concentration up to 150
mg/l. Allyl alcohol at concentrations up to 4,000 mg/l slowly
inhibited methane production after about 10 days because of slow
build up of volatile acids. However, biological methane potential
tests show that anaerobic bacteria degrade on more than 7% of allyl
alcohol.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Growth Ahead for
Treatment Chemicals

As the nation's water quality proves increasingly inadequate and
the need for clean water becomes more apparent, the U.S. specialty
water treatment chemicals (WTCs) industry continues to offer a
viable means of ensuring plentiful pure water supplies. New and
increasingly stringent environmental and pollution/dumping laws
influence the development of alternative water treatment
technologies (chemistries) that replace existing treatments.

According to Business Communications Co., Inc. report RC-002U,
Specialty Water Treatment Chemicals, the vast domestic water
treatment industry remains a mature yet profitable market. Of that
total market, specialty water treatment chemicals represent about
84%, or about $2.6 billion, and most of its profit. The specialty
water treatment chemicals market should see an average annual
growth rate (AAGR) of 5.3% to the year 2000.

With 1995 sales estimated at $947 million, corrosion and scale
inhibitors represent the largest segment of the specialty water
treatment chemicals. New toxicity requirements, among other
factors, contribute to a forecasted market reaching $1.3 billion in
the year 2000, resulting in a 7.3% AAGR.

Following close behind are the biocides and disinfectants with
projected 1995 sales of $821 million. Concerns about chlorine gas
toxicity and rising prices are making the higher priced yet safer-
to-use specialty biocidal and disinfectant chemicals more
attractive to consumers. The market forecast for 2000 is $984
million at an AAGR of 3.7%.

The coagulants and flocculants segment continues to evolve. With a
1995 market value of $270 million, anticipating a 2000 market of
$319 million, environmental restrictions on wastewater discharges
and the need for water conservation will fuel the growth of this
market. The expected AAGR is 3.4%.

Sales of filter media and adsorbents come primarily from activated
carbon. Those sales are estimated at $202 million in 1995, and are
expected to reach $251 million in 2000, with the 4.4% AAGR
reflecting demand for granular activated carbon, a versatile and
broad-spectrum absorbent.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

DNA Test for Live
Crypto Oocysts

Because bacterial culture methods don't work for Cryptosporidium
parvum oocysts, the standard indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA)
method for detecting them in environmental samples relies on
isolation and identification. Christine Wagner-Wiening and Peter
Kimmig (Landesgesundheitsant Baden-Wurttemberg, Weiderholdstr. 15,
D-70174 Stuttgart, Germany) point out that detection by staining
and counting by immunofluorescence microscopy does not distinguish
between live and dead oocysts or between C. parvum and other
species of Cryptosporidium.

Wagner-Weining and Kimmig devised a genetic test which uses a
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to detect live C. parvum oocysts.
Their excystation protocol before DNA extraction permits
distinguishing between live and dead oocysts.

Kimmig reports in Applied & Environmental Microbiology [61-12,
4514-4516, 1995] that they obtained C. parvum sporozoites by
incubating concentrated oocysts in phosphate-buffered saline
solution (PBS) containing 0.25% trypsin and 0.75% sodium
taurocholate at 37(C for 60 min. They removed the trypsin and
taurocholate by washing and centrifugation, and resuspended the
mixture of oocyst walls, oocysts, and excysted sporozoites in PBS.

Total DNA was extracted from excysted sporozoites by incubation at
58(C in a digestion buffer solution with 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate,
0.015 ml of 10 mg/ml proteinase K solution, 0.2 ml of 10 mM Tris-
HCl, 10 mM EDTA and 50 mM NaCl, and 0.07 ml dithiothreitrol in
water. The authors purified the DNA and eluted the dried, pelleted
extract in sterile water. They used synthetic oligonucleotide
primers CP 397 and CP 1270 to amplify an 873-bp region of a 2,395-
bp DNA fragment which encodes a repetitive oocyst protein.

Kimmig reports that PCR gene probe-positive signals occur only when
live sporozoites are present in the extraction medium after
digestion times of 5-90 min. DNase digestion after excystation
prevented false positive signals from the DNA of dead sporozoites.
The authors tested the specificity of the DNA primers for C. parvum
DNA by attempting to amplify target sequences from 46 other
microorganisms that occur in the same environment. They found no
amplified DNA products.

The sensitivity of their system was determined by direct counting
of serially diluted sporozoites before DNA extraction. Kimmig
reports that the specific 873-bp fragment is faintly visible when
the starting material contains as few as 100 sporozoites. A second
round of amplification sometimes increases sensitivity to 10
sporozoites, but this step is not always reliable. The specificity
and sensitivity of their DNA primers makes it possible to routinely
monitor low numbers of live C. parvum oocysts in environmental
samples.

The shortcomings of IFA are the subject of an editorial article in
Analytical Chemistry [67-12, 731A-734A, 1995] which reviews
alternative methods of detecting C. parvum. These include enzyme-
linked immunoabsorbent assay (ELISA), flow cytometry with
fluorescent cell sorting, fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH)
with confocal microscopy or flow cytometry, microscopy combined
with imaging by slow-scan charged coupling device, in vitro cell
culture, and electrorotation assay.

Analytical Chemistry concludes that the best of them takes 24 hours
and none of them yet replaces continuous turbidity measurements by
particle counting as a real-time measure of pathogens. Even though
particle counting is an indirect measure, it determines particle
sizes and warns of particles in the micron size range of cysts and
oocysts.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Differing Views
on Compliance

Its goal of maintaining and protecting surface water quality has
led the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to set some very low
limits for a variety of toxic pollutants. The demanding EPA
requirements for testing and reporting prompt contrasting reactions
from the chemical industry and the water treatment industry.

While Anna Rule (Hampton Roads Sanitation District, Virginia Beach,
VA; Tel: 804/874-1287) exposes the impracticalities and
inadequacies of compliance testing, Darrell R. Wilder
(Environmental Services Lab, Eastman Chemical Co., Kingsport, TN
37662-5054) sees compliance testing and waste minimization as
opportunities for self-directed efforts to eliminate sources of
pollution and reduce the burden of testing.

Writing in Water Environment & Technology [7-11, 31-34, 1995] Rule
points out that the minimum concentration at which a chemical's
presence can be determined by a specific method is an exceedingly
minute but imprecise quantity which has nevertheless become a
regulatory goal and performance standard. A method detection limit
(MDL) is the minimum concentration of a substance which can be
identified, measured, and reported with 99% confidence that its
concentration is greater than zero. EPA bases MDL on the standard
deviation of a set of replicate determinations.

The EPA has set water quality criteria for some substances at or
below MDLs without considering the limits of analytical technology.
Compliance with permit limits set below MDLs or at zero is
problematic because measurement errors, variability, and
uncertainty. Measurements at ultradilute levels are consequently
anything but absolutely true and exact determinations.

Rule indicates the flaws in deriving a confidence interval from a
set of determinations and suggests that prediction intervals or
tolerance intervals are more appropriate for estimating the range
of future multiple measurements and the probability that a given
percentage of them attain a given MDL. Rule points out that it
introduces a bias to treat results at or below an MDL as zero or
nondetectable while accepting higher values as true and accurate.

"All measurements, at any level, include defined and unavoidable
imprecision. Analytical and sample variance, or relative standard
deviation of measurements (RSD) is not constant throughout the
concentration range but gradually increases as the results approach
the lower or upper end of the analytical range... The practice of
eliminating low-level data by reporting 'less than' or 'zero' is
called left-censoring and is regarded as an unnecessary loss of
valuable information." While it is statistically valid to use low-
end data, this approach often conflicts with setting regulatory
limits.

Rule favors the calibration curve method as an alternative for
estimating measurement detection limits. This method finds
tolerance intervals for assessing future performance and uses them
to define uncertainty bands on the calibration curve. The analyst
may then compute and define minimum concentrations that have an
acceptable level of confidence with a predetermined RSD. The
calibration curve method is the basis of a proposal presented to
the EPA by a Detection/Quantitation Workgroup representing the
regulated community. Other concepts of MDL may be appropriate, but
the problem is the validity of low-end results. Carefully developed
and documented protocols should allow a more effective validation
and define more appropriate uses although at a higher cost.

Working the higher end of compliance testing, Wilder accepts
compliance testing as a fact of life for environmental discharges
in the chemical industry. Now that the NPDES program has entered a
phase of diminishing returns, the EPA is encouraging a "front end"
approach to pollution control that encourages proactive waste
minimization and pollution prevention.

Government initiatives and voluntary programs have created
financial incentives for chemical companies to go beyond routine
compliance by developing environmental strategies that reflect
environmental responsibility. Writing in Analytical Chemistry [25-
2, 77-89, 1995] Wilder presents a review of some new measurement
technologies for preventing pollution and cutting waste.

Wilder considers technologies for measurement of wasteload
concentrations, flow measurements, monitoring specific waste
components, monitoring networks, process control of activated
sludge treatment systems, and measurement of air emissions. Wilder
believes that internal and self-directed efforts by chemical
companies in all these areas give analysts scope for ingenuity and
creativity in identifying and eliminating sources of toxic
contaminants. Successful results could reduce the burden of
compliance testing.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Overtones in
Budget Stalemate

Congressional action on renewal of the Clean Water Act seems to
have been forgotten during the present confrontation over the
federal budget. Environmental affairs, however, are one of the
issues under contention in the battle to balance the budget.

Republicans are eager to cut spending on environmental programs in
their quest to trim a trillion dollars from the national spending
plan but they appear to be losing public support for any attempt to
limit the ability of the EPA to protect public health and the
environment. It is still not clear how the budget battle will end,
but it seems unlikely that Congress will be able to reform
environmental regulation by punitive budget cutting.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Briefly Noted:

    Rachel Furman of Onset Computer Corp. (P.O. Box 3450,
Pocasset, MA 02559-3450; Tel: 508/563-9000, Fax: 508/563-9477)
relates that the company's new StowAway TidbiT is the world's
smallest temperature logger. The TidbiT measures 1.2" wide by 1.6"
tall by 0.45" thick and is completely sealed and waterproofed. It
records temperatures and times at remote locations and at depths up
to 1,000 ft. The logger costs $149 and the base station kit costs
$123.

    N.J.C. Strahan, F.J. Nicholson, and I.D. Ogden (Food Science
Lab, Torrey, P.O. Box 31, Abbey Rd., Aberdeen AB9 8DG, Scotland,
U.K.) have coupled an ion mobility spectrometer to a computer-
automated sampling system to detect the volatile gases produced
when pathogenic bacteria metabolize their substrate. Strahan
explains that IMS uses a 63Ni source to ionize gas particles in an
electrical field. The time of flight of the ions is measured, and
the massive products of bacterial metabolism are identifiable by
their longer drift times. Results are reported in Analytica Chimica
Acta [313-1,2, 63-67, 1995].




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Regeneration Won't
Bog this Absorption

Peat Technologies Corp. (PTC, 9076 Little Sweden Rd., Cook, MN
55723-8814; Tel: 218/666-2962, Fax: 218/666-2963) has received an
exclusive, worldwide license from the University of Minnesota to
manufacture and market a new wastewater treatment product based on
technology developed at the University's Natural Resources Research
Institute (NRRI) in Duluth, MN.  The University has applied for a
patent, consisting of both composition of matter and process
claims, to protect the new technology.

The new material, "MultiSorb 100," is formed into granules of
specially processed peat and was developed after three years of
research at  NRRI.  It has shown outstanding performance in
adsorbing a wide variety of organics and heavy metals from various
wastewater streams.  Being granular in form, the peat particles
resist crushing, are dust-free, have high permeability to water
flow, and resist leaking of organic matter, while at the same time
having good ion exchange capacity.

MultiSorb 100 can be recycled and regenerated just as ion exchange
resins.  In contrast to current ion exchange technology, the
components of hard water or monovalent cations do not significantly
interfere with the binding ability of toxic heavy metal ions such
as zinc, copper, lead, cobalt, and chromium.

PTC has established and is operating a production facility to
produce the material in pilot quantities at the Leoni International
peat operation located south of Virginia, MN.  This facility, which
can produce 1/2 ton of product per day, will be upgraded to produce
24 tons of product per day by the third quarter of 1996.

Roy E. Larson, chairman and CEO of PTC, told WTN that the major
thrust of PTC is to manufacture and market MultiSorb 100 for
extracting metals and organic contaminants from wastewaters.  The
new adsorption material has removed dissolved forms of iron, lead,
zinc, barium, nickel, copper, and ethylene glycol from wastewater
at the laboratory-scale level.  Several successful tests have also
been made in the field using actual wastewater streams.  In many
cases, the effluents met drinking water standards and other
discharge criteria.

Because MultiSorb 100 can best handle wastewaters having pollution
concentrations of less than 500 ppm, it is most efficiently applied
as a polishing step in an overall wastewater treatment process,
following a membrane system for instance.  PTC's short term
objectives are to commercialize the new technology and to identify
the market niches where it is an efficacious and cost-effective
treatment method for the removal of metals and organics from
wastewaters.  The company is interested in developing various
strategic relationships to introduce the product and to establish
a marketing and sales effort.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Champion Closes the
Loop for Pulp Mills

Champion International Corp. (1 Champion Plaza, Stamford, CT 06921;
Tel: 203/358-7000, Fax: 203/358-2975) has begun commercial-scale
testing of its new Bleach Filtrate Recycle (BFR) Process at its
pulp and paper mill in Canton, NC. Champion says the BFR Process
has the potential to reduce the discharges of dissolved organic
matter from bleached-kraft mills and that it is an advance to the
goal of a closed loop system that will eliminate all process
effluents from the bleaching of paper pulp.

Champion developed BFR with the technical support of Sterling Pulp
Chemicals (1200 Smith, Suite 1900, Houston, TX 77002-4312; Tel:
713/650-3700, Fax: 713/650-9551). BFR is a unified package of
engineering systems that reorganize and redirect the flow of the
fluids used to bleach paper pulp. They trap process chemicals for
reclamation and reuse in the bleach plant; capture the non-fibrous
components of wood that are removed by bleaching and use them as
fuel in the pulp mill; and recycle the treated process water to the
pulp mill and the bleach plant. Champion says that BFR can reduce
the discharge of dissolved organic matter by about 90%, cut
discharges of chlorinated organic compounds to almost zero; and
virtually eliminate any color in effluent from the bleach plant.

Champion has licensed the HPD Division of Wheelabrator Water
Technologies to market BFR worldwide, and Champion and Sterling
have established The Closed Loop Alliance (10 Pearl St., Kingston,
NY 12401; Tel: 914/331-1431) to promote awareness of BFR and their
goal of making kraft mills environmentally friendly by closing the
loop on their waste streams.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Tailoring to Meet
Application Specs

Stephen J. Allen (Dept. of Chemical Engineering, Queen's University
of Belfast, Stranmillis Rd, Belfast BT9 5AH, U.K.) foresees a
demand for activated carbons which are prepared for specific
applications in water and wastewater treatment. He reports that
technology now in development will be able to produce carbons with
precisely engineered surface properties and pore sizes. Lignite, in
particular, is a source material that is suitable for activation in
different ways to produce absorption characteristics for specific
purposes.

Allen and a team of four U.S. and British engineers compared the
differences in absorption of sodium benzoate, 2,4-dichlorophenol,
and 2,4,6-trichlorophenol on five activated carbons made from the
same Crumlin lignite. They activated the lignite in a two-stage
experimental process with iron sulfate and steam at 800(C, zinc
chloride with steam at 600( and 800(C, and iron nitrate with steam
at 600( and 800(C.

Allen reports in Journal of Chemical Technology & Biotechnology
[64, 261-268, 1995] that chemical and steam activation each
improved the performance of activated carbons from Crumlin lignite,
and the two-stage combination gave the best results. The chemical
treatments that gave the best results on their own, iron nitrate
and zinc chloride at 800(C, also gave the best results when
combined with steam treatment.

These two carbons showed the poorest agreement with traditional
absorption theories. Allen suggests that this is because capillary
condensation accounts for significant extra absorption that is not
accounted for by models based on surface absorption. Allen's team
found a good correlation between surface area measured by nitrogen
absorption and the capacity of the carbons for absorbing benzoic
acid. The monolayer benzoic acid capacity also correlated well with
total absorptive capacity, showing that the dominant mechanism is
more likely to be pure absorption than capillary condensation.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Membrane Reactor
Purges Dissolved O2

Dissolved oxygen is usually purged from ultrapure water by thermal
degassing, vacuum degassing, nitrogen bubble deaeration, or the
addition of hydrazine or sodium sulfite. Engineers in Singapore
have invented a bench-scale membrane reactor that overcomes the
disadvantages of these physical and chemical methods in reducing
dissolved oxygen to less than 1.5 ppb.

K. Li, Ivy Chua, W.J. Ng, and W.K. Teo (Dept. of Chemical
Engineering, National University of Singapore, 10 Kent Ridge
Crescent, Singapore 0511) used a membrane reactor made from a
microporous polypropylene hollow fiber module packed with a
catalyst in the void space. They investigated the simultaneous
operation of both physical and chemical processes in purging the
water of oxygen.

The  membranes are hydrophobic with 0.04 cm OD, 0.003 cm wall
thickness, and 30 nm pores covering 33% of the hollow fiber
surface. The catalysts are beads of palladium-doped anion exchange
resins based on styrene and divinyl benzene. Li reports that the
engineers introduced purified hydrogen into the fiber lumens while
they fed deionized water saturated with air to about 8.3 ppm DO
into the shell side where it flowed through the catalyst packed
around the fibers. Dissolved oxygen (DO) diffuses from the water
through the hollow fibers to be purged by hydrogen. At the time,
hydrogen diffuses through the fibers into the water and reacts with
any remaining oxygen to form water.

The authors measured oxygen concentration in the gas phase with a
Perkin Elmer gas chromatograph using a thermal conductivity
detector and recorded the detector response on a PC with Perkin
Elmer software. They used an Orbisphere Model 3600 dissolved gas
analyzer to monitor dissolved oxygen in the feed and effluent
streams.

Li writes in Chemical Engineering Science [50-22, 3547-3556, 1995]
that the rate of dissolved oxygen removal by both physical and
chemical processes was controlled by the liquid film around the
hollow fiber membranes and catalyst particles in the shell side. At
low catalyst loadings, both physical and chemical processes
contributed to oxygen removal whereas at high catalyst loadings the
chemical reaction was dominant.

It was found that mass transfer studies show that the mass transfer
coefficient for physical stripping is generally smaller than the
coefficient for the chemical reaction. Both coefficients are
dependent on the rate of water flow through the reactor. The group
developed a mass transfer correlation which they expect to be
useful in designing a full-scale membrane reactor that will achieve
a DO level of 1.2 ppb.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

U.S. Filter Is
Dealing Again

U.S. Filter Corp. (73-710 Fred Waring Dr., Palm Desert, CA 92260;
Tel: 619/340-0098, Fax: 619/341-9368) continues its acquiring ways.
This time it is Jet Tech Inc. (Edwardsville, KS) and Continental
Water Systems Northwest (Auburn, WA). You have to ask, "Is FilmTec
next?"

Jet Tech manufactures high efficiency air diffusion equipment which
accelerate the destruction of organic contaminants in sequencing
batch reactors and autothermal thermophilic aerobic digesters which
treat sludge and solids for land applications or unrestricted
landfilling.

Continental Northwest supplies water treatment products and
services for high purity industrial water systems for the
electronics industry and operates a facility in Vancouver for
regenerating ion exchange resins. U.S. Filter plans to merge
Continental Northwest with its recently acquired Polymetrics
operations in Seattle.

U.S. Filter has inaugurated its US$6 million wastewater treatment
plant for the city of Yautepec in the Mexican state of Morelos.
Officials from the U.S. and Mexico gathered in Morelos to mark the
completion of the plant one year after the devaluation of the
Mexican peso. U.S. Filter designed, built, and operates the plant
under a direct concession agreement. It will treat 5.6 mgd of raw
sewage for the city of 48,000 people. Richard J. Heckman of U.S.
Filter says the Yautepec project is the company's third in Mexico
since the passage of NAFTA. U.S. Filter has also invested $1
million in its pharmaceutical, laboratory, and dialysis water
center in Mexico City.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

DSI, Osmonics
Nearly as One

The transaction requires the final execution of a definitive merger
agreement, approval of the merger agreement both companies,
regulatory approvals, and the satisfaction of customary closing
conditions, but Osmonics, Inc. (5951 Clearwater Dr., Minnetonka, MN
55343; Tel: 612/933-2277, Fax: 612/933-0141) and Desalination
Systems Inc. (DSI, 760 Shadowridge Dr., Vista, CA 92083; Tel:
619/598-1800) want to be as one.

Outstanding shares of DSI will be exchanged on a share-for-share
basis for Osmonics common stock.  The transaction is structured to
qualify as a tax-free exchange and a "pooling of interests" for
accounting and financial purposes. The value of the transaction is
approximately $30 million.  The merger is expected to add over $20
million to Osmonics' 1996 sales. Estimates vary, but DSI probably
has sales of $18-$19 million at the present time.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

European Bank
Offers Loans

The European Investment Bank is loaning ECU 70 million, about $92
million, to Aguas Argentina to finance the construction of new
sewer and wastewater treatment facilities for the northern part of
Buenos Aires. Aguas Argentina is a joint venture of Lyonnaise des
Eaux, S.G. de Barcelona, Compagnie Generale des Eaux, Sociedad
Comercial de la Plata, Meller S.A., and Banco de Galicia y Buenos
Aires. The project is part of a $4 billion program to extend
wastewater treatment services to 3.5 million people in parts of
Buenos Aires without adequate sewer services.

The European Investment Bank has been the long-term financing
agency of the European Union since 1958, and it finances capital
investments in countries which have cooperation agreements with the
union.

The Humanitarian Office of the European Community (ECHO) is backing
international reconstruction efforts in Haiti by granting ECU 5
million, about $6.5 million, in aid for 20 projects which include
developing supplies of safe drinking water for urban and rural
areas. This is the third phase of an aid program that ECHO began in
June 1995.

The Cohesion Fund of the European has granted ECU 117.7 million,
about $153 million, to help Greece in seven water-related projects.
They include a water pipeline system from the rivers Aliakmon and
Axios to Thessaloniki, enlarging and completing wastewater
treatment facilities at Thessaloniki, reinforcing of the Mornos
aqueduct, and biological water treatment and sewage treatment
stations at Agrino, Thiva, Pyrgos, and Yannitsa.

French and Chinese officials have signed a 30-year, $200 million
loan agreement to finance four projects in China that use French
equipment. The projects include water treatment facilities for
rural areas and municipal wastewater treatment facilities for the
city of Xiamen in southeast China. Yves Galland, the French
Minister for Foreign Trade, signed the agreement in Beijing on
December 4. France has granted similar low-interest loans totaling
$2.4 billion in the last decade.

The North American Development Bank has approved its first two
loans for environmental projects. Alfredo Phillips Olmedo of NADB
reports that NADBank directors have authorized funding for a $14.5
million  wastewater treatment plant in Ensenada, Baja California
and a $25.4 million fresh water system for Brawley, CS. The
binational bank created under NAFTA to support infrastructure
development will underwrite $6.45 million of the Ensenada project
which replaces an obsolete facility. NADBank will fund $17.2
million of the Brawley loan where the present water treatment plant
fails drinking water standards.


Water Stock Watch
(At Close, January 2, 1996)

                                    Current         Last
Company                   Symbol      Price         Month     Change

American Water Works      AWK        38.750         32.250    +6.500
Aquarion                  WTR        25.375         23.625    +1.750
Betz Labs                 BTL        41.250         40.250    +1.000
Calgon Carbon             CCC        12.000         12.875    -0.875
Connecticut Water         CTWS       27.500         28.000    -0.500
Dow Chemical Com.         DOW        71.125         71.375    -0.250
Duriron Co.               DURI       25.250         27.750    -2.500
FMC Corporation           FMC        67.500         74.000    -6.500
W.R. Grace                GRA       59.625          61.875    -2.250
Gould Pumps               GULD       25.000         24.375    +0.625
Hach Co.                  HACH       17.250         16.125    +1.125
Ionics, Inc.              ION        43.375         43.625    -0.250
Merck & Co.               MRK        64.375         61.625    +2.750
Nalco Chemical            NLC        30.750         30.500    +0.250
Osmonics                  OSM        19.875         18.250    +1.625
Rohm & Haas Co.           ROH        64.625         61.250    +3.375
Sybron Chemical           SYCM       10.750         12.375    -1.625
U.S. Filter               USF        26.625         22.500    +4.125

Source:  BCC, Inc.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Wheelabrator, Betz
in Strategic Alliance

Wheelabrator Water Technologies, Inc. (Liberty Lane, Hampton, NH
03842; Tel: 603/929-3129, Fax: 603/629-3129) and Betz Water
Management Group (4636 Somerton Rd., Trevose, PA 19047;
Tel:215/355-3300, Fax: 215/953-5544) have formed a strategic
alliance to build, own, and operate water treatment systems at
customer sites. Betz is responsible for sales, marketing, and
supplying specialty chemicals while Wheelabrator will undertake
system design, construction, and operations.

The alliance proposes to seek new opportunities in the pulp and
paper, petroleum refining, chemical, power, food, and steel
industries. The alliance has also agreed that Ecolochem Inc.
(Norfolk, VA) will participate as a preferred supplier of ultrapure
water services and technology.

Wheelabrator Water Technologies is a newly-formed subsidiary of WMX
Technologies Inc., and Betz Water Management is the global
technology unit of Betz Laboratories, Inc.

Wheelabrator Water Technologies reports that its Memtek Div. has
sold a third Rinsewater Maintenance System to McAlpin Industries of
Rochester, NY. The system will recycle 60-75 gpm for a new plating
line which plates steel parts for corrosion protection




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Goodbye Water
Meter Readers

The Utility Div. of Badger Meter, Inc. (4545 W. Brown Deer Rd.,
Milwaukee, WI 53223; Tel: 414/355-0400, Fax: 414/355-8096) has
signed an agreement with CellNet Data Systems Inc. (San Carlos, CA)
to develop an automatic water meter reader for water utilities.
CellNet will design radio frequency communication modules to relay
information from Badger's meters to water utilities.

Badger Meter has built water meters since 1905 and is a leader in
flow measurement and flow control technologies for utilities and
industry. Badger's Dan Zandron says that automatic meter reading
will enable the 60,000 water utilities in the U.S. to deliver
improved customer billing services at much lower costs than manual
meter reading.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Life Industries Wins
Mexican Concession

Life Industries, Inc. (219 Orange Ave., Sarasota, FL 34236; Tel:
941/361-2106, Fax: 941/361-2127) has won a 15-year concession to
design and build 6 municipal wastewater treatment plants for six
cities in the Mexican state of Morelos. George L. Hagen of Life
Industries (Tel: 813/351-8617, Fax: 813/351-2004) says that the
company is acting in partnership with the firm ICA S.A. de C.V. of
Guadalajara. The concession includes management and maintenance of
the plants. Hagen expects the concession to generate income
totaling $30 million.

Life Industries owns two artesian water wells that supply drinking
water for an area near Guadalajara. The firm has plans to build a
plant to treat and bottle the water for local and international
sales. Life Industries proposes to use a process invented by Deiter
Gabor and covered by U.S. Patents 5,292,194 and 5,342,529. It
consists of a chamber which is under pressure at one end and a
vacuum at the other.  A high-speed rotor draws feedwater into the
high pressure end where centrifugal force spins out the impurities.
The water is treated by vacuum distillation and withdrawn at the
vacuum end. Hagen says the product water is highly pure in quality.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

French Do Adore
the British Water

The European Commission has approved a takeover bid from Lyonnaise
des Eaux for the Northumbrian Water Group which supplies drinking
water and sewage treatment services in the northeast of England.
Lyonnaise already owns two other British water utilities, North
East Water and Suffolk Water. Ian Byatt, regulator of British
utilities, insisted on price cuts of 15% over the next 6 years when
Lyonnaise offered $1.27 billion for Northumbrian.

Another French takeover bid is taking shape in southeast England,
where Generale des Eaux and SAUR Water Services Plc have joined in
a buyout offer for Mid Kent Holdings Plc. The two French companies
already own 39% of Mid Kent, and they say they plan to split the
firm and merge it into two other companies that they already own.
General des Eaux and SAUR own nine other British water utilities,
and they say the merger would ease water shortages and improve
efficiency of service. They did not propose any reductions in water
rates. Mid Kent management has rejected the French bid as
unwelcome.

A third British utility is looking to international growth to
assure its future. Thames Water Plc has a 35% share in a $860
million project to supply drinking water to the Turkish city of
Izmit. Thames is the largest investor in the group which has the
concession for the "build, operate, and transfer" project.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Philly Suburban
Keeps Growing

Philadelphia Suburban Water Co. (762 Lancaster Ave., Bryn Mawr, PA
19010-3489; Fax: 610/645-1061) has completed its fifth acquisition
for 1995 and has an agreement to begin 1996 with another.

PSW bought the Schuylkill Township water franchise from
Phoenixville Borough for $1 million. The franchise serves 1,800
residents. PSW has connected the area to its system by a 12 in.
main that supplies water from its Pickering Plant on Pickering
Creek.

PSW had earlier bought the Castle Rock water system in Edgmont
Township, as well as the Ivy Hill, Deerfield Knoll, Chesterdale,
and Media Borough water systems. PSW now serves 850,000 residents
in four counties of southeastern Pennsylvania. The company has
completed an agreement to purchase the Hatboro water authority
serving 15,000 residents in Montgomery County.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Briefly Noted:

  The Kingdom of Nepal has approved a $185 million project to
develop new water supplies for the Kathmandu Valley. Local and
foreign investors will finance the Melamchi Drinking Water Project
to supply 170 million l/d by building a 27 km tunnel to divert
water from the Melamchi River to Kathmandu. The state-owned Nepal
Drinking Water Corp. will buy water from the Melamchi company and
the Nepal electric authority will buy the electricity it generates.

  A.O. Smith Corp. (P.O. Box 23972, Milwaukee, WI 53223-0972; Tel:
414/359-4000, Fax: 414/359-4180) is buying the bulk storage tank
business of Peabody TecTank from The Pullman Co. for about $18
million. TecTank builds epoxy-coated steel and aluminum storage
tanks for applications in food processing and water and wastewater
treatment. Its fiscal 1995 sales were $49 million.

  Cohesant Technologies, Inc. (1801 E. 9th, Suite 1520, Cleveland,
OH 44114; Tel: 216/861-6266, Fax: 216/694-3529) reports that its
American Chemical Co. Unit is buying the business operations of
Raven Lining Systems (Tulsa, OK). Raven manufactures and licenses
the application of high-build epoxy coatings to protect wastewater
treatment systems and similar facilities from corrosion.

  Tyco International Ltd. (One Tyco Park, Exeter, NH 03833-1108;
Tel: 603/778-9700; Fax 603/778-7700) and Earth Technology Corp.
(100 W. Broadway, Suite 5000, Long Beach, CA; Tel: 310/495-4449,
Fax: 310/426-0666) have a merger agreement under which Tyco will
buy Earth Tech's outstanding common stock for a total of about $70
million. Earth Technology designs and engineers water and
wastewater treatment facilities and had sales of $178 million for
fiscal 1995.

  Core Industries Inc. (P.O. Box 2000, Bloomfield Hills, MI 48304;
Tel: 810/642-3400, Fax: 810/642-6816) has purchased CMB Industries
of Fresno, CA, the leading producer of sleeve valves and the second
largest producer of backflow prevention valves in the world.
Backflow prevention valves are used in a wide variety of commercial
and industrial applications to protect the quality of drinking
water.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Bone Charcoal, Sand
Clear the Water

Twenty small springs in northeast England are sources of ground
water that is strongly colored by fulvic and humic acids.
Chlorination results in the formation of trihalomethanes at levels
well above the standard allowed by the European Community. J. Lewis
(Yorkshire Water plc., U.K.) reports that engineers at Yorkshire
Water had little success at treating the colored water with
advanced technologies. They have now devised a method of using bone
charcoal in combination with slow sand filters.

Lewis explains that bone charcoal upgrades sand filtration by
removing turbidity and absorbing color and metals. Activated carbon
is not as good at absorbing metals. The Marsett pilot plant uses a
commercial bone char material, Brimac, which is more commonly used
in sugar refining. Brimac consists of 10% activated carbon and 90%
hydroxyapatite in a 20/60 mesh size, and it has a structure which
protects it from rapid erosion. The 8 m3/day pilot plant has 3
covered slow sand filters followed by chlorination and storage in
a service reservoir.

Lewis reports in Water & Environmental Management [9-4, 385-395,
1995] on the first six months of monitoring the Marsett pilot
plant. Lewis found that pH was initially 11 but stabilized below
nine within six weeks. The color of the filtered water and THM
levels were consistently much lower than the EC standards. Bone
charcoal was consistently better than sand in removing turbidity
and coliforms, but the level of dissolved metals in the groundwater
was too low to make any comparison.

The success of the Marsett pilot plant convinced Yorkshire Water to
convert five other small treatment works to bone charcoal
filtration. Two have dual-media filters with bone char on sand, and
the others have layers of bone char between sand. Their capacity
ranges from 3-100 m3/day. The thickness of bone char in most cases
is 500 mm. All treated colored water, turbidity, and THMs
effectively, though spikes as high as 20 Hazen units mark momentary
breakthroughs during exceptional rains at the Marsett plant. One
plant reduced Al levels from 0.4 mg/l to less than 0.05 mg/l, and
two reduced Fe levels from as much as 0.7 mg/l to <0.05-0.1 mg/l.

Although bone char costs 35 times more than sand, Lewis found that
it actually produced real savings in labor costs because bone
charcoal filters are easier to clean than sand and the bone
char/sand filtration requires less labor at a small plant than a
more complex technology. Bone char filters reduce chlorination
costs by as much as 70%.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Can Structured
Water Be Good

A new product for the gullible health faddists is "Aqua Resonance
AM" from Quorum International Ltd., a network marketing firm that
also markets Quorum water filtration and Genesis distillation
systems and Biologics nutrition products over the Internet with a
home page listing at http://www.hk.super.net/~gng/aqua.html.

Capitalizing on the peculiar properties of water proceeding from
its polar structure and invoking the perennial appeal of the
fountain of youth, its distributors say that "Aqua Resonance AM" is
water that has been clustered "to improve metabolic efficiency and
nutrient absorption back into the cells of the human body."

Using "sophisticated magnetic resonance, laser and ceramic
technology, Dr. Lorenzen has succeeded in producing micro-clustered
water with the same properties of youthful biowater." It is
Lorenzen's thesis that cellular water is not like tap water, rain
water, or mineral water because its molecules share hydrogen atoms
and cluster in small bunches, delivering nutrients and removing
toxins as they diffuse through cell walls.

The movement of cellular water supposedly slows down as we age and
no longer performs its metabolic functions as well. Claiming that
"the study of cellular signal transduction has for years pointed to
the need for replacement of biowater as we age," the distributors
of Aqua Resonance AM recommend adding one capful to a 0.75 l bottle
of distilled water, shaking well, and refrigerating for 8 hours
before drinking.

Aqua Resonance is, of course, 100% pure water and so concentrated
that a devotee needs only 2 tablespoons per gallon of distilled
water to prepare the most effective mixture. It is available in 4-
oz bottles at $34.95 per bottle plus postage and handling from
Aqualogics (Tel: 602/780-5588 or email: Gilbert Ng at
gng@hk.super.net).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Daicel Increases
It's Production

According to a report in Separation Membrane Business News in Japan
(November 1995), published by CHC Corp. (27-4-205 Koshienguchi
Kita-machi, Nishinomiya 663, Japan), Daicel (1-Teppo-Cho, Sakai,
Osaka Prefecture, 590 Japan) will increase its hollow fiber
membrane production capacity from 2,000 bundles a year to 20,000
bundles by 1997.  Daicel has marketed Molsep (RO and UF membrane)
and Pearlcon since 1975 in its separation systems division.  Those
materials are applied to preparation of ultrapure water,
concentration and clarification of fruit juice, and separation and
purification of enzymes and pharmaceuticals.  Four new production
lines for hollow fiber membrane will be located in the Himeji
Plant.

Daicel underwent a reorganization last year, and established a new
company, Daicen, in cooperation with Central Filter to carry out
marketing and maintenance of membrane modules and membrane systems.
Daicel continues to produce the membrane in a pilot plant in their
research center.

The Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) has asked
major water system engineering companies to investigate the use of
novel technology for recycling wastewater.  The technologies
developed are expected to be composites of various operations
including reverse osmosis, biological treatment, ammonia
adsorption, activated carbon adsorption, and oxidation.  The
government will provide a process development budget for the next
3-4 years, subject to approval by the Ministry of Finance.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Countertop System
from Premier

Researchers at Premier Manufactured Systems, Inc. (17431 N. 25th
Ave., Phoenix, AZ 85023; Tel: 602/931-1977) have developed a
countertop reverse osmosis (RO) unit utilizing a membrane that
permits operation at abnormally low water pressures, typically as
low as 10 psi (U.S. Patent 5,445,729). Tap water pressure at the
faucet typically is less than 40 psi.

The RO unit makes do with only one, small and compact, outlet pump.
An optional single, or a dual-channel dual-pass, ultraviolet (UV)
light source sterilizes filtered inlet, and/or the purified output.
Purified water is stored at atmospheric pressure in a simple
storage bag, and is dispensed on demand by force of the outlet
pump.

The entire RO unit-storage bag, pump, filters, UV sterilizer,
membrane and all-is packaged in a compact and aesthetically
pleasing, cylindrically-shaped housing. The unit can be kept on a
household counter top with flow connected to normal household
plumbing-typically to the faucet and drain of a kitchen sink-while
connected to normal household power.

The RO unit is intended for purification of water in the event of
an emergency or power emergency, and is even operative in the
complete absence of electrical power, such as after an earthquake
or other emergency, by manual disconnection or bypass of its inlet
solenoid valve.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

Profit Margins
Can Be Slim

Certainly automation and improved fabrication techniques help, but
the profit margins for RO have got to be the slimmest of any of the
membrane technologies. Back when RO membranes/modules were selling
for $7 - $10/sq. ft., that was considered cheap compared to an
ultrafiltration membrane.  Now we hear about some of the home RO
manufacturers talking about $2.50/sq. ft. for simple flat sheet
membrane.  Those big 8" X 40" modules that we grew up with were
usually in the $1000-$1500 range. Now we hear about 8" X 40"
modules going for as little as $550.  Of course that may "depend"
on a lot of different things, but price cutting seems to be the
norm.

There are about 2,200 million gallons per day of installed RO
capacity worldwide.  Most of this capacity is for brackish feeds.
About 14% of installed capacity is in sea water RO.  Life cycles
for general RO modules have been extended from the 1-3 year time
span of the 1980s to the 3.5-4.5 year time span in 1995. Sea water
RO installations seem to add modules on a continual and on-going
basis to keep water quality up. The replacement market remains
about 53% of the global sales of membranes and modules or about
$100 million worldwide annually out of a total market of $189
million.

A lot of ownership changes have taken place in the past few years
and probably a lot more are in the making.  There seems to be a
diversity of players and some of the leaders such as FilmTec/Dow
may be seeing their market share declining. Dow probably had over
37% of the world's RO market in 1992. Finishing out 1995, Dow
probably has more like 24-25% of the global RO market.

U.S. companies once saw an unrivaled dominance for their RO
technology.  Interesting that as the profit margins shrink, the
U.S. companies seem to be gathering up competitors to share in the
$189 million membrane/module global RO market. (see table)

Competing in the RO Marketplace

DOMESTICFOREIGN
DowMemtec (Australia)
DSINitto Denko(Japan)
DuPontRoChem (Germany)
Fluid Systems/Anglican Water Separem (Italy)
Hydranautics/Nitto Denko Toray (Japan)
U.S. FilterToyobo (Japan)
OsmonicsNWW Acumem (England)
TriSep




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 1996

CALENDAR

March 19-24, 1996, Water Quality Association Convention and
Exhibition will be held at the Indiana Convention Center in
Indianapolis, IN.  Contact: Jeannie Collins at WQA (Tel: 708/505-
0160, ext. 210, Fax: 708/505-9637) for more information.

May 1-3, 1996, Ultrapure Water Expo '96 will be held in Chicago,
IL.  Contact: Miriam Slejko (Tel: 303/973-6700) for additional
information.

May 20-23, 1996, 7th World Filtration Congress will be held at the
Technical University of Budapest in Budapest, Hungary.  For
information, contact: Magyar Kemikusok Egyesulete (Fo u. 68, 1027
Budapest, Hungary; Tel: (011) 361/201 6883, Fax: (011) 361/201
8056).

June 9-12, 1996, Watershed '96 will be held in Baltimore, MD, (Tel:
703/684-2400). Call for additional information.

July 14-19, 1996, Ion Exchange '96 will be held at Churchill
College, Cambridge, England.  Contact: Society of Chemical Industry
( Tel: +44(171) 235-3681, Fax: +44(171) 823-1698).

July 16-18, 1996, Semicon/West will be held in San Francisco, CA.
Contact: Semiconductor Equipment and Materials International (Tel:
415/940-6961).



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-19</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B020-95</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev01.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002552 text/html 45311
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:24:04 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:20 GMT
Content-length: 45122
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev01.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
WORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 3, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>***************&nbsp;SLANTS & TRENDS&nbsp;***************</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1030 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>ARTHUR D. LITTLE IS AWARDED $7.6 MILLION&nbsp;TO HELP BELARUS TACKLE DEFENSE WASTE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(660 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>RUSSIAN ENVIRONMENT MARKET&nbsp;TO BE SUBJECT OF NEW STUDY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(324 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>UKRAINE RESEARCH FACILITY BOASTS&nbsp;ADVANCED REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(273 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>EUROPEAN UNION MOVES TO TIGHTEN&nbsp;ENVIRONMENTAL RULES ON PROJECTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(306 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>JAMAICA SEEKS UN FUNDING&nbsp;FOR SEABED PROTECTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(138 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>CANADIAN ENVIRONMENTAL FIRM&nbsp;SETS INDONESIA FISHERIES DEAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(148 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>COMPANIES, REGULATORS AGREE&nbsp;ON STRATEGY FOR NEW TESTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(697 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>UNEP VOICES SUPPORT FOR METHODS&nbsp;THAT ENSURE GREATER DIVERSITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2499 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
WORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 3, 1996

***************
SLANTS & TRENDS
***************


EMERGING MARKETS: Although political and economic
instability continues to plague many Central and Eastern
European countries, interest in the environmental goods and
services markets there continues. Initially off to a
somewhat rocky start, many states, especially such Eastern
European countries as the Czech and Slovak Republics,
Hungary and Poland, are adopting Western-style environmental
regulations. Further, privatization of state-held industries
has put environmental concerns in the hands of individuals
rather than often unaccountable bureaucracies. Still,
creating a sustainable development ethic is difficult amid
hard economic times, analysts say. And without adequate
state funding or enforcement of existing environmental laws
and regulations, the pace of remediation and pollution
abatement programs has been slow.

     This issue of WER looks at several facets of
environmental protection in Central and Eastern Europe,
particularly the problems faced by Russia and its nuclear
power industry. Because of the inherent safety problems
posed by radioactive materials, this sector requires
specialized environmental engineers and relatively high
costs, often beyond the reach of the former Second World's
developing economies.

* * *

CHINA TARGETED: While the West focuses much attention on
Central and Eastern Europe, funds also are flowing to
Communist China, where rapid industrialization and
population growth continues to plague the environment. The
European Investment Bank just issued its first loan to China
for environmentally friendly development of clean-burning
natural gas reserves. The project will help the environment
through the distribution of natural gas in Pudong, a
satellite city of Shanghai, which will reduce the air
pollution caused  by the present use of coal and town gas.
The EIB is providing roughly $73 million for the development
of the Ping Hu offshore field. The $1 billion project is
being co-financed by the Asian Development Bank, the Exim
Bank of Japan and France.


Central/Eastern European News Briefs

     Events creating possibilities for sales of
environmental goods and services in Central and Eastern Eu-
rope are routine occurrences. The following is a snapshot of
environmental news stories that occurred just before or
after the New Year.

Russia Having Trouble With CFCs

     Russia is asking for more time to cut ozone-threatening
substances. At a major international conference of
government representatives convened in Vienna to review the
1987 Montreal Protocol on ozone protection, Russian
Federation Environment Minister Viktor Danilov-Danilyan said
Russia needs more time and a larger pool of investment aid
in order to develop substitutes to ozone-harming substances
such as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). Under the Montreal
Protocol, signed by 150 countries, such industrialized
countries as Russia are to stop producing CFCs by 1996 and
the rest of the signatories by 2010.

     Minister Danilov-Danilyan said the Russian Federation
is now producing only half the ozone-threatening chemicals
it was in 1987, but he added that the drop was a by-product
of the fall in industrial output. The minister was quick to
point out that he and his government would have preferred to
be able to meet the deadline, as other governments are
doing, but that the economic conditions prevailing within
his country are making it impossible for the principal
factories from even paying their workers, let alone their
taxes and electric bills. It will be impossible for the
Russian government to force such enterprises, even if they
are state-owned (and many are not) to comply with the
protocol when the ministry has no financial capacity to
support the enterprise's change-over to non-CFC production
or usage.

German, Swiss, Finnish Waste

     Germany and Switzerland have decided not to send spent
nuclear fuel to Krasnoyarsk-26 for processing, Krasnoyarsk
Krai Deputy Governor Sergei Arinchin was quoted as saying.
The waste would have been processed at the RT-2 plant -
still under construction - in the formerly secret nuclear
center in Siberia. The Russian authorities had hoped to
finance the project by accepting foreign waste, enabling
them to process their own stocks. The Swiss and German
pullout will deal a major blow to the project. The decision
is likely to be hailed by environmental groups, which have
strongly opposed the importation of nuclear materials,
arguing that Russia's waste storage sites are already
overflowing.

     Meanwhile, a trainload of spent nuclear fuel from a
Finnish nuclear power plant reportedly has arrived in Russia
for processing at the Mayak plant in Chelyabinsk-65. An
English translation of the Komsomolskaya Pravda newspaper
says it is not yet clear whether the nuclear residue remain-
ing after processing will be shipped back to Finland or kept
inside the Russian Federation.

Nuclear Safety Threatened

     Nuclear safety may be threatened by workers at Russia's
nuclear power plants, who say they may shut down the
facilities unless they receive overdue wage payments.
Officials say they have scheduled warning protests, but it
is not clear what form they will take. Energy consumers owe
nuclear power plants about 2.5 trillion rubles (US$555
million), and on average workers have not been paid for
three months, according to the deputy head of Rosenergoatom
in Moscow.

Assistance from Germany

     A German company has signed a contract with Russia's
Kursk nuclear power plant to construct a nuclear waste
storage facility and to provide 240 containers to store the
plant's radioactive waste. The German Company for Nuclear
Containers, a Nukem subsidiary, will control production
quality, train specialists and provide the know-how for
production. According to Gosatomnadzor, Russia's nuclear
safety agency, the solid waste storage facilities at the
Kursk plant are full.

Kazakhstan Troubled

     The amount of radioactive waste accumulating at uranium
mining and processing plants in Kazakhstan reportedly is
reaching alarming proportions. Since this large, very poor
Central Asian country became independent in 1991, the
quantity of radioactive waste stored in Kazakhstan has grown
to 219 million metric tons. The republic's Ministry of
Ecology and Biological Resources claims the aggregate
radioactivity from the waste comes to 250,000 curies, which
is "many times more than the accepted norm." Kazakhstan does
not have the means to deal with the waste because under the
Soviet Union's regime disposal was a national responsibility
carried out by the government in Moscow. Today, there are
neither any Kazakh laws nor bilateral agreements with Russia
which adequately address this type of nuclear waste disposal
dilemma.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
WORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 3, 1996

ARTHUR D. LITTLE IS AWARDED $7.6 MILLION
TO HELP BELARUS TACKLE DEFENSE WASTE


     The international consulting firm Arthur D. Little has
been awarded a $7.6 million contract to help the former
Soviet republic of Belarus solve environmental problems
related to its former Strategic Rocket Forces (SRF) bases.

     The two-and-a-half-year contract from the Defense
Nuclear Agency (DNA) is part of the Cooperative Threat
Reduction (CTR) Program developed under the l991 Nunn-Lugar
legislation intended to assist the countries of the former
Soviet Union in the elimination, and to prevent the
proliferation, of weapons of mass destruction.

     Arthur D. Little experts will help Belarus personnel to
assess the radiation and conventional environmental damage
at sites where intercontinental ballistic missiles were
based, transported, operated, or maintained, and help the
country restore them for other purposes. In Belarus alone,
at the height of the arms race, there were more than 80 SS-
25 missiles. Belarus has since declared itself a non-nuclear
state and wishes to return the facilities to civilian use.

     Arthur D. Little consultants will integrate a number of
different technical resources within the program to provide
training and technical assistance to the Belarus officials
and experts. The consultants will work with the Belarus
personnel to analyze the environmental problems at one
missile site and devise a restoration plan, then oversee the
Belarus technicians as they do environmental restoration
work at a second site. The ultimate goal is to transfer
enough knowledge to Belarus so that they can complete the
environmental restoration work at the remaining sites.

     Potential environmental problems include heavy metal
and low-level radioactive contaminants, spilled petroleum,
spilled liquid rocket fuel, and some minefields around the
sites' perimeters which have unexploded ordnances.

     As part of the effort to transfer expertise in the
environmental restoration field, Arthur D. Little will
conduct international conferences co-sponsored by DNA and
the Belarus Ministry of Defense. Experts from around the
world will be invited to Belarus to discuss a variety of
environmental restoration experiences, technologies, and
management issues.

     As part of the CTR program, an agreement was signed in
l993 between the United States and the Republic of Belarus
to assist in development of the Environmental Restoration
Project. Other CTR projects in Belarus under Nunn-Lugar
include assistance in defense conversion, export control
systems and training, government-to-government
communications links, and emergency response equipment and
training.

     Belarus, located between Poland and Russia, has an
especially high water table and active groundwater movement,
which can exacerbate groundwater pollution.

     Other organizations involved with Arthur D. Little on
the Environmental Restoration Project include the Army Corps
of Engineers Waterways Experiment Station, Los Alamos
Technical Associates, Technology Management Company, the
Environmental Chemical Corp., the Environmental Hazards
Specialists International, Environmental Careers
Organizations, the World Environment Center, and Clean
Sites, Inc.

     Arthur D. Little, which conducted the largest
environmental impact assessment ever conducted in the Former
Soviet Union by a Western company, has handled more than
3,000 environmental audits and assessments in 30 countries
throughout Europe and the United States. Headquartered in
Cambridge, MA., Arthur D. Little has offices around the
world. It provides consulting in three areas: environmental,
health, and safety consulting; management consulting; and
technology and product development.

* * *

     RUSSIAN NUCLEAR SAFETY: Viktor Mikhailov, Russia's
minister of nuclear energy, announced Jan. 2 that nuclear
smuggling should be the top item on the agenda for the April
G-7 summit in Moscow. Mikhailov said the summit, devoted to
nuclear safety issues, should draft "common procedures" for
dealing with nuclear smuggling and tightening control over
nuclear materials. He also announced his ministry made $1.65
billion from exports in 1995, a significant contribution to
Russia's $63 billion in total exports, and not much less
than the $2.5 billion Russia earned by exporting arms.
However, many of the countries that want to purchase Russian
civilian nuclear technology, such as Iran and Cuba, have a
questionable ability to pay for it, casting doubt on
Mikhailov's prediction that nuclear exports can be boosted
to $2 billion by 1998.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
WORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 3, 1996

RUSSIAN ENVIRONMENT MARKET
TO BE SUBJECT OF NEW STUDY


     Arthur D. Little has undertaken a study of the Russian
market for environmental equipment and services to help U.S.
companies determine export potential as that area of the
world rebuilds its economy.

     The study, requested by the U.S. Department of Commerce
and the American Embassy in Moscow, will determine the
potential for U.S. environmental goods and services in
Russia, indicate current and future trends, and highlight
the dominant driving forces and pressing environmental
concerns in the Russian market.

     The information will be used to help U.S. companies
decide whether and how to compete in the Russian
environmental services market, and help lay the groundwork
for U.S. government-sponsored trade promotion events.

Many Subjects Targeted

     Special areas Arthur D. Little consultants will explore
include the most pressing environmental needs in air, water,
and solid waste pollution control and prevention, and the
barriers that could restrict access to the Russian market by
U.S. environmental services firms.

     U.S. firms have indicated a growing interest in the
potential for environmental goods and services sales in
Russia as more public and private money is invested in
rebuilding the economy.

Services being assessed include:

     l Solid and hazardous waste management;
     l Waste site cleanup or construction;
     l Pollution abatement in such areas as asbestos, lead,
and radon; and
     l Environmental consulting and engineering in hazardous
waste, air and water quality, pollution prevention, and
environmental management.
     Equipment markets include:
     l Air, water, and solid waste pollution controls;
     l Environmental monitoring systems;
     l Waste containment, disposal and treatment tech-
nologies;
     l Thermal technologies;
     l Bulk liquid removal; and
     l Groundwater collection.

     Anthony Montrone, vice president in charge of Arthur D.
Little's environmental business strategy practice, and David
Webb, director of the firm's Moscow office, said Arthur D.
Little was chosen because of its long history of helping
companies enter international environmental products and
services markets, and its experience addressing
environmental issues in Russia.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
WORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 3, 1996

UKRAINE RESEARCH FACILITY BOASTS
ADVANCED REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY


     Ukraine has recently produced two technologies that may
significantly facilitate remediation of industrial waste
waters as well as the recycling of used oil and such
composite wastes as grinding swarf and certain sludges.

     Marketing of the technologies is being handled through
the Struten Institute, which promotes access to these and
other technology-transfer opportunities.

     One Ukrainian research institute has developed methods
to produce a semipermeable membrane made of synthetic
diamond, the Struten Institute says. The material may be
placed on a variety of substrates, including ceramics.

     The result is a semipermeable membrane that is
simultaneously resistant to heat, abrasion and pressure.

     In a separate yet linked development, another Ukrainian
institute has perfected a method for "scrubbing" the surface
of semipermeable membranes. From a physical chemistry stand-
point, it is now possible to continually and economically
stir-up otherwise sedate layers.

     The method has so far been applied to polymeric
membranes, speeding reverse osmosis pressures as low as 2-5
atmospheres, the Student Institute says.

     The Struten Institute is a nonprofit organization based
in the United States and geared toward bringing technically
trained individuals from Ukraine in contact with Western
companies.

     "This business level, technical contact, mediated
through the Struten Institute, is a dividend some businesses
will realize from the fall of communism," the institute said
in a statement.

     Differentiating between Ukraine and the Russian
Federation, the Struten Institute says it is keen to help
companies economically secure research and development
partners and tap Ukraine's emerging market of 52 million
people.

     Contact: Mike Mychajlonka, executive director, Struten
Institute, PO Box 162, Saline, MI 48176-0162; e-mail:
strutinst@aol.com.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
WORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 3, 1996

EUROPEAN UNION MOVES TO TIGHTEN
ENVIRONMENTAL RULES ON PROJECTS


     European Union environment ministers have reached a
political agreement to extend the range of development
projects requiring environmental impact assessments (EIAs)
before final approval is granted. Meeting in Brussels in
late December, the ministers endorsed proposal COM(93)575,
which expands the EIA requirements under directive
85/337/EEC.

     The move, termed a decade too late, was hailed by many
in the environment industry for opening the door to new
goods and services sales. The revised rules will come into
effect in January 1998, but only after parliamentary
approval.

     Spanish Transport and Public Works Minister Jose
Borrell, who chaired the meeting as EU environment
president, said the union now has a complete series of rules
on which investment projects require EIAs. In recent years,
EIAs largely have been conducted on an ad hoc basis, have at
times been poor in quality, and recommendations from
stakeholders sometimes have not been followed, EU sources
say.

     Under the new regime, the EIAs will more accurately
identify potential environmental problems associated with
proposed development projects and give stakeholders,
including developers, authorities and the public, ample
opportunity to discuss them, the ministers said in a
concluding statement. Projects plagued by poor EIA
implementation include Britain's Twyford Down transportation
project and Greece's plan to divert the Acheloos River.

     The new rules extend mandatory EIAs to such sectors as
road-widening, nonhazardous waste storage facilities, water
wells and management, oil and gas drilling, petroleum
pipelines, dams, intensive hog and poultry farming, pulp and
paper factories, open mines and  quarries, overhead power
lines, and chemical storage facilities exceeding 200,000
metric tons. EIAs may also be required, but will not be
mandatory, for forestry, mineral extraction, energy, metal
and chemical processing, food, textiles and  tourism
projects.

     Contact: European Commission Environmental Secretariat,
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Brussels, Belgium; +32-2-299-11-
11; fax: +32-2-295-01-38.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
WORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 3, 1996

JAMAICA SEEKS UN FUNDING
FOR SEABED PROTECTION


     Kingston asked the United Nations Dec. 26 to restore
funds for the International Seabed Authority, a group that
would oversee economic activities in international waters.
One of the authority's main responsibilities will be to
supervise seabed mining. The move follows a U.N. decision to
cut 1996 funding from $2.6 million to $770,000. The ruling
also would eliminate several of the 17 proposed posts.

     Although the authority boasts 170 member countries,
participants have not been able to decide on who should sit
on the council or who should serve as the secretary general.
The authority will meet next in Kingston in March. Jamaica,
which was chosen two years ago as host to the International
Seabed Authority.

     Contact: Ministry of Public Service and Environment,
Citibank Building, 9F, 63-67 Knutsford Blvd., Kingston 5,
Jamaica; +1-809-926-3235; fax: +1-809-929-6616.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
WORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 3, 1996

CANADIAN ENVIRONMENTAL FIRM
SETS INDONESIA FISHERIES DEAL


     The Canadian firm Epicore Networks Inc. has signed a
five-year, $8.75 million contract through its subsidiary PT
Environmental Network Indonesia Ltd. to supply Sulawesi Agro
Utama (SAU) with aquaculture products and technical services
to support the company's shrimp hatchery and farm operations
in South Sulawesi.

     The contract calls on Epicore to help address the many
environmental problems that have plagued the Indonesian
facility. Environmental and other problems are said to
seriously threaten the $7 billion international aquaculture
industry. "This contract, with a major Indonesian aqua-
culture company, confirms the effectiveness of Epicore's
"solutions" based strategy," said Chief Executive Officer
Ian Fraser.

     Epicore uses natural microbes and enzymes that are
friendly to the environment, the company said. The
corporation's products and services have applications in
aquaculture, agriculture and horticulture, cleaning and
sanitation and waste water treatment. Contact: Ian Fraser,
chief executive officer, Epicore, England, +44-1932-355230.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
WORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 3, 1996

COMPANIES, REGULATORS AGREE
ON STRATEGY FOR NEW TESTS


     Multinational companies concerned about the cost of
assessing the environmental and health hazards posed by
their operations may benefit from a new set of toxicology
test strategies drafted last month. The new methods are
designed to save time and money, better predict health
effects of drugs, chemicals, radiation and other substances
and reduce, refine or replace animal use.

     The Interagency Coordination Committee on the
Validation of Alternative Methods (ICCVAM) has issued a
report viewed as important to the international environment
community because it should enhance global efforts to
harmonize toxicity testing methods. Countries are trying to
harmonize methods so health regulators around the world can
share data and make comparable risk assessments.
Corporations support the effort which would make it easier
to conduct tests accepted throughout the global economy.

     More than 150 people discussed a draft report by the
ICCVAM at a National Toxicology Program workshop held in
mid-December. ICCVAM represents 15 U.S. federal agencies
including National Institutes of Health, the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Centers for
Disease Control, the Department of Energy, the Agency for
Toxic Substances and Disease Registry and the Department of
Transportation.

     ICCVAM designed its report to apply to all proposed
toxicological testing methods for health and ecological
effects. New tests could supplement or be alternatives to
the traditional two-year rodent bioassay used in risk
assessments and regulatory decisionmaking. New tests could
involve transgenic animals, mathematical and computer
models, and in vitro methods, such as test tube or petri
dish experiments with tissue samples. The new methodologies
should help agencies better protect human health and safety,
said ICCVAM co-chair William Stokes.

     The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Devel-
opment (OECD), which represents 25 nations, approves
guidelines for new test methods. OECD-member nations must
accept data generated by tests that followed approved guide-
lines, said OECD representative Herman Koeter. OECD experts
will review ICCVAM's report Jan. 22-24 at a workshop on
alternative test methods.

     ICCVAM's report describes eight criteria agencies would
use to assess a proposed test method's validity. For
example, researchers or manufacturers should test the new
procedure on agents similar to the substances to which the
method would be applied. The researchers also should give
agencies a detailed protocol describing the method,
materials needed, criteria by which data will be evaluated
and the procedure's limitations. The protocol should be
reviewed by an independent scientific panel.

     Agencies should consider more than a dozen criteria in
determining whether they should accept a new test method,
ICCVAM said. For example, the new procedure should: be
approved by the scientific community; adequately predict the
endpoint of interest; be readily transferred among
laboratories; and generate data that is as good or better
for hazard identification and/or dose-response assessment
than the test for which it is proposed to be a substitute.

     "The report is excellent," said David Brusick, echoing
comments expressed by many participants. Brusick, Corning
Hazleton's scientific director, co-chaired one of three
panels making recommendations for the report. He suggested
ICCVAM define a formal validation process and highlight it
and other key recommendations in tables and flow charts.

     Companies, agency scientists and other stakeholders
should be involved early on and throughout the process of
validating and accepting new methods, said Patricia
Williams, vice president of Glycomed, a biopharmaceutical
company. Risk assessors also must be involved to help ensure
data will meet their needs.

     Lawmakers and/or private industry should fund ICCVAM or
a similar committee to educate regulators about new test
methods, coordinate agencies' actions, and work with the
international community, several speakers said. Since
industry will benefit if these tests are accepted, companies
should consider funding, through a user fee, efforts to
approve the tests, said Steve Niemi, vice president of the
Genzyme Transgenics Corp.

Harmonizing testing methods may save firms millions of
dollars annually, Senior Scientist David Neuman, of the Ilsi
Risk Science Institute later said. Currently, to satisfy
divergent requirements, companies may conduct several
expensive tests that vary in only minor details. Duplicating
tests does little to help researchers or regulators
understand the substance being studied, he said. ICCVAM
expects to issue a final report this summer. Contact: Alma
Britton, +1-919-541-0530.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
WORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet
JANUARY 3, 1996

UNEP VOICES SUPPORT FOR METHODS
THAT ENSURE GREATER DIVERSITY


     Local, regional and global initiatives to preserve
biodiversity were lauded Dec. 29 by world leaders
celebrating the International Day for Biological Diversity.

     In addition to touting the virtues of biodiversity,
leaders said companies looking to market their pollution
abatement and remediation goods and services will benefit
from helping improve public awareness of environmental
problems.

     Summarizing the day's theme was a statement by the
United Nations Environment Program (UNEP), which said
biological diversity constitutes the resource upon which
families, communities, nations and future generations
depend.

     (The Convention on Biological Diversity went into
effect Dec. 29, 1993. The document was signed by 167
countries plus the European Union on June 5 1992 and has to
date been ratified by 136 states.)

     Describing all living creatures as having its place and
function, the UNEP believes that through thoughtless action,
mankind is eroding the Earth's biological capital at an
alarming rate.

     "The world is being impoverished by the loss of its
richest resources - of forests, wetlands and seas and
depletion of its most fundamental stock - its species, its
ecosystems and its habitats," said UNEP Executive Director
Elizabeth Dowdeswell. Further, the loss of every gene,
species or ecosystem means a loss of an available adaptive
option.

     Although many countries and industry sectors take for
granted the Earth's natural bounty and resilience, the
ability of natural systems to bounce back after disruption
is declining. "If the environment is reaching the limits of
its endurance, what can each one of us do to conserve our
planet's biological capital?" the statement asks.

     An active and well-informed public is the best defence
for the environment, UNEP says. "An education that empowers
and enables people to seek collectively ways to overcome
current destructive trends is a critical component of any
successful strategy for achieving a sustainable future.

     Toward this ends, UNEP is eager to enlist the support
of indigenous conservation groups, whose indigenous
knowledge and wisdom about the environment may well provide
the resilience to adapt to the future environmental changes.
And, experience has shown that wherever local people have
been given greater responsibility for managing their own
resources, they have shown both a capacity and a willingness
to conserve.

     Sectors that should become more actively involved in
preserving biodiversity include the pharmaceutical industry,
agriculture, tourism, fisheries and industries requiring raw
materials.

     The United Nations Environment Program today works to
support the Convention on Biological Diversity by
strengthening the national and global base of knowledge on
biodiversity.

Industry Reaches Out

     The Paris-based Association Valentin Hauy has
translated the Convention on Biological Diversity into
braille and an initial print run of 1,000 English and 1,000
French copies were released Dec. 29. The version will be
distributed free of charge to organizations for blind and
partially sighted people around the world.

     The Spanish National Organization of the Blind (ONCE)
based in Madrid released 200 copies of the Spanish braille
version plus 200 copies on cassette. The event represents
the first time industry has joined forces with the
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity to
financially support a braille project.

     Contributions were made by a number of international
partners including: the European Senior Advisory Group on
Biotechnology (SAGB), the US-based Biotechnology Industry
Organization, the Japan Bioindustry Association, the
Canadian Pulp and Paper Association and the European-based
Green Industry Biotechnology Platform. "These contributions
show industry's commitment to make available the content of
the convention to as many people as possible, thus sig-
nificantly contributing to increasing public awareness -
paramount in our drive to promote balanced economic and
social approaches for the protection of all life forms," the
secretariat said in a statement.

     Contact: Robert Bisset, UNEP, Nairobi, tel: +254-2-62-
3084; fax: +254-2-62-3692; e-mail: Robert.Bisset@unep.no; or
Calestous Juma, Executive Secretary, European Senior
Advisory Group on Biotechnology, Geneva, tel: +41-22-979-
9360; fax: +41-22-797-2512.

News Briefs

     l AIR POLLUTION - EUROPEAN UNION: The European
Commission plans to introduce two environmental initiatives
and to focus on member states' implementation of existing
environmental laws in 1996. The new initiatives will take on
industrial emissions of VOCs and the waste problems posed by
scrapped vehicles. Proposals to increase compliance with ex-
isting rules will include revisions to Directive 70/220 to
cut air pollution from "not privately owned" motor vehicles
and amendments to Directive 88/77 on pollution from diesel
emissions. Also pending are two initiatives for eco-labeling
of packaging and packaging waste.

     l CLIMATE - FINLAND: Pekka Kauppi of the Finnish Forest
Research Institute has concluded that the U.N. Framework
Convention on Climate Change's goal of stabilizing
greenhouse gas emissions at 1990 levels is an "unattainable"
goal. His warning follows a conclusion by international
scientists that humans are at least partially responsible
for climate change.

     l ENERGY - AUSTRALIA: Australian Energy Minister Tony
McGrady has announced 49 megawatts of electricity from
burning the sugar industry by-product bagasse will join the
Queensland power grid by Jan. 1, 1998. Mills in Invicta,
Kalamia, Inkerman, South Johnstone and Maryborough are
participating. The environmentally friendly technology may
be transferred to the thousands of sugar mills throughout
the world.

     l GROUNDWATER - INTERNET: The International Ground
Water Technology magazine can be reached via World Wide Web
at http://waternet.com. The company also operates electronic
mailing lists for paid subscribers to that publication and
another for subscribers to Water Technology magazine.
Contact: Publisher, e-mail: waternet@waternet.com.

     Also, a new mailing list named simply Groundwater has
been started. To subscribe, send e-mail to:
majordomo@ias.champlain.edu. In the body of the e-mail type
the command: subscribe groundwater. To send mail to the list
after you have subscribed, address the mail to: groundwa
ter@ias.champlain.edu. Kenneth Bannister is the list owner.

     l MANAGEMENT - INFORMATION: TG International Ltd. of
Ottawa, Canada, will conduct a free seminar on improving
corporate competitiveness through environmental management.
The seminar, A Mine From Hell: A Business Approach to
Environmental Management Issues, will be held Jan. 30 at the
Ottawa Public Library. The gathering will discuss the Crown
Butte Mines Inc.'s New World Mine in Montana. The Canadian
company Noranda Inc. owns controlling interest in the New
World Mine. Neither condemning or endorsing the mine, the
seminar will present a set of circumstances that will allow
participants to appraise and discuss a business management
approach to identifying stakeholders' concerns and
operational environmental issues, organizers say. Contact:
Peter Downing, TG International Ltd., PO Box 38120, 1430
Prince of Wales Drive, Ottawa, Ontario Canada K2C 1N0;
tel/fax: +1-613-225-7204; e-mail: az387@freenet.carleton.ca.

     l MARKETING - INTERNET: Companies looking for marketing
opportunities in the Eastern and Central Europe may be
interested in a new World Wide Web site established by the
Sacred Earth Network, a networking service among Western and
Eurasian Environmental nongovernmental organizations. The
site is located at http://www.igc.apc.org/sen/.
"Nongovernmental environmental organizations in the former
Soviet Union play an important role at home and abroad," the
organization said in announcing the site. "Their dedicated
professional and volunteer members strive to provide
reliable information about current conditions and the
effectiveness of remedial or conservation techniques. As
international collaboration grows, electronic mail has
become vital to the efficient development and implementation
of environmental programs." The site includes a directory of
e-mail users.

     l MEDICAL WASTE - AUSTRALIA: Too much waste is
considered infectious, drinking up hospital waste disposal
costs, according to the Australian Medical Association
(AMA). The contention was voiced during the Medwaste '95
conference sponsored by Griffith University. The AMA said
surveys show that 60 percent of what is put in hospital
infectious waste containers, including packaging and
flowers, is not infectious. With disposal of infectious
waste costing three times as much as general waste, the AMA
is concerned there is an over-zealous attitude toward
infectious waste. The AMA wants doctors to take the lead in
differentiating truly infectious from ordinary trash. In
Australia, hospitals only generated 0.5 kg of waste per
patient per day 15 years ago and now generate 15 kg. All
hospitals together produce  an  estimated  600,000 kg of
solid

World Environment Report wants to provide you with the
latest information on global environmental trends that could
affect your interests or provide new business opportunities.
We welcome your comments and story ideas. Contact the
editor, David Bottorff, at Business Publishers Inc., 951
Pershing Dr., Silver Spring, MD 20910-4464, 1-301-587-6300,
ext. 3005; fax: 1-301-587-1081; Internet: bottorff@aol.com.
waste daily. The buildup is partially due to the
introduction of single-use items, including medication cups
and oxygen masks.

     l POPULATION - WORLD: Because population growth and its
demand on natural resources is one of the leading causes of
environmental degradation, countries and international
institutions are looking for ways to integrate family
planning into long-range sustainable development goals. The
Population Institute revealed Dec. 28 that 4.7 billion of
the world's 5.7 billion residents, or 80 percent, live
outside the industrialized world. The population in
nonindustrialized countries will double in between 32 and 36
years, compared with 430 years for developed countries,
according to the institute's most recent report. In
aggregate, the world's population will double in 40 years.
This means that the vast majority of the 100 million new
mouths that will enter the world in 1996 will be found in
countries least able to meet the demand. As a result, the
fragile environment in these countries will suffer greatly,
the institute says. Particular problems include excess use
of firewood and overfarming of eroding lands.

     l PRODUCTS - INTERNET: Magnet Inc. of Seattle, Wash.,
has established a World Wide Web site, Better World, to
promote environmentally friendly products and information
for individuals and industry. The site, located at
http://www.betterworld.com, includes a wide range of
environmental information, including recycling and waste
minimization. Companies also can post online storefronts for
direct sales, product information, public relations
materials, and any other information they wish to convey to
potential customers. Contact: MagNet Inc. on the World Wide
Web at http://www.magnets.com or Barry Harrington
Associates, +1-510-376-4109; e-mail: barry.harrington@magnets.com.

     l RADIOACTIVE WASTE - ITALY: Italy will receive at
least 7,000 cubic meters of its own radioactive waste,
according to the National Agency for the Environment (ANPA).
The country had sent it for containment in England in the
late 1960's. Italy is way behind schedule in constructing
storage containers for the waste, said ANPA spokesperson
Renata Montesanti. Further, waste in England is the tip of
the iceberg, says the report, which recommends a creation of
a central government body and national standards to
coordinate radioactive waste management.

     l SOLAR ENERGY - ISRAEL: A plan to build a large solar
power facility in Israel is expected to draw a proposal from
Amoco-Enron Solar Power Development Co., in cooperation with
Israeli partners. A report from Israel said Amoco-Enron is
working with the Israeli companies Solel and Ormat Engines
on a proposal for a 100-megawatt solar facility for the
Israel Electric Corp. (IEC), but an official of the Houston-
based company declined to identify the firms involved. Rick
Barsky, senior vice president for development at Amoco-Enron
Solar Power Development, said he expects a request for
proposals for an 80-MW facility to be issued in the first
half of 1996. "We intend to look at that RFP and potentially
to respond to it," he said.

     l WASTE - GERMANY: There are at least 240,000 waste
sites suspected of polluting the German environment,
according to the International Trade Fair for Waste and
Waste Water Disposal. The Federal Environment Ministry said
earlier federal and state governments could provide DM24
billion to DM30 billion for clean-up in eastern lands by
2002. The German Institute for Economic Research in Berlin
said western Germany needs between 60 billion and DM100
billion for cleanups through 2005.

     l WATER POLLUTION - GERMANY: A treaty between the
German Chemical Manufacturers Association (VCI) and
Rotterdam in The Netherlands aims at reducing industrial
pollution of the Rhine River. The agreement affects about 50
VCI companies with sites along the Rhine. By 2000, they
promise to cut 1986 levels of zinc by 78 percent, mercury 77
percent, chromium 87 percent, copper 69 percent, nickel 64
percent, cadmium 58 percent, lead 57 percent and arsenic 2
percent. In return, Rotterdam, situated where the Rhine
enters the North Sea, will renounce until 2000 any damage
claims against VCI member companies for arsenic, cadmium,
chromium, mercury and nickel. The Port of Rotterdam is
sensitive to pollution of silt, which it must dredge con-
tinually.

Calendar

     Jan. 8-11: Essentia '96: International Technology Forum
on the Bridge Between Opportunities in Central and Eastern
Europe and Partners Worldwide, Prague, Czech Republic. This
event will evaluate the current state of technology transfer
and commercialization, advanced communication and
information technologies, and environmental protection and
rehabilitation. Essentia '96 consists of four parts:
research and development market, advanced technology fair,
partnership development center, and conferences. Contact:
Essentia '96, Technology Park AS CR, Rozvojova 135, 165 02
Prague 6, Czech Republic; +42-232-7677, fax: +42-232-5630;
e-mail: technopark@icpf.cas.cz.

     March 3: CEMP Conference, Workshop & Training Program
1995-1996, Aberdeen, Scotland. The programs are organized by
the Center for Environmental Management and Planning (CEMP).
The topics to be covered include environmental assessment
and Management, waste management, international courses for
the oil & gas operations, tourism, and environmental
auditing for business. Contact: Center for Environmental
Management and Planning, AURIS Business Center, 23 St.
Machar Drive, Old Aberdeen, AB2 1RY, Scotland, United
Kingdom; +01224-272483; fax: +01224-487658

     March 18: International Sustainable Development
Research Conference, Manchester, United Kingdom. The
conference will examine international dimensions of
sustainable development as well as implementation of Agenda
21 at a local level. Contact: The Conference Manager, ERP
Environment, P.O. Box 75, Shipley, West Yorkshire, BD17 6EZ,
United Kigdom; +44-1274-530-408; fax: +44-1274-530-409; e-
mail: r.j.welford@hud.ac.uk.

     March 19-23: Entsorga, International Trade Fair for
Recycling and Waste Disposal, Cologne, Germany. Entsorga '96
may appeal to specialists seeking the latest environmental
technologies. Contact: Koln Messe, P.O. Box 21 07 60, 50532
Koln, Germany; +49-221-8210; fax: +49-221-821-3415.

     March 24: Energy & Resources Law '96: 12th Advanced
Seminar, Prague, Czech Republic. Trends in energy, East-West
energy trade, energy treaties, electricity and the
environment, recent developments in mining, coalbed methane,
and nuclear law will be covered. Contact: International Bar
Association, 2 Harewood Place, Hanover Square, London W1R
9HB, England; +44-171-629-1206; fax: +44-171-409-0456.

     March 24-27: Environmental Technology, A Course on
Applied Technology for Remediation and Purification,
Antwerp, Belgium. The objective of this course is to inform
participants with a background in  natural sciences or
engineering about the latest scientific developments and
legal issues with respect to the applied techniques for
remediation and purification of water, soil, and air.
Contact: Isabelle F. Galode, EERO Training Center, P.O. Box
182, 6700 AD Wageningen, The Netherlands; +31-317-482-796;
fax: +31-317-484-941.

     April 10-13: Environmental Chemistry of Inorganic
Pollutants: A Course on Risk Evaluation, Applied Aspects and
Fundamentals, Nancy, France. This course may help
scientific, industry or government professionals evaluating
risk issues. Contact: Isabelle F. Galode, EERO Training
Center, P.O. Box 182, 6700 AD Wageningen, The Netherlands;
+31-317-482-796; fax: +31-317-484-941.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-20</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B020-126</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi92.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002722 text/html 92297
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:24:46 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:32 GMT
Content-length: 92108
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi92.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>PW, E&Y PLAN JERSEY MOVE TO LIMIT PARTNERS' LIABILITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(568 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>NEW ORGANISATION CREATED AS CKL AND IAA MERGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(316 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>UK:  COURT REJECTS NAMES' ACTION AGAINST LITTLEJOHN FRAZER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(351 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>DUBLIN'S MCGRATH & CO FORMS ALLIANCE WITH BELFAST PRACTICE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(294 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>ICAEW/CIMA MERGER TO COST 130 JOBS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(569 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>FORMER BDO PARTNERS STUNNED BY RULING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(480 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>ACCA MAY ADOPT A FEDERAL STRUCTURE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(562 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>COMMITTEE SET UP TO REVIEW CADBURY CODE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(471 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>US TO CRACK DOWN ON PENSIONS FRAUD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(496 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>ACCOUNTANTS ADVISED TO BROADEN HORIZONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(487 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>PRACTICE PROTECTION EATS INTO KPMG AUSTRALIA FEES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(218 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>GRANT THORNTON EXPANDS IN UK WITH NEW FIRM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(301 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS BRIEF</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>TOUCHE ROSS HEADS GROUP BID FOR MILLENIUM CONTRACT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(137 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>HLB SIGNS UP KRESTON MEMBER IN SINGAPORE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(252 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>BEWARE OF THE `FAT CAT' OBSESSION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1068 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INTERVIEW</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>PUSHING FOR CHANGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1084 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>IS INCORPORATION THE ANSWER?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1111 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FEATURE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>PROFESSIONAL SURVIVAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2165 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>SUCCESS BREEDS SUCCESS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3130 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

PW, E&Y PLAN JERSEY MOVE TO LIMIT PARTNERS' LIABILITY

PRICE WATERHOUSE and Ernst & Young in the UK have announced plans to
change their legal status to limited liability partnerships (LLPs) and
to take their businesses off shore to Jersey.

The move is designed to protect partners' personal assets in the event
that a firm is successfully sued for negligence. Currently, like most
other UK accounting practices, the firms trade as unlimited liability
partnerships.

The move to LLP status, which cannot be done under UK law, would become
possible due to planned changes to Jersey law by the island's
government. In a statement issued on December 11, Jersey's
Parliamentary Finance and Economics Committee said it will propose a
bill to the island's Parliament permitting the creation of LLPs. The
government is keen to promote Jersey as an offshore financial services
centre.

Under the proposed law, the partnership would remain totally liable for
all the firm's debts, but individual partners who are not responsible
for a particular negligent act would have their personal assets
protected from debts arising from that negligence.

Each LLP would be required to have at least one general partner and all
LLP assets would be available to creditors. In addition, the LLP would
be required to provide a #5 million financial provision, a sort of
bond, for judgments against the partnership. The draft law will be
debated in Jersey's Parliament, the States of Jersey, during the first
quarter of 1996. If approved, it will then go to the Privy Council for
sanctioning and is expected to be operative by year-end.

"We are actively considering whether adoption of the limited liability
partnership structure is appropriate for the UK practice," said E&Y
senior partner Nick Land. "Initial consultation with a small number of
clients and all of our partners has produced a very positive reaction."

The firms' partnership culture would continue within the UK and there
would be no change to their UK taxation arrangements. The Jersey option
is claimed to be cheaper than the incorporation route chosen recently
by KPMG (TA 5902). A senior partner at one of the firms estimates the
saving could be as much as 10 percent of pre-tax profits compared with
the cost of KPMG's chosen route.

Accountants are not the only ones who stand to benefit from the new law
in Jersey. Other professionals, including solicitors, architects and
surveyors, will be able to establish partnerships on the island.
Practices in other countries could also relocate to Jersey.

"At the moment, if you are found to be liable for negligence then you
are liable for everything, no matter what one's contribution to that
negligence might have been," said Ian Brindle, senior partner at PW.

All the Big Six have been working with the Institute of Chartered
Accountants in England and Wales to get the UK Government to change the
principle of joint and several liability contained in the Companies Act
of 1985. "This can't happen overnight," Brindle said. "These things
take time and time is not necessarily on our side." In the meantime,
the firms need a way to protect themselves from "Armageddon", he said.

Brindle described the UK's current limited liability law for
partnerships, which was created in 1907, as"not relevant to modern
times". Like joint and several liability, time-consuming primary
legislation would be needed to change it, he said.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

NEW ORGANISATION CREATED AS CKL AND IAA MERGE

CKL INTERNATIONAL, the network that lost two of its founding members in
the space of a year, has agreed to merge with International Accounting
Associates (IAA) and its US affiliate, the Continental Association of
CPA Firms (CACPA).

The agreement was finalised in mid-November and takes effect on January
1. The merger is expected to create a network of 130 accounting and
consulting firms, with offices in 58 countries and annual revenues of
over $400 million (#260 million). Total staff is put at 6,700.

The new organisation will be known as AGN (Accountants Global Network)
International. Its board will be comprised of six representatives from
CKL and six from IAA-CACPA. CKL chief executive Nick Blake will remain
in that role at AGN.

The network will be divided into four regions: Asia/Pacific,
Europe/Africa/Middle East, Latin America and North America, where AGN
expects to have its strongest presence.

CKL has been in trouble since its UK firm and founding member Clark
Whitehill quit to join Horwath International (TA 5890) in September
1994. It eventually signed up the smaller firm Levy Gee as a
replacement (TA 5894).

Things got worse earlier this year when another founding member, US
firm Kenneth Leventhal, merged with Ernst & Young, taking with it
annual fees of $195 million (TA 5897). CKL firms in Belgium, Israel,
Greece and Denmark have also left within the last 18 months.

IAA, with headquarters in Engelwood, Colorado, had revenues of $193
million in 1994. CACPA, a group of 26 firms in the US, accounted for
about $150 million of that total.

Whether all of CKL's members will go along with the merger is still not
clear. South African firm Levitt Kirson is known to be considering a
move to Nexia International, although no decision had been made as TA
went to press.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

UK:  COURT REJECTS NAMES' ACTION AGAINST LITTLEJOHN FRAZER

A #200 MILLION negligence suit brought by investors in the Lloyd's of
London insurance market against Littlejohn Frazer has been thrown out
of court.

Littlejohn was being sued in the High Court over its audits of the
Gooda Walker syndicates at Lloyd's, which ran up losses of almost #1
billion in the late 1980s and early 1990s.

In October 1994, 3,000 Lloyd's investors, or Names, won damages
estimated at about #400 million from the agency that managed their
insurance underwriting (TA 5890).

The Names then sued the auditor, claiming that the syndicates' accounts
had disguised underwriting losses by overstating the value of their
investments. The Names said they would not have invested in later years
had they known of the losses.

The High Court decided that the precedents established in the 1990
Caparo case applied. Whether or not Littlejohn was negligent in
auditing the syndicate was irrelevant as no duty of care was owed to
future investors at Lloyd's.

The case is a setback to attempts by Lloyd's to organise a market-wide
out-of-court settlement of the litigation that has dogged the market
for the last three years. Names are seeking damages for the estimated
#11 billion of losses run up by the market since 1988. There is now
less pressure on the auditors to contribute to the proposed #2.8
billion settlement fund (TA 5898).

Littlejohn senior partner Alastair Campbell said:"The judgment makes
clear the losses were not caused by the auditors, even if there had
been negligence by the auditors, which is something we hotly dispute."

The case related to losses run up on Gooda Walker syndicates 290 and
164's 1989 years of account. Littlejohn now plans to apply to have
another case struck out in relation to syndicate 387, where a claim for
about #80 million has been made by the Gooda Walker Names. Two other
cases, where a total of #8 million is being claimed, will continue to a
full hearing.

The Names are expected to appeal the High Court decision.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

DUBLIN'S MCGRATH & CO FORMS ALLIANCE WITH BELFAST PRACTICE

MCGRATH & Co, the Republic of Ireland member of accounting network ACPA
International, has established a formal association with Belfast firm
MTF to cope with its growing need for representation in Northern
Ireland.

McGrath has worked with MTF on a number of projects since the Northern
Irish peace process began 15 months ago. Although McGrath previously
covered the entire island for ACPA, an increase in outside investment
in the north, particularly from the US, has created the need for a
representative firm there.

"The peace process has set it all in motion," said Tom Kavanagh,
managing partner at McGrath. "We've already seen a rise in inward
investment and this can only increase."

McGrath was attracted to MTF because of its specialty in mergers and
acquisitions, an area in which the Dublin firm is not particularly
strong. One of MTF's partners, Michael Townsley, already does some M&A
work in the south, and McGrath hopes to develop this.

Although MTF is not a member of ACPA it will do any referral work to
Northern Ireland in co-operation with the Dublin firm. According to
Kavanagh, McGrath gets"regular work" from ACPA, mostly in the tax
sector, although this does not make up a large portion of its fee
income.

McGrath reported revenues of IR#1.75 million (#1.8 million) in 1995,
putting it 17th in the Irish league tables (TA 5902). Kavanagh
estimates that MTF's revenues for 1995 were about IR#750,000. Combined
revenues at both firms are expected to reach IR#2.7 million in 1996.

McGrath, which operates out of one office, has five partners and a
total staff of 45. MTF, also a one-office firm, has three partners and
a total staff of 25.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ICAEW/CIMA MERGER TO COST 130 JOBS

SOME 130 jobs are expected to go as part of a cost-cutting exercise if
the proposed merger between the Institute of Chartered Accountants in
England and Wales (ICAEW) and the Chartered Institute of Management
Accountants (CIMA) goes ahead.

Details of the cost cuts were revealed in the prospectus for the
merger, which was published in early December after being approved by
the governing councils of both bodies.

The new organisation, to be known simply as the Institute of Chartered
Accountants, has budgeted to save 20 percent of the combined costs of
the two existing bodies, which employ 630 people between them. ICAEW
chief executive Andrew Colquhoun said efficiencies will be possible as
a result of the inevitable duplication of services currently being
provided by the two bodies.

Colquhoun said the job cuts will be phased in over five years. He
expects few compulsory redundancies since staff turnover at the ICAEW
is currently running at 10 percent to 15 percent.

The savings will allow the institute to reduce its #138 annual
subscription fee by #20, bringing it closer into line with the #110
currently charged by CIMA.

However, Colquhoun denied that cost savings are the main motive behind
the merger. "We are not promoting this on the financial issue," he
said. "We are promoting this because the environment for the profession
is becoming harder and we believe we can serve the interests of
accountants better by being bigger."

The new institute will offer two types of qualification: one aimed at
those training in public practice, who will continue to be known as
"chartered accountants"; and the other for those working in industry,
who will bear the title "chartered management accountant". The Privy
Council granted CIMA members the right to use the "chartered"
designation in early December.

There will be a four-stage education syllabus, consisting of two
foundation levels, an intermediate and a final level. Students will be
time barred if they do not pass their final examinations within seven
years of starting the foundation course. Students will be able to
accumulate examination credits at all levels except the final level.

The "England and Wales" part of the current ICAEW name will be dropped
in an attempt to give an international image to the new body. The plan
involves actively marketing the new qualifications abroad in
competition with the Chartered Association of Certified Accountants.

"This is not marketing for its own sake, but we believe we can offer a
high quality qualification around the world," Colquhoun said."They will
have to meet the standards we have here in the UK, but we do think
there is a market out there for our qualification."

The new institute will have nine regions in England and Wales, each of
which will be able to elect six members to the new council; three from
industry and three from practice. The exception will be London which
will elect 14 members.

There will be further elections in Scotland, Ireland and in regions
around the world such as Malaysia, Hong Kong and South Africa.

The merged institute will have 150,000 members - 109,000 from ICAEW and
41,000 from CIMA.

Members of both institutes are expected to vote on the merger proposal
in April or May.

(See page 8 for interview with CIMA president Allan McNab)

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

FORMER BDO PARTNERS STUNNED BY RULING

FORMER PARTNERS of BDO Binder Hamlyn have been stunned by a High Court
ruling which holds them liable for damages, interest and costs of #105
million, arising from the 1990 take-over of one of the firm's audit
clients.

The damages of #65 million are believed to be the highest ever awarded
against a UK accounting firm and have added new urgency to auditors'
search for liability protection.

During the court case, counsel for Binder said the firm had insurance
cover of #71 million, leaving #34 million of the award to be met from
the partners' personal assets. With between 120 and 150 partners
believed to be involved, the average bill could be as high as #280,000
per partner.

The suit related to an agreed bid by electronic security company ADT
for Britannia Security Group in 1990. ADT paid #105 million for
Britannia, basing the price on accounts for fiscal 1989 which had been
audited by Binder.

Following the acquisition, ADT discovered that Britannia's 1989 profits
were #3.2 million, not #8.7 million as stated, and that its net assets
were less than half the #36.5 million shown in the accounts. ADT was
eventually forced to write off its investment and filed suit against
Binder in 1992.

The judge in the case found that Binder had been negligent in its audit
of Britannia, and that, crucially, the firm owed a duty of care to ADT
because of remarks made by Martyn Bishop, the partner who signed off on
the accounts, at a meeting with ADT officials in January 1990.

At that meeting, held shortly before the bid was announced, Bishop was
asked if he stood by his opinion that Britannia's fiscal 1989 accounts
gave a true and fair view of the company's financial health. Bishop
replied that he did.

Binder argued that this "off the cuff remark" in no way constituted a
duty of care to ADT. It said it had not entered into any agreement,
verbal or otherwise, to advise ADT, nor had it been paid for any
advice. The firm cited the landmark Caparo ruling of 1990, which held
that auditors do not owe a duty of care to third parties, regardless of
whether they are negligent.

Binder has pledged to appeal against the decision and is confident that
it will succeed in overturning the verdict."The firm is certain that
the Caparo principles apply," a spokesman said.

BDO Binder Hamlyn ceased trading in October 1994, when the bulk of the
firm merged with Arthur Andersen (TA 5887). Other Binder offices merged
with Stoy Hayward, the current BDO representative in the UK, while some
of the partners joined other accounting firms or went into industry.
Binder Hamlyn is still trying to determine exactly how many partners
are liable in the Britannia case.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ACCA MAY ADOPT A FEDERAL STRUCTURE

THE CHARTERED Association of Certified Accountants (ACCA) looks set to
bow to pressure from radical East London University professor Prem
Sikka to reform the way the body is governed.

Chief executive Anthea Rose put forward proposals at an ACCA council
meeting in early December to disband the current London- based council
and replace it with a federal structure. This will take greater account
of the rights of the association's 18,000 overseas members - 40 percent
of the total - who Sikka has argued are effectively disenfranchised.

The proposed structure devolves power to a number of new regional
councils, which will in turn report to an international committee. A
discussion document outlining the proposals was sent to all ACCA
members on December 15.

An ACCA source said: "It is true the way our council is structured
makes it very difficult for members to play a meaningful role if they
live on the other side of the world. Instead, we are to propose some
form of devolution with a federal structure."

The powers to be devolved will be debated in the discussion document.
It is thought unlikely that the regional councils will have any control
over the examination syllabus. Powers to be devolved could include
direct dealings with regional governments and the issue of guidance and
advice on local auditing accounting and taxation matters.

The changes follow criticism by Sikka that the ACCA is undemocratic.
His call for the association's president to be directly elected by the
membership received widespread support at an extraordinary general
meeting in September. Nearly 3,000 of the 10,000 members who voted
backed the proposal (TA 5901).

The ACCA is not ruling out direct presidential elections, but a change
to the current practice of having the president elected by the council
is not part of the latest proposals.

Sikka has been in a long-running conflict with the association. He has
taken his campaign for reform to Parliament, where he has won the
support of Labour MP Austin Mitchell.

While Sikka said he supports the new federal system, he insisted that
the proposals do not go far enough. He called for more transparency
within the ACCA, open council meetings, access to agenda papers and
minutes, and repeated his call for direct elections to key positions.
"Basically, the people who are leading the organisation need to be
mandated," he said.

Meanwhile, the ACCA's application to change its name to the Association
of Chartered Public Accountants has been turned down by the Privy
Council, the body which must approve all changes to an organisation's
Royal Charter.

In a letter to the ACCA, the council said it objected to the use of the
word "public" in the proposed name. However, it had no problem with the
use of the term "chartered".

In submissions to the council, the Institute of Chartered Accountants
in England and Wales argued that the name change would cause confusion
with the certified public accountant designation used in the US.
Mitchell argued that the ACCA did not act sufficiently in the public
interest for it to merit the title"public".

The ACCA has been asked to come up with a new proposal and expects to
put forward a new name for its members to vote on in the near future.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

COMMITTEE SET UP TO REVIEW CADBURY CODE

THREE YEARS after the Cadbury Committee published its landmark code on
the financial aspects of corporate governance in the UK, a new body is
to examine how far compliance with the code has progressed and to
consider whether it needs updating.

Headed by ICI chairman Ronnie Hampel, the Committee on Corporate
Governance will have 12 members drawn mostly from commerce and
industry. They include David Simon, chairman of British Petroleum, and
Northern Foods' chairman Christopher Haskins. The only representative
of the accountancy profession is Coopers & Lybrand chairman Peter
Smith.

The committee's sponsors include the Financial Reporting Council, the
London Stock Exchange, the Confederation of British Industry, and the
Consultative Committee of Accountancy Bodies.

Apart from reviewing compliance with the Cadbury recommendations,
Hampel's committee will also take account of the so-called Greenbury
proposals in the controversial area of directors' pay (see page 7).

Hampel is anxious that the push to clean up British boardrooms will not
lead to a host of new restrictions on business.

"There is much debate about the pace of change in corporate governance
and it is my intention that the committee will take appropriate time -
and consult widely - before reaching any conclusions on all aspects of
its remit," he said."Above all, we must enhance, not inhibit, the
prospects for UK business in an increasingly-competitive global
marketplace."

The Cadbury report's recommendations included a proposal that company
directors should report on the effectiveness of their system of
internal financial control and on whether the business can continue to
trade as a going concern; that audit committees be comprised solely of
external directors; and, in effect, that the role of chairman and chief
executive should be separated.

The establishment of Hampel's committee comes at a time when a spate of
corporate scandals has led to growing international concern over
corporate governance. In July, France tackled the issue with the Vienot
Report, which recommended a greater role for independent directors and
board sub-committees to deal with the annual audit and the appointment
and remuneration of directors.

On a wider scale, the International Capital Markets Group (ICMG) has
called for more transparent reporting of corporate governance processes
by large listed companies across the globe. Founded as a co-operative
venture by the world's legal and accountancy professions, the ICMG made
its call after analysing the main corporate governance issues arising
in the world's six biggest economies in a report titled, Who holds the
reins?.

In its review of corporate governance practices in Japan, Germany,
France, the US, Canada and the UK, the ICMG found some evidence of
convergence. But it concluded that entrenched cultural and legal
differences mean that the world is not yet ready for common rules to
improve corporate governance.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

US TO CRACK DOWN ON PENSIONS FRAUD

US AUDITORS could be required to report financial irregularities in a
company's employee pension funds, if proposed legislation is approved
by Congress.

The Labor Department, which is investigating hundreds of companies
suspected of illegally dipping into their employees' pension funds, is
working closely with the American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants (AICPA) to reach agreement on the language in the bill.

The legislation has been around for years in one form or another. But,
even though it would increase government regulation of the work of
auditors, "chances for passage are stronger now than ever before",
according to Richard Steinberg, a member of the AICPA's employee
benefit plans committee and chairman of its emerging issues task force.

The proposed measure was given new life after the Labor Department
found evidence of an increase in pension plan fraud. The department has
civil and criminal investigations in progress against 300 companies for
diverting funds from 401(k) plans, tax- deferred savings accounts set
up by employers. Its caseload is at least triple what it was one year
ago.

In some cases, auditors have found that companies failed to make good
on their obligations to match employee contributions as required by
federal law. In other cases, companies not only reneged on their
obligations, but also diverted employee contributions withheld from
weekly pay cheques.

In the largest Labor Department case, Coleman American, based in
Dothan, Alabama, allegedly withheld several months' worth of
contributions to its 401(k) plan affecting 200 employees. Confronted by
regulators last summer, the company's owner paid the $607,893 that was
due. In another case, a Wisconsin firm diverted $12,354 in
contributions from a plan covering 23 employees before closing its
doors.

The 300 Labor Department enforcement cases represent less than 0.5
percent of the more than 140,000 active 401(k) pension plans, which
have become popular because they limit employer obligations to retirees
and make it easier for workers to take their benefits with them when
they switch jobs. Money contributed to such plans is tax deferred.

Steinberg, who heads Coopers & Lybrand's benefit plan audit practice in
New York, said the Labor Department began a programme last spring to
educate companies on their responsibilities regarding employee benefit
plans. "Only recently has Labor Secretary Robert Reich become very
assertive in emphasising the need for a stronger hand. The emphasis
seems to have shifted from education to something much tougher and
proactive."

According to Steinberg, the Labor Department probe focuses on three
kinds of pension cost discrepancies: companies that do not understand
the law; companies that use the benefit funds to solve temporary
financial problems; and companies that are committing direct theft of
assets or fraud. "The third group of companies appears to be the
smallest group," he said.

If an auditor finds evidence of fraud,"he must identify it on the
auditor's schedule or take exception in the auditor's report",
Steinberg said.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ACCOUNTANTS ADVISED TO BROADEN HORIZONS

ACCOUNTANTS MAY be skilled in auditing and tax advice, but they need to
acquire a more general knowledge of the world around them to compete in
the global marketplace.

That's the view of the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC),
the worldwide professional body, which has just issued a draft revision
to its guidelines on education. The new guidance is aimed at ensuring
that accountancy students will be able to cope with such issues as the
globalisation of business enterprises, the relaxation of trade rules
and growing regulatory pressures.

"We're putting greater emphasis on general knowledge rather than strict
technical knowledge," said Milou Kelley, manager of IFAC's education
committee. "We want accountants to develop a broad base of knowledge in
the arts, sciences and humanities that will make them better able to
look at international issues in wider perspective.

"The issues that face professional accountants have become much more
complex. They need to be able to look at complex transactions and know
what is involved so that they can become good decision-makers and
better problem-solvers," she said.

IFAC is less concerned about accountants' ability to apply accounting
rules than about their ability to deal with a situation where no
standards exist. "Once the standards are set, that's the easy part,"
Kelley said.

"We're trying to remove all of the layers surrounding complex issues,
such as changes in technology," she explained. "Our standards are
designed to deal with real life."

The new exposure draft revises its International Education Guideline 9,
Prequalification Education, Tests of Professional Competence and
Practical Experience of Professional Accountants. It recommends that
accounting curriculums place greater emphasis on the development of
intellectual, interpersonal and communication skills, and it stresses
the need for curriculums to help students become committed to high
ethical values and standards.

"This draft guideline continues to develop our thinking on education
for the year 2000 and beyond," said Cecil Donovan, chairman of the IFAC
education committee."Comments and reactions are very important to us at
this stage."

The comment period extends to May 31 1996, to give IFAC member bodies
and others sufficient time to comment on the issues raised in the
document.

Since 1977, IFAC has represented accountants on an international level.
Its membership is comprised of the American Institute of Certified
Public Accountants (AICPA) in the US and more than 100 similar groups
from 80 countries.

IFAC's education committee has just issued two pronouncements relating
to information technology: International Education Guideline 11,
Information Technology in the Accounting Curriculum and the discussion
paper, Integrating Information Technology Across The Accounting
Curriculum: The Experience of the Certified General Accountants
Association of Canada.

Guideline 11 establishes a framework for devising an information
technology curriculum, including the skills required by an accountant
who uses information technology, manages information systems, designs
business systems or evaluates information systems.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

PRACTICE PROTECTION EATS INTO KPMG AUSTRALIA FEES

KPMG'S AUSTRALIAN firm paid out about 7 percent of total fee income for
practice protection, including professional indemnity insurance, during
fiscal 1995.

According to KPMG's 1995 annual report - the first of its kind to be
released by a major Australian firm - practice protection cost more
than A$21 million (#10.5 million) in the year to June. Total fee income
rose 6 percent to A$301 million.

The firm said that since risk management procedures are now taking
effect, practice protection costs have peaked. "One of the board's main
objectives is to halve this cost but it must be recognised that, given
our past claims record, this will take some years to achieve," the
report said.

A breakdown of fees showed that consulting revenues rose 37 percent to
A$32 million. Audit and corporate finance, the mainstay of KPMG's
business, grew 3 percent to $120 million, while corporate recovery
revenues fell 13 percent to A$12 million.

The firm's gross contribution percentage - fees less labour costs - was
53.1 percent of fee income, compared with 53.5 percent the year before.

In the report, which did not reveal profits, KPMG chairman John
Harkness said revenues are expected to rise 4 percent in the current
fiscal year.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

GRANT THORNTON EXPANDS IN UK WITH NEW FIRM

GRANT THORNTON in the UK has continued its expansion programme with the
addition of a two-partner firm which has served London's Polish
community since 1955.

The ten employees at Potworowski Kinast joined Grant Thornton's West
London office on December 1. Potworowski's Polish office has been a
member of Grant Thornton International since 1993 and will continue to
practise as Potworowski Kinast Grant Thornton.

The firm has annual revenues of about #500,000. One of the partners,
managing partner Tad Potworowski, is based in London, the other in
Poland.

Grant Thornton country managing partner David McDonnell said his firm
has supplied Potworowski with training and support since the Polish arm
joined GTI some years ago. "The intention always was that the [London
firm] would join us at some stage," he said.

Acquiring Potworowski, with its strong roots in the Polish community,
ties in with the West London office's strategy of targeting certain
ethnic groups in the capital, McDonnell said.

The latest deal brings to eight the number of firms which have merged
with Grant Thornton in the last 18 months. In October, it acquired
Vandenburghs, another London firm whose three partners were retiring.
That firm had revenues of about #800,000.

"We are actively seeking further acquisitions over the next year,"
McDonnell said. Grant Thornton is in preliminary talks with a number of
local firms, none of which are linked to a national network, he said.

Grant Thornton's revenues rose 6.5 percent to #114 million in the year
to March 1995. Excluding the firm's insolvency business, organic growth
for the current year is forecast at 7 percent to 8 percent. Insolvency
fees are likely to shrink by about #3 million from #24 million last
year, McDonnell said.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

TOUCHE ROSS HEADS GROUP BID FOR MILLENIUM CONTRACT

TOUCHE ROSS is heading a consortium which is bidding to run the UK's
#400 million Millenium Festival, planned for the year 2000.

The consortium, called M2000, also includes MAI, the television
franchise owner, construction company Bovis and property group
Stanhope. Touche's role will be as project manager.

The festival will be held at a site in Greenwich and is expected to
attract 50 million visitors over its one-year duration.

Three rival bids appear to be less comprehensive than the M2000
proposal. They include a site at the Birmingham National Exhibition
Centre, which is backed by a promised #50 million from the local
council. The other two bids appear to have failed to win any serious
backing and are almost certainly out of the running.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

HLB SIGNS UP KRESTON MEMBER IN SINGAPORE

HLB INTERNATIONAL has strengthened its newly-formed Asia-Pacific region
by signing up Loke Lum & Partners, a two-partner firm which was
previously a member of Kreston International.

Kreston, meanwhile, has linked with David Yeung & Co, a one- partner
unaffiliated practice.

Loke Lum, which became a full member at HLB's annual conference in
Mexico in November, has revenues of about $3 million (#4.7 million) and
employs 50 staff. It has already referred work to HLB members in
Australia, Thailand, Hong Kong, Indonesia and Hungary.

As a result of the link with Loke Lum, HLB has cut its ties with Foo
Kon & Tan, a correspondent firm it shared with Grant Thornton. No fee
income figure is available for Foo Kon, which is nearly three times
bigger than Loke Lum in staff terms.

HLB chief executive Peter Frost said: "Asia-Pacific is a key
development area for HLB, targeted for significant expansion in the
future, and we are delighted to appoint a new representative for the
group in Singapore."

As part of a general restructuring, HLB established a formal Asia-
Pacific regional committee at the annual conference. Daniel Loke,
senior partner of Loke Lum, is one of four members of the council.

Chris Flint, Kreston's international secretary, said Loke Lum's
departure was not a total surprise, and his group "acted quickly" to
plug the gap. David Yeung & Co has revenues of $1 million and employs
around 40 staff.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BEWARE OF THE `FAT CAT' OBSESSION

Some of the Big Six are committed to disclosure of directors' pay as
part of their plans for incorporation. William Gleeson wonders if they
know what they've let themselves in for

WARM BEER, cricket and an obsession with directors' pay. There are some
things people from other parts of the world will never fathom about the
British. When KPMG publishes its results for fiscal 1995 at the end of
January, the main focus of the press will be on the pay of what The
Times has already dubbed the biggest "pride of fat cats" to be revealed
at one time.

Colin Sharman, the firm's senior partner, could be forgiven for
regretting the public fascination with the issue. Speculation about his
salary has been rife, with some estimates putting it as high as #1
million - although KPMG denies the figure will be anywhere near this
level.

Nevertheless, there is known to be a big difference between what new,
young KPMG partners are paid and the salaries of top people at the
firm, particularly in the southeast of England.

Hardly a day goes by without a UK national newspaper publishing details
of what a listed company pays its directors. Reporters are sent up and
down the country by business news editors keen to beat the competition
to the latest "fat cat" revelations.

Annual reports are scrutinised for details of the "directors'
emoluments". During a hostile take-over bid, a close eye is kept on the
various offer and defence documents for details of boardroom pay. The
official stock exchange news service is examined daily for
announcements of changes in directors' shareholdings in their own
company, in case it reveals the award or cashing in of share options.

But a question mark must hang over whether all this is good for British
business. It is arguable that, with a few exceptions, the furore
created every time a director does well for himself may end up damaging
the company he works for.

The advertising industry is a case in point.

When Martin Sorrell, the chief executive of WPP, sought to get
shareholder approval for changes to his pay package, he met with
immense opposition. The big guns from the City institutions came out
against the deal. The press had a field day.

True, Sorrell was after a lot of money. The package could have been
worth almost #30 million over six years. But he argued that similar
deals were given to rival advertising agency bosses around the world.
At one stage, Sorrell threatened that if he did not get his way, he
would take his agency lock, stock and barrel to the US. In the end, a
compromise was reached, which allowed Sorrell to take a lot of money
away if the company met certain earnings growth targets.

But things were not amicably resolved at what was Saatchi & Saatchi.
Maurice Saatchi found shareholder opposition to his pay deal so strong
that he was forced to leave the company. In doing so he took half of
the agency's best creative staff with him. Now, another business has
been created and is doing well having poached a significant number of
former Saatchi clients.

The issues are more complex in the case of the privatised utilities.
These were once regarded as bureaucratic edifices staffed by career
civil servants who never thought they would earn more than #50,000 a
year.

After privatisation, the likes of British Gas chief executive Cedric
Brown saw their salaries take off. Brown earned #275,000 in fiscal
1995. Then British Gas proposed that for the current fiscal year, his
basic salary should be increased to #475,000. Add to that a share bonus
worth 125 percent of the basic - that's #590,000 - and Brown is set to
earn over #1 million this year. Not bad for a man who just a few years
earlier was an unaspiring career civil servant.

But, as legitimate as the public interest is in British Gas, it is hard
to see the interest the public could have in the pay of a senior
partner at a chartered accountancy firm. How the firm's profits are
doled out is surely a private matter between the senior partner and the
rest of the partnership.

Even more of a mystery is that since the accounting firms are not
required to reveal this level of detail, why are they doing it? Under
UK law, KPMG will only be required to disclose directors' pay for KPMG
Audit Plc, the incorporated part of the business. But, the firm has
said that it will go further and disclose full audited accounts for the
partnership.

Ernst & Young, which is considering becoming a limited liability
partnership (see page 1), is also going further than it needs to. It
has said it will reveal the pay of the management committee that runs
the firm and the pay of all its partners.

This information will be presented in a table which will band the
remuneration of the partners in #5,000 steps, as is the practice in UK
company accounts. Yet who, other than the curious, will benefit from
such disclosure?

The media hype has the effect of introducing an anti-success culture.
This in turn can prevent people from aspiring to become what some might
deride as a "fat cat", but what others would describe as a success in
business.

The accounting firms have long kept a close secret of what their
partners earn. The average Big Six partner is undoubtedly on close to
#200,000. Making that known could damage accountants' calls for
protection from liability. The massive damages against BDO Binder
Hamlyn has undoubtedly provoked some public sympathy towards the
profession (see page 3), but how long will that last when it is known
what partners earn?

The publicity could be destructive to the profession in other ways.
Revealing that, despite the cost of litigation, partners are all
wealthy, may provide an excuse for some clients to try and force fees
down further.

Another factor is the pressure that disclosure will put on executives
at less profitable firms to justify their high salaries. No bad thing
for the firms concerned, of course, but one wonders whether the"fat
cats" of the accounting world are ready for the challenge.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

PUSHING FOR CHANGE

As plans for the merger between the Chartered Institute of Management
Accountants and the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and
Wales take shape, Nick Speechly talks to CIMA president Allan McNab

LEADING MEMBERS of the UK accountancy profession must have lost
countless chargeable hours over the years engaged in fruitless merger
talks between different professional bodies. Allan McNab, president of
the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (CIMA), hopes that
the time he has spent discussing a merger with the Institute of
Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW) has not added to the
tally.

In early December, McNab presented CIMA's ruling council with detailed
proposals for the merger thrashed out over the preceding year by no
fewer than 14 joint working parties of the two institutes. The
prospectus for the merger has now been sent out to members of both
bodies (see page 3), and in January, the institutes will embark on
energetic campaigns aimed at explaining their plans to members. If
market research exercises show the proposals are well received, members
will vote on the plans in April or May.

The UK accountancy profession has a long history of ambitious plans for
organisational change which have come to naught - including the most
recent Bishop committee proposals for a wholesale regrouping of the
institutes. Divisions among the different bodies and opposition to
change from many of their members have derailed many proposals.

Distinctions blurred

So, what benefits from a merger between CIMA and the ICAEW can justify
McNab and his colleagues spending yet more time in negotiations?

McNab can point to his own career, working with a CIMA qualification as
a partner at Coopers & Lybrand, as indicative of some of the forces
driving change. With some CIMA members working in public practice
firms, as he is, and many more ICAEW members working in industry, the
distinctions between the roles of the institutes are becoming more
blurred.

"It goes to show that the rationalisation of the profession might be a
good idea," he said.

The proposals would produce a stronger combined institute, focused
equally on the needs of both accountants in public practice and those
in industry, according to McNab. Members who move between audit firms
and business would benefit from strengthened support from within the
same organisation, while the structure will also recognise the
differing needs of the two groups.

"The two institutes overlap in the middle," McNab said. "But, there are
also distinctive parts of both which we would like to preserve in two
streams of qualification."

The combined institute would offer two qualifications, with those
qualified in public practice retaining the "chartered accountant" title
and those trained in industry using "chartered management accountant".
The two syllabi would include many common elements, and the process of
transferring from one qualification to another is to be simplified.

For CIMA, a major benefit of the merger could be in attracting more
employers to offer formal management accountancy training schemes. With
many corporate finance directors holding ICAEW qualifications, they are
likely to be more enthusiastic in supporting trainees in their
companies for their own institute than they might have been in the past
for a separate CIMA qualification, McNab suggested.

"I'd hope that the combined institute will be so attractive and
prestigious that we'd encourage more industrial and commercial
companies to set up formal programmes," he said.

The gain of the prestigious "chartered" tag would be another benefit of
the merger for CIMA members, although McNab did not rank this
particularly highly.

"It's a factor - but it's not an overwhelming one," he said, pointing
out that CIMA has already received Privy Council permission to use the
"chartered management accountant" label in its own right (see page 3).

The CIMA president admitted that the ICAEW's attempts to set up its own
industry management scheme - TOPP (training outside public practice) -
had encouraged support from CIMA for a merger. "Obviously if we were to
remain independent, and the ICAEW managed to adapt its training so it
was successful in industry, there would be a serious competitor for
training capacity. One of the minor advantages of a merger would be
that it would take care of the competitive threat."

While many attempts to merge institutes in the past have fallen in the
face of members' resistance to change, McNab can have a degree of
confidence that his members, at least, broadly support the principle of
merging. Market research carried out among members over the Bishop
proposals showed support for restructuring, and also showed support for
discussions with other institutes should Bishop collapse. Further back,
CIMA members also voted in favour of the abortive plans for a
reorganisation of the profession proposed in 1970.

Benefits to members

"Our members voted for rationalisation at that time, and we've been
consistent ever since for the last 25 years," McNab boasted.

It is more difficult for leaders of the two institutes to be confident
of gaining the support of ICAEW members. But the ICAEW and its members
will also benefit from the move, according to McNab. Members
transferring to industry after training in public practice particularly
will gain through having a simpler route to a further qualification
specifically designed for their new career path.

"What we hope is that when a chartered accountant moves into industry,
he would see the benefits of doing the other side of the qualification -
 doing the business planning and management accounting," McNab said. "I
actually think that the combination of the two - qualifying through
both routes - would be the best possible accounting qualification."

What is more, the combined institute would be better placed to adapt to
changes in the structure of training within the profession.

"The nature of audit firms is changing. It's less dependent on lots of
junior staff and more on senior people, with computer auditing
techniques and that sort of thing. For people who want to become an
accountant nowadays, there are less opportunities through the classic
chartered accountancy route."

Combination with CIMA provides the ICAEW with the best way of adapting
by providing more training in industry, McNab argued. "If they were
going to be successful in training in industry, they would have to do
something that was very much like what CIMA does anyway," he said."So,
they might as well join us."

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

IS INCORPORATION THE ANSWER?

In the last issue of TA, Richard Turnor looked at the unlimited
liability of partners. This month, he considers whether incorporation
provides a solution

THE NEWS that KPMG is to incorporate part of its audit practice,
combined with the award in the ADT case (see page 3), has generated
great interest in incorporation as a means of protecting partners'
estates.

Both accountants and solicitors can now, like members of other
professions, practise in corporate form. A company has a separate legal
personality, and the shareholders of a limited liability company in
principle are not liable for the acts or defaults of the company
itself. Thus, the shareholders of a professional firm who would
otherwise be partners can protect their personal estates even if the
business itself is at risk from claims against the company. In the
event of a catastrophic claim, the shareholder/director may lose his
livelihood, but at least his personal assets will be safe. It may also
be possible to protect different parts of the business from problems in
other parts by incorporating a series of separate companies.

But, it is important to be aware of what incorporation cannot achieve.

It will not, for example, release those who were partners before
incorporation from pre-incorporation liabilities, leases and debts.

Nevertheless, this is not necessarily a reason to reject incorporation.
In time, claims arising from prior advice will become statute barred,
the lease will expire, all pre- incorporation partners will retire and
eventually the company's shareholders will have no responsibility for
pre-incorporation debts.

A director or employer of the incorporated company who gives negligent
advice may still incur personal liability under normal agency
principles. A director who fails to supervise an employee adequately
may also incur liability. Thus, incorporation does not provide complete
protection to those immediately involved, but at least the directors
should have no personal liability for matters for which they are not
responsible. Furthermore, creditors may not in practice think it
worthwhile to claim against a small group of directors and employees
who have been directly involved.

KPMG has said that it will incorporate the high-risk part of its audit
practice (TA 5902), while continuing other aspects of its business in
partnership. Arrangements of this nature need to be structured very
carefully. A claimant who is unable to recover adequate compensation
from the company will explore every possible means of getting
compensation from the partners. An obvious line of attack is to argue
that he thought he was dealing with a partnership rather than with a
company, or that the company was a sham which ought not to stand
between him and his claim against the partners.

Care must, therefore, be taken to ensure that the company genuinely
carries on its own business, and that all advice and services provided
by the company are demonstrably given by or on behalf of the company,
and not on behalf of the partnership. It will not be enough to ensure
that the engagement letter is written on behalf of the company. Where
it is intended that a client should have no claim against the
partnership, all advice must be given by or on behalf of the company
and all correspondence must be conducted on the letterhead of the
company. All time incurred on behalf of the company must be recorded
separately from time recorded working for the partnership.

It should be remembered that if the company becomes insolvent, it may
then have a claim against the partnership relating to services provided
to the company by partners and employees of the partnership. Care
should be taken to insulate the partnership from these difficulties.
For example, those who provide advice on behalf of the company should
be employed directly by the company to do so.

If a partnership incorporates in order to protect the partners'
personal estates and the company then incurs a liability to a client
which it is unable to meet in full, the client is the loser. Thus, the
added protection of incorporation is obtained at the expense of clients
and others who deal with the firm. How are they likely to react?

Clients are likely to be particularly concerned about the financial
strength of the company after incorporation. Partnerships do not have
to publish their accounts, and the fact that the incorporated firm must
do so may be of some comfort to clients since it will give them a
regular indication of the company's net financial position.

However, the published accounts will not disclose the company's
insurance arrangements and some clients may ask for details of cover
maintained and of the identity and financial security of the insurers.
Most firms will be reluctant to disclose this kind of information since
it could be valuable to potential claimants. If the clients are not
satisfied with the information provided about the company, they may be
tempted to take their business to a firm which still practises in
partnership.

But, clients may attach more importance to other factors, such as the
degree of skill of the proposed client service team, and its
familiarity with the client's business and the issues involved. Indeed,
the track record of the client service team may often be regarded as a
strong indication that a claim is unlikely to arise in the first place.
Clients may not think that the remote risk of a claim that cannot be
met in full justifies losing the benefits of a long-term relationship
that has been otherwise successful, especially if those firms which
could offer an equivalent service have also incorporated.

In conclusion, while incorporation may not be a complete solution to
the problems of unlimited liability, if it is carefully planned, it
should protect the personal estates of partners from future liabilities
for which they are not personally responsible. In practice, clients may
be unlikely to think that the reduced protection justifies abandoning
an otherwise satisfactory relationship, especially if the alternative
firms also practise as corporate firms. In such circumstances, why does
any professional firm continue to practise partnership?

The main problems are likely to arise in the context of taxation, both
of the profits of the business and of transactions where shares in the
incorporated business change hands. I would not presume to instruct a
readership of accountants on such matters.

Next month, I will consider the implications of limited liability
partnerships in jurisdictions outside the UK.

Richard Turnor, a partner at London law firm Allen & Overy since 1985,
advises professional partnerships on all aspects of their partnership
structure and documentation.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

PROFESSIONAL SURVIVAL

Ronald Gage, chairman of the Canadian Institute of Chartered
Accountants and head of Ernst & Young in Canada, talks to Gundi Jeffrey
about the major issues facing the profession

IN CANADA, as elsewhere, the accounting profession is facing
unprecedented challenges. Years of recession, followed by economic
stagnation have flattened revenue growth at most of the firms in the
country.

Traditional audit services were further eroded by an amendment to the
Canadian Business Corporation Act in 1994 which eliminated the
requirement of privately-held companies to file audited financial
statements. Litigation in the wake of business failures, although not
as fierce here as in the US, for example, continue to dog the firms.
Times are tough, and Canada's accountants are fighting back.

The Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants (CICA) is now in the
throes of several major initiatives aimed at ensuring that its members
continue to provide relevant, expert and valuable services to Canada's
business community and thereby hang on to their pre-eminence in the
marketplace.

The body, which has 58,000 members, differs from other accounting
institutes in the world in that it alone is responsible for setting
national standards for accounting and auditing. These standards are
recognised in company, securities and banking law at both federal and
provincial level. The CICA develops the Uniform Final Examination all
aspiring CAs must pass to qualify, as well as joint continuing
education programmes with the provincial institutes.

It also liaises with the provincial institutes, which are responsible
for the licensing and governance of their members.

TA recently spoke to Ronald Gage, chairman and chief executive of Ernst
& Young Canada and current chairman of the CICA, about some of the more
pressing challenges facing the Big Six in Canada and the chartered
accounting profession generally.

Gage qualified as a CA in 1964, while with Clarkson Gordon, which is
now E&Y. He became a partner in 1970 and worked his way up the ranks to
become executive partner and chairman of the firm's management
committee in 1986, chief operating officer in 1987 and E&Y chairman and
chief executive in 1993.

As chairman of the profession, as well as head of one of the largest
firms in Canada, Gage has a unique perspective on the profession's
problems and opportunities in today's information- driven society.

TA: Earlier this year, Ontario Premier Mike Harris endorsed the concept
of limited liability partnerships (LLPs) for Ontario's chartered
accountants (TA 5900). Have you any idea when we will see this backing
translated into legislation?

Gage: Although every provincial institute has, for the last year or so,
had a task force working on this subject, three provincial governments
have expressed some commitment to proceed. In Ontario, the timing of
when the government will consider this matter really depends on its
priorities and legislative agenda. My own thinking is that is unlikely
to appear on the government's agenda before spring 1996. I would be
hopeful that we might well see some legislation in Ontario within the
coming year.

The governments in Nova Scotia and Alberta have also been addressing
the matter, and I'm hopeful that we will see the legislation some time
before the end of 1996.

TA: If it happens in Ontario first, how will that affect the structure
of the national firms?

Gage: My understanding is that the firms could establish their national
partnership in any province that has the LLP legislation. That would
then become their governing legislation and would be respected on an
interprovincial basis. I suspect that, once one or two provinces have
introduced this kind of legislation, the other provinces would follow
fairly promptly.

TA: Is the profession lobbying to push the matter along?

Gage: We have a group in place charged with maintaining an active
dialogue with the provincial governments to make sure that they clearly
understand what the issues are, that we have an opportunity to answer
any questions or reservations they might have, and to keep up to date
on the status of each province.

TA: How exactly does an LLP function?

Gage: It enables you to practise in partnership form but have the same
kind of protection against liabilities that you would have under the
limited liability corporate form. It protects the personal assets of
the partners in the firm, but it does not protect the assets of the
firm itself. The one exception is that, if one or more of the partners
were found to be personally negligent in connection with a legal
matter, then their personal assets would not be protected.

TA: Once the legislation comes into effect, is that enough? Will it
give the firms the protection they are seeking?

Gage: LLP legislation is really just the first step. The far more
important issue is the very inequitable situation the firms face under
joint and several liability. That's even a more serious problem than
the partners' personal assets being at risk. It puts the entire firm at
risk.

To deal with that, we are trying to encourage legislative reform in
Canada that would provide for proportionate liability in the way that
damages are allocated in the case of professional negligence
litigation. If we're found to be, say, 5 percent contributory to a
problem, we would be responsible for only 5 percent of any financial
award that was given, irrespective of whether other defendants were
able to pay their awards.

TA: Are you making any headway with this one?

Gage: I would say yes. We are doing this on a co-ordinated basis right
across the country, working with all the provincial governments. They
have been quite prepared to hear our story, and several have indicated
a willingness to examine the matter on a more formal basis over the
coming one or two years and determine whether there is a legislative
inequity that needs to be addressed.

TA: In the meantime, what has been happening in the insurance market
for the firms?

Gage: Generally, the commercial insurance market continues to be very
expensive, continues to offer relatively limited coverage, and the Big
Six have to provide a very large proportion - 50 percent or more -
through their own captive insurance companies.

TA: So what are the firms doing in terms of risk management strategies
to reduce exposure to lawsuits?

Gage: Over the past two or three years, all the firms have been
focusing on managing their risks. In the case of Ernst & Young
International, I chaired a task force a couple of years ago on how we
could deal more effectively with risk management in light of the
litigation scene.

The kinds of things we put in place are: continuing to educate our
people on the risks that are out there and how to best manage those
risks; putting enormous emphasis on the acceptance and continuance of
clients; and re-emphasising and continually improving our approach to
our internal quality control process. We are also re-engineering our
audit methodologies to heighten our focus on the risk of the industry
the client operates in, and the risk profile of the individual client,
so that we can understand where those business and operating risks are
to direct our audit activities accordingly.

We also strongly support the various initiatives that are going on in
the areas of sound corporate governance. We think that improved
corporate governance practices go a long way to helping us manage the
risks, and part of that is, of course, a strong and effective audit
committee.

TA: What are risky clients and might you decide not to continue
auditing them?

Gage: We, along with other firms, have declined to take on prospective
clients, and have decided reluctantly to part ways with existing
clients where we felt that their risk profile became inappropriate for
us. Certain industries, such as hi-tech, are much riskier than others
in terms of the potential rate for business failure. You also have to
look at the quality of the corporate governance, the quality of the
internal controls and the quality of management. You must always be
concerned with the integrity of the people you're dealing with.

TA: Moving on to your role as chair of the CICA, what kind of agenda
had you built yourself before you started out?

Gage: It seems to me that, to be successful over the long term, our
profession has be relevant to the society we operate in; we have to be
pre-eminent and we have to be attractive to retain the best people. We
have been experiencing tremendous change and turbulence in the Canadian
economy, which has had a huge impact on us over the last five or ten
years. It seemed to me that, when I got on the ladder to become chair
of the CICA, we needed to take one of these longer, more far-reaching,
very integrated views of the profession and create a new vision for the
future.

That was the number one item on my agenda and I'm pleased that, last
February, we created the Vision Task Force (TA 5898). This task force
will report to the board of governors on a preliminary basis in
December, offering its long-term view of the future and a series of
recommendations on what action the profession should take over the
course of the coming years.

It will address several issues. Like, should we be separating
certification, that is, becoming a chartered accountant, from
licensure, that is, the right to practise public accounting? Should we
formally recognise specialisation? What amount and type of experience
should be required in the assurance services area to get your CA? How
do we ensure reciprocity and harmonisation among the provinces?
Accounting firms are doing a lot more than accounting. How do we
determine fees and billings? Who can or can't be a partner? They're
also looking at the very governance of the CA profession itself. There
is nothing off the table. There are no sacred cows.

TA: Did you have anything else you wanted to accomplish as chair of the
CICA?

Gage: Another area of real deep interest to me, really an offshoot of
the Vision project, is that we have to re-examine how and where we
provide our assurance and attestation services. Our traditional role as
auditors has been to audit historic cost financial statements.

As we move out of an industrial economy to an information and knowledge
economy, some of the most important assets won't be on a historic cost
financial statement. Intangible assets such as intellectual capital,
human resources, research and development, and innovation, don't appear
on financial statements. Likewise, we probably have to find new ways to
measure performance in this emerging information economy.

I believe that, as we change our focus and learn to address the more
important assets of the new economy, auditors can play a useful role in
what are now called non-traditional attestation areas. I think the
challenge is for us to identify what those areas are and to what extent
they will have a marketplace value. We shouldn't be trying to sell an
attestation service just because we can do it. We should be focused on
the marketplace to see where the market believes there will be value in
third-party assurance. Then we have to establish ourselves in those
areas.

For example, there might be value in users knowing that certain
commercial databases had a process to keep the information accurate and
timely. An audit firm might go in and evaluate the procedures for
maintaining the database. There might be areas in the environmental
field where there was a desire to know to what degree a company had
good processes and systems in place to monitor compliance with
environmental regulations.

Right now, a lot of this is quite speculative and we need to examine
where the values of our society are changing and what kind of
information is going to become critical in performance evaluation in
the future and whether that performance information would be more
valuable if it had an auditor's opinion on it. I think there is a
really critical issue to keep our profession relevant to our society.

Again we have established a small task force that, over the next few
years, will examine this area in a comprehensive fashion. It is co-
ordinating its work with a similar committee in the US. TA: Any other
challenges?

Gage: The big issue we haven't talked directly about is attractiveness.
We have to make sure the profession is dynamic and challenging, that
members are highly respected and regarded within society. And we have
to make sure that it's financially rewarding. That's the only way we're
going to continue attracting the very best people. Like any profession,
we're only as good as the quality of people in it.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SUCCESS BREEDS SUCCESS

In Malaysia, healthy economic growth and a flood of investment is
creating a lucrative market for accounting firms. Sally Roden reports

THE LAST ten years have seen a remarkable economic turnaround in
Malaysia. In the mid-1980s, with the country deep in recession, the
government was forced to extend university courses from three to four
years in a bid to combat unemployment.

Today, the problem isn't a lack of jobs; it's an acute shortage of
skilled labour in every industry sector. The government has even had to
reverse its decision of a decade ago and cut university courses back to
three years.

Economic growth has been impressive. In each of the last seven years,
gross domestic product has risen by more than 8 percent.

Such economic success, combined with a stable political environment -
the National Front Coalition has been in power for 38 years - has
resulted in a flood of investment into the country. And that kind of
investment - RM38.4 billion (#10 billion) in 1994 alone - is good news
for accounting firms.

"Growth has been bullish and will continue for at least the next three
years," said Ian Appleby, shortly before retiring as Asia- Pacific
regional managing partner at Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu International.

"There has been plenty of infrastructural projects and many government
agencies are being privatised which results in investment," said Goh
Joon Hai, managing partner of Hew & Tan, the local member of Moores
Rowland International.

Under a privatisation programme launched over ten years ago, roads,
railways, the national airline, hospitals, telecommunications and power
generators have all been sold off. More recently, the government
announced that a further 200 state- owned bodies were to be privatised,
which is likely to result in more work for accountants.

Another source of overseas funds is the government's recently adopted
strategy of turning Malaysia into an international financial services
centre. In June, it announced a range of measures to liberalise the
country's capital markets, while two new derivatives exchanges are
expected to open this autumn.

In response to the influx of foreign investors, accounting firms have
had to change the kind of services they offer.

Chris Low, tax manager at HALS & Associates, said his firm's clients
used to be concerned only with tax compliance. "Now they have a
different attitude and look more to consulting to minimise their tax
exposure," he said. Changes in tax regulations occur every year, he
said, as the government moves towards greater emphasis on indirect
taxation.

Goh said Hew & Tan is providing more management consulting and tax
services. "Increased investment has meant more tax payers and more tax
work," he said. Taxation is currently handled by a civil service
department but there is a move afoot to establish an inland revenue
board which would be independent of the civil service. There is also a
parallel move to introduce a system of self-assessment, which would be
good news for accounting firms.

Hew & Tan has also been active in corporate finance. "We have played a
big role in helping clients gain public listings," Goh said. "We select
a merchant banker and are involved in the initial public issue."

The government has also encouraged Malaysian companies to expand into
other markets in southeast Asia. During 1995, it introduced a law that
allowed all profits earned outside Malaysia to be repatriated for
investment free of tax.

"Companies with expertise in plantation are buying land in Indonesia
and Vietnam," said Zainal Putih, country managing partner at Arthur
Andersen. "Other companies which are experts in road building,
particularly because Malaysia's north/south motorway has just been
completed, are setting up in India and Vietnam where these services are
needed."

This drive overseas has provided new challenges for accounting firms.
"As Malaysia advances towards developed nation status, it can be
expected that competition in the profession will intensify and clients
will become more demanding," said Lai Siew Peng, practice development
manager at Ernst & Young.

While few Malaysian firms were prepared to disclose revenue figures for
last year, most of those that did reported robust growth. More telling
are the staff figures. Of the 23 firms that replied to TA's survey,
only three recorded a decline in total head-count.

None of the Big Six would reveal fee income figures, but in terms of
total staff, E&Y is the market leader with 1,222 employees. The firm's
clients include the state-owned Bank Bumiputra, agriculture and
fisheries group Multi-Purpose Holdings and Malaysia's largest
conglomerate, Renong Holdings.

Lai said the biggest areas of growth for E&Y are tax and consulting.
She believes the healthy growth in the Malaysian market is set to
continue. "The anticipated robust economic activity, rising business
confidence, lowering of corporation tax [to 30 percent] and the
increase in reinvestment allowance are among the reasons," she said.

In second place is KPMG with an estimated total staff of 973. TA puts
the firm's total partner numbers at 23 and professional staff at 750.

Arthur Andersen comes next with total staff of 906, up 4.4 percent from
a year earlier. This figure does not include Andersen Consulting.

According to Zainal, Andersen has benefited greatly from the
government's privatisation programme. He said many of the privatisation
contracts go to the Big Six "because of the international nature and
complexity of the work".

Fourth in the staff rankings is Price Waterhouse, with estimated total
staff of 826, followed by Coopers & Lybrand on 722.

Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, which also operates under its local name of
Kassim Chan & Co., takes sixth place in the tables with total staff of
714, a rise of 5.8 percent on the previous year.

Unlike their western counterparts, firms in Malaysia have been largely
unaffected by fee pressure in the audit sector. "Price competition is
not a problem. Clients are concerned with quality, not price," said
Chia Kwong Chow, managing partner of KC Chia & Noor, the MacIntyre
Strater affiliate.

Part of the reason for this is the Malaysian Institute of Accountants'
(MIA) monitoring of audit fees. Until three years ago the MIA
stipulated a minimum audit fee. It now simply offers a guideline of
fees that should be charged.

By far the biggest problem facing the Malaysian profession is a
shortage of staff. The country's thriving commercial sector can afford
to offer high salaries in order to lure staff from accounting firms,
while stringent immigration laws make it hard to bring in expatriate
staff.

"This country has had about 8 percent growth for about eight years.
With a population of only 20 million, problems are inevitable," said
Zainal at Andersen. "Opportunities pop up everywhere."

Kim Guan, managing partner of Kreston International member firm THLG
Kreston - M, believes the only way around the staff shortages is to
offer higher salaries. But others see potential pitfalls in such a
strategy.

"This pushes up the cost of production and can push up prices," said
Low at HALS. "The work environment must be good, and every individual
must be looked at separately to find out what his needs are." He
believes the government will have to deal with this growing problem
soon.

Other small firms say the biggest difficulty they face is clients
moving over to Big Six firms when they reach a certain size.

"Most of the big assignments are dominated by the Big Six," Chia said.
"The survival of the smaller firms depends on the partner's personal
contact and the market niche carved out by the firm."

But, as Goh at Hew & Tan pointed out, this is not a problem unique to
Malaysia. "It happens in every country when clients grow to a certain
size," he said. "We have lost one or two jobs over the last two years
but this was not a case of clients defecting to the Big Six."

In response to the growing globalisation of the profession, more firms
are adopting international names. THLG Kreston adopted the Kreston
moniker 18 months ago. "From the client point of view, it shows the
firm is moving in a certain direction, even though it is not a Big Six
firm," he said. International work makes up about 15 percent of the
firm's total business.

Chia & Noor has not adopted the MacIntyre Strater name. Chia does not
think it would offer the firm any advantage. "We have largely local
clients, and membership of MacIntyre Strater is not very useful for
this type of client," he said.

The main professional issue on the agenda in 1995 was the proposed
merger between Malaysia's two accounting bodies. The statutory body,
the MIA, and the older Malaysian Association of Certified Public
Accountants (MICPA), a private association established by chartered
accountants who qualified in England, are in the process of formalising
the agreement. It was the MICPA which originally governed the
accounting profession in Malaysia, before the MIA was established in
1967.

"Two bodies are not justified for a relatively small number of
accountants," Zainal said. The MIA has about 8,000 members and the
MICPA about 4,000, while some accountants are members of both.

Some people hope that the merger will bring about professional change
in the country. For example, Malaysian accountants are not allowed to
advertise, a legacy of the British influence on the MICPA, according to
Zainal. He thinks this will have to change. "Customers and the public
need more information," he said. "This is one anomaly in the
advancement of the profession."

Looking to the year ahead, most accountants believe the favourable
business climate will continue. The economy is forecast to grow by over
8 percent again, and Malaysia's enhanced role throughout southeast Asia
is expected to produce new business opportunities. In terms of economic
muscle, Zainal said,"we are now moving on to the same plane as
Singapore and Hong Kong".

SELECT ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING FIRMS IN MALAYSIA - RANKED BY REVEUNE

                                       Fee     Fee
                                       income  income  Growth Effec-
                     International     1994    1993    rate   tive
Firm                 affiliation       (RM/m)  (RM/m)  (%)    date

Moore Stephens       Moore Stephens    4.1(1)  3.6(1)  13.9   Dec 94
THLG Kreston - M     Kreston           2.8(2)  2.5(2)   n/a   Dec 94
HALS & Associates    -                 2.0     1.8     11.1   Dec 94
Wong Liu & Partners  Morison           2.0(1)  1.8(1)  11.1   Dec 94
Shamsir Jasani       Grant Thornton
                     /HLB              1.9     1.8      5.6   Dec 94
Anuarul Azizan Chew  Morison           1.3     1.3      0.0   Dec 94
Neoh WM Lam          SCI               1.1     1.0     10.0   Dec 94
KK Chow & Partners   IGAF              1.0     0.9     11.1   Dec 94
Ong & Wong           IA                0.8(1)  0.8(1)   0.0   Dec 94

(1) Figures supplied in US dollars and converted to Malaysian
ringgit at the year-end exchange rates
(2) Estimated by TA

Note:  Some firms declined to give fee income data

Source:  The Accountant

LEADING ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING FIRMS IN MALAYSIA - RANKED BY TOTAL
STAFF

                             Number       Number       Number of
                             of           of           chargeable
                             offices      partners     staff
Firm                         1993  1994   1993  1994   1993   1994

Ernst & Young(1)             13    12     24    22     n/a    950
KPMG Peat Marwick/KPMG Desa
 Megat                       10(2) 10(2)  20(2) 23(2)  570(2) 750(2)
Arthur Andersen(3)           14    14     18    15     610    648
Price Waterhouse              8     8(2)  26(2) 26(2)  605    600(2)
Coopers & Lybrand            11(2) 11(2)  26(2) 23(2)  n/a    n/a
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu(1)   6     7     18    22     494    525
Hew & Tan                     2     2      5     5     162    158
Shamsir Jasani                4     4      7     7     125    129
Robert Teo Kuan               1     1      3     4      80     85
Moore Stephens                5     5      5     5      90     76
Horwath Mok & Poon            1     1      3     3      48     65
Yeo Yong Poh                  2     2      6     6      57     65
Roger Yue Tan & Associates    1     1      2     2      52     58
KC Chia & Noor                3     3      4     3      41     45
Russ Ooi & Associates         3     3      4     4      44     48
Ong & Wong                    2     3      3     3      10      9
HALS & Associates             1     1      3     3      35     40
Anuarul Azizan Chew           2     1      3     3      39     38
Wong Liu & Partners           3     3      2     4      39     38
Gong & Co                     2     2      3     3     n/a     40
Neoh WM Lam                   2     2      2     2      35     40
THLG Kreston - M              2     2      2     2      26     28
KK Chow & Partners            1     1      1     2      20     20

                                    Number of
                                    administrative  Total
                                    staff           staff
Firm                                1993    1994    1993    1994

Ernst & Young(1)                    n/a     250     1,124   1,222
KPMG Peat Marwick/KPMG Desa Megat   180(2)  200(2)    770(2)  973(2)
Arthur Andersen(3)                  240     243       868     906
Price Waterhouse                    194     200(2)    825(2)  826(2)
Coopers & Lybrand                   n/a     n/a       n/a     722
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu(1)         163     167       675     714
Hew & Tan                            30      29       197     192
Shamsir Jasani                       16      16       148     152
Robert Teo Kuan                      20      20       103     109
Moore Stephens                       15      20       110     101
Horwath Mok & Poon                   12      15        63      83
Yeo Yong Poh                          9      10        72      81
Roger Yue Tan & Associates           10      12        64      72
KC Chia & Noor                       17      20        62      68
Russ Ooi & Associates                 9       9        57      61
Ong & Wong                           41      42        54      54
HALS & Associates                    10      10        48      53
Anuarul Azizan Chew                  11      10        53      51
Wong Liu & Partners                   9       9        50      51
Gong & Co                           n/a       5       n/a      48
Neoh WM Lam                           6       5        43      47
THLG Kreston - M                      4       4        32      34
KK Chow & Partners                    6       6        27      28

(1) Figures refer to 1994 and 1995
(2) Estimated by TA
(3) Does not include Andersen Consulting

n/a = not available

Source:  The Accountant

LEADING ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING FIRMS IN MALAYSIA - FEE SPILT

                     International        Account-     Consult-
Firm                 affiliation    Audit ing     Tax  ting    Other

Arthur Andersen(1)   AA & Co, SC    67     -      17   10       6
Hew & Tan            MRI            60    10      18    -      12
Shamsir Jasani       Grant Thornton
                     /HLB           52     -      18   16      14(2)
Robert Teo Kuan      Nexia          39     -      36    2      23
Moore Stephens       Moore Stephens 65(3)  -      18   17       -
Horwath Mok & Poon   Horwath        35     5      25    5      30(4)
Yeo Yong Poh         DFK            50    10      23    7      10(4)
KC Chia & Noor       MacIntyre
                     Strater        28     5      20   27      20(4)
Russ Ooi &
 Associates          RSM            26     8      20    -      46(4)
Ong & Wong           IA             60     -      20   10      10
HALS & Associates    -              50     -      20   20      10
Anuarul Azizan Chew  Morison        70     2      10    3      15(4)
Wong Liu & Partners  Morison        58     6      15   21       -
Gong & Co            CKL            51     7      16    -      26
Neoh WM Lam          SC             46     8      18    -      28(5)
THLG Kreston - M     Kreston        65     -      25   10       -
KK Chow & Partners   IGAF           47     4      19    -      30(5)

(1) Does not include Andersen Consulting
(2) Share registration and corporate recovery
(3) Includes accounting
(4) Includes corporate finance
(5) Secretarial

Source:  The Accountant

LEADING ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING FIRMS IN MALAYSIA - WHO'S WHO

Arthur Andersen
Level 1
Block C (South)
Pusat Bandar Damansara
50490 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 60-3-255 7000
Fax: 60-3-255 5332
Contact partner: Dato' Hj. Zainal Abidin Putih

Anuarul Azizan Chew (Morison International)
18 Jalan 1/64
Off Jalan Kolam Air/Jalan Ipoh
51200 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 60-3-441 7233
Fax: 60-3-441 0395
Contact partner: Azizan Bin Mohd. Noor

KC Chia & Noor (MacIntyre Strater)
229-1 Jalan Perkasa Satu
Taman Maluri
Cheras
55100 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 60-3-984 3102
Fax: 60-3-984 7952
Contact partner: Chia Kwong Chow

KK Chow & Partners (IGAF)
Suite 1713
17th Floor
IGB Plaza
6 Jalan Kampar
50400 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 60-3-442 2055
Fax: 60-3-441 7719
Contact partner: KK Chow

Coopers & Lybrand
22nd Floor
IGB Plaza
Jalan Kampar
Off Jalan Tun Razak
50400 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 60-3-441 1188
Fax: 60-3-441 0880
Contact partner: Mohammad Abdullah

Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu (DTTI)
3 Changkat Raja Chulan
50200 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 60-3-230 6822
Fax: 60-3-232 4585
Contact partner: Mohd Kassim Bin Sulong

Ernst & Young
1st & 4th Floors
Kompleks Antarabangsa
Jalan Sultan Ismail
50250 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 60-3-244 2333
Fax: 60-3-241 0676
Contact partner: Ali Abdul Kadir

Gong & Company (Clark Kenneth Leventhal)
3 Jalan SS2/64
47300 Petaling Jaya
Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 60-3-776 4612
Fax: 60-3-775 4362
Contact partner: Felix Gong

HALS & Associates (-)
12th Floor
Ming Building
Jalan Bukit Nanas
50250 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 60-3-201 1322
Fax: 60-3-201 1326
Contact partner: Chew Weng Kit

Hew & Tan (Moores Rowland International)
Wisma Selangor Dredging
7th Floor
South Block
142A Jalan Ampang
50450 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 60-3-261 5222
Fax: 60-3-261 3909
Contact partner: Goh Joon Hai

Horwath Mok & Poon
13-1 Pertama Complex
Jalan Tuanku Abdul Rahman
50100 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 60-3-292 9560
Fax: 60-3-292 9361
Contact partner: Mok Yuen Lok

KPMG Peat Marwick/KPMG Desa Megat
4th Floor
Wisma Perdana
Jalan Dungun
Damansara Heights
50490 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 60-3-255 3388
Fax: 60-3-255 0971
Contact partner: Ramli Ibrahim

THLG Kreston - M (Kreston International)
Suite One
Wisma Rolnic 97C
Jalan Bangsar
59200 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 60-32-827 889
Fax: 60-32-827 897
Contact partner: Kim Guan

Moore Stephens
Block D
3rd Floor
Bangunan SPPK
46 Jalan Dungun
Damansara Heights
50490 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 60-3-254 1888
Fax: 60-3-254 7673
Contact partner: Eddy Chong

Neoh WN Lam
(SCI International)
Acctax Corporate Centre
2 Bawasah Road
10050 Penang
Tel: 60-4-228 0020
Fax: 60-4-228 0023
Contact partner: Lam Wai Min
                 Neoh Chin Wah

Ong & Wong (IA International)
3rd Floor
Wisma Ho Weng Kee
138-140 Jalan Petaling
50000 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 60-3-230 4033
Fax: 60-3-232 4863
Contact partner: Ong Kong-Lai

Russ Ooi & Associates (RSM International)
Letterbox No. 8
Wisma Damansara Penthouse
14th Floor
Jalan Semantan
50490 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 60-3-254 3388
Fax: 60-3-255 5101
Contact partner: Russ Ooi

Price Waterhouse
11th Floor
Wisma Sime Darby
Jalan Raja Laut
PO Box 10192
50706 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 60-3-293 1077
Fax: 60-3-293 0997
Contact partner: Khoo Eng Choo

Shamsir Jasani
(Grant Thornton/HLB)
Level 17
Menara Bank
Pembangunan
Jalan Sultan Ismail
PO Box 12337
50774 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 60-3-292 4022
Fax: 60-3-291 5229
Contact partner: Narendra Jasani

Robert Teo Kuan (Nexia International)
171-175 Jalan Maharajalela
50150 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 60-3-248 3700
Fax: 60-3-244 2880
Contact partner: Robert Teo

Wong Liu & Partners (Morison International)
62-A Sri Bahari Road
10050 Penang
Tel: 60-4-263 5540
Fax: 60-4-263 4953
Contact partner: Dean Liu

Yeo Yong Poh (DFK International)
Suite 4024
4th Floor
President House
Jalan Sultan Ismail
50250 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 60-3-241 2555
Fax: 60-3-242 6355
Contact partner: Khoo Pek Ling

Roger Yue Tan & Associates (BKR International)
2nd Floor
Wisma Tai Yoon
9B Lorong Medan Tuanku Satu
Medan Tuanku
50300 Kuala Lumpur
Tel: 60-3-292 0722
Fax: 60-3-291 6569
Contact partner: Roger Yue

Source:  The Accountant

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-21</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B020-197</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi113.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002834 text/html 164107
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:25:57 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:55 GMT
Content-length: 163917
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi113.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>The Best and Worst of 1995: Diamonds & Dogs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(6721 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>Top Financial Planning Software</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1309 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Financial Planners' Secrets of Success</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1112 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>This Just In:  Getting Back to Business</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(5706 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Editor's Note:  Another Nail in the Coffin?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(922 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Andersen BC Looks At Systems Union's SunSystems Accounting Software</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1968 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Information Services:  In Search of On-line CPAs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2060 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Practice Development:  Form 5500 Follow-up</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1742 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>Newspages:  Tax Vendors for Sale</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1328 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>Quicklooks:  MAXShare and Hijaak Graphics Suite</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1986 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>Creative Uses of Life Insurance Abound</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1085 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

The Best and Worst of 1995: Diamonds & Dogs


Each year as the holiday season approaches, the editorial staff at Accounting
Technology gathers for one of the most enjoyable tasks of the year-choosing
products for our annual Diamonds and Dogs article.  Pouring through countless
back issues of computer and industry trades, newspaper clippings, and our own
notes accumulated over the year, we narrow down our choices until we wind up
with the dozen and a half "awards" presented here.

This year, things were really pretty slow for the first half of the year.
With many vendors waiting for the release of Windows 95, not all that much
exciting happened until late summer.  At least, that's what it seems like in
retrospect.  In actuality, it was an interesting year all around.  And, as has
been the trend in recent years, much of what took place was of benefit to you,
both in terms of what you can accomplish, and what it costs to do so.  This is
reflected in the large number of Diamonds, with just a smattering of Mixed
Bags and Dogs.


The brightest diamond of all

Finally, no article on the best of 1995 would be complete without a nod to the
"best of the best."  To the staff here at Accounting Technology, that's you
the reader.

With this first issue of the new year, everyone at Accounting Technology would
like to wish you and yours a happy, healthy, and profitable New Year!

So, without further ado, and presented in no particular order (and with no
real malice intended), here are our choices for the Diamonds and Dogs of 1995.


DIAMONDS

Sometimes you Win(95)...

And it seems as though Microsoft has indeed won big with this newest release
of its graphical operating system.  Often delayed, and put through the largest
beta test in history (more on this later), the software was finally released
with much fanfare on August 24th.  The papers reported users lining up in
computer stores to purchase the upgrade when it went on sale at midnight.
And, with the OEM deals Microsoft cut with hardware vendors, there are
millions of copies out there already, with a fairly large proportion of them
actually being used, rather than stuck on the shelf.

More conservative users, including many accountants, are biding their time,
waiting for a second release.  Of course, as magazine editors, no one expects
us

to be all that conservative, so we followed Win95 through the end of the beta
test and used it exclusively on our production machines (we still test
hardware with Win 3.11, unless it's a PC that comes with Win95 pre-installed).
And, we have to admit that a lot of the hype surrounding Win95 is justified.

We installed it on several workstations effortlessly, while one hung up until
a network card was removed.  The new desktop is really a big improvement over
Win 3.11, and once you get used to it, Windows Explorer is more powerful than
the File Manager it replaces (though you can continue to use File Manager if
you prefer).

Plug and Play, when it works, is a joy, and a terror when it doesn't.  All
told, just as with any operating system that's preceded it (including IBM's
OS/2 Warp), Microsoft Windows 95 has its good points and bad.

Overall, we started out liking it, and as we discover just how to use some of
its not-so-obvious features, that liking grows.


2+2 finally = 4

Last year at this time, Intel was just recovering from a media blitz nailing
the vendor on its cover-up of math problems inherent in its Pentium processor.
Jokes were rampant, and Intel was desperately trying to find some graceful way
out of the mess.  It finally bowed to the inevitable and offered to replace
any Pentium that contained the fault.  You had to give a credit card number,
but if you actually returned the faulty chip, your charge account was never
charged.

This strategy worked just fine.  Today, the Pentium CPU rules.  Sure, you can
still buy a 486, but why would you want to?  Everything goes better with a
Pentium, and system prices on the 75-MHz version (the 60- and 66-MHz CPUs have
all but disappeared) are under $2,000.  Even notebooks are Pentium powered.

Cyrix and AMD are still able competitors, carrying the banner for their "5X86"
technology.  But while the alternate CPUs are powerful, Intel's Pentium still
has the edge in both power and market share.  But that's right now.  You never
know what the future will bring.


How much is that accounting package in the Window(s)?

Accountants, as a professional group, have been rather slow to adopt Windows.
And even those who have moved into the Windows environment haven't embraced
Windows-based accounting applications with much gusto.

Part of this is that while the benefits of Windows-based productivity
applications such as word processing and spreadsheets are pretty obvious,
accounting itself is such a data entry oriented task that it's been difficult
to understand the benefits that a visually oriented approach could offer.  To
borrow from the last, short-lived "Zorro" TV series, most of us just want to
"Get in, make some Z's, and get out."

This situation has resulted in a sort of Catch 22.  With accountants resistant
to Windows-based accounting, vendors have been hesitant to invest much money
and time in R&D.  With few packages available, accountants haven't felt much
pressure to change.

That's changed pretty dramatically over the last two years.  It happened first
in the consumer market the year before last.  Windows-based packages from
Peachtree, Intuit, Microsoft, and scores of other vendors started to dominate
the market.  Not only in accounting applications, but in retail tax prep as
well.  With much of their Windows R&D already a sunk cost, many of these
vendors turned their attention to the professional market.  1995 saw a flood
of products announced and shipped.  And those vendors that don't already have
a Windows product line will most likely offer one this year.  When Win95 was
announced, we received almost two dozen press releases from accounting and tax
software vendors announcing Win95 compliant packages.

We're convinced that Windows-based applications offer concrete benefits in
ease of use, with drop-down menus, a consistent interface, pick-lists, and
similar features.  Easier to use also means easier to learn, so your training
and re-training costs go down as well.

If you're still primarily a DOS shop, it's time for you to take a close look
at Windows applications.  In many cases, they really are better.


CD-ROM gets faster, easier, and cheaper

1995 will also be remembered as the year that CD-ROM became a standard, and
even expected, feature on desktop PCs.  Much of the reason for this is a
one-two punch.  First, the year marked a switch from SCSI- and AT-interfaced
drives to the ATAPI IDE standard, which allows a drive just to plug into a
hard disk cable or second IDE channel on the motherboard if available.

This easy interfacing came along with the arrival of inexpensive quad-speed
drives, which dropped in price from over $400 at the start of the year to
under $150 by year's end.  When you purchase them with a complete system, or
as part of an upgrade kit, it's quite possible to receive a quad-speed drive
that costs in the $100 range.

But quad-speed is hardly even the state of the art.  Driven by more demanding
multimedia applications, six-speed drives are plentiful.  Diamond Multimedia
Systems is shipping an eight-speed drive with its top-of-the-line upgrade kit,
and several vendors are showing (but not yet shipping) ten-speed units.

Many of you already have CD-ROM drives.  But with the silver disc now the
distribution media of choice, if you don't yet have a CD-ROM drive, it's time
to add one.  And if you have a slower drive, it's not very expensive to
upgrade to one of the newer, speedier units.


ZIP and EasyDrive give you lots of space for very little cash

The mass move to Windows has had one not-so-beneficial effect.  Suddenly,
almost everyone is suffering from a lack of hard disk space.  With operating
systems such as Win95 taking up mucho megabytes on their own, it doesn't take
the installation of too many megabyte-hungry application such as Microsoft
Office (up to 75MB) before you start getting Disk Full messages from your PC.

PCs these days are coming with larger hard disk drives, and replacement drives
have dropped below $400 for a gigabyte drive.  But what do you do if you are
already maxed out in your system?  Most PCs will only support two hard disk
drives.  Unless you want to start transferring files back and forth between
diskettes and/or tape, you have a problem.

Well, you did until recently.  Well-known vendors Iomega and SyQuest have
introduced your solution-ZIP and EZ*DRIVE removable media drives.  Both these
vendors have a long track record in the removable media industry.  SyQuest has
been making high-capacity removable cartridge drives since the Apple II.
Iomega followed suit with its Bernoulli Box for the IBM PC in the early 1980s.
Over the years, both have been somewhat successful, mostly in vertical
industries.  Many of Iomega's sales have been to various branches of the
government and military, where the units' ruggedness is greatly valued, and
the relatively high cost is of secondary concern.  SyQuest has been a big hit
in the publishing industry.  Many publications (including this one) send files
created with page layout software to the printing house on SyQuest cartridges.

But relatively high drive and media prices have kept either company from being
as successful as it might have been.  In 1995, however, both vendors
introduced consumer-oriented, high-capacity storage solutions at affordable
prices.  And sales for both have really taken off.

The ZIP drive, introduced first, is a terrific-looking external drive that
uses a special 3.5-inch, flexible-media, removable disk.  Providing 100MB per
diskette, both the drive, at about $200, and the media, at $20 per 100MB, are
easy on your wallet.  We've been testing the parallel-port version of the ZIP,
and we just love it (the review will be in a future issue).  It seems users
do, too.  The drives have been flying off the shelves, and many vendors have
been backordered almost continuously since the drive started shipping.

This situation has worked out pretty well for SyQuest.  Its EZ*DRIVE is a
comparably priced 135MB cartridge hard disk unit, available in both
parallel-port and SCSI versions (as is the ZIP), and in internal and external
versions (the ZIP is strictly external).  We also have an EZ*DRIVE under
review.  Except for some initial problems installing the SCSI interface, it
also has been a joy to use.

In fact, about the only fly in the ointment with either of these drives is
that Iomega has already announced a bigger and better drive.  Its Jaz drive
should be shipping about the time this appears.  And while we haven't yet seen
one, it's expected to sell for under $500, with 1-gigabyte cartridges costing
about $100 each.  If Iomega does as good a job with the Jaz as it did with the
ZIP, there's no way it (or you) can lose.


Tape backup hits rock bottom

While we're on the topic of additional storage, let's not forget tape backup.
1995 will probably be remembered as the year that tape backup became
affordable enough for even home users.

Tape backup is a technology that's been around almost as long as PCs.  We've
seen it go from the large, clunky 3-M cartridge technology to the tiny DAT
(Digital Audio Tape) format.  One thing has remained constant over the years.
Tape backup has been expensive, slow, and generally a pain to use.

That was then.  The popular QIC format speeded up the backup process.  But it
took inexpensive parallel-port tape

drives to make tape backup an attractive technology.  Prices were falling all
during 1995, but MicroSolutions really hastened the process with an 800MB
Travan-technology capable parallel-port drive for under $170.  Iomega quickly
followed suit with a similar Ditto drive.  Colorado Memory Systems, now owned
by Hewlett-Packard, already has a large chunk of the installed market, with
the lion's share of OEM deals with system vendors.  You can be sure Colorado
won't give up any sales easily to other tape drive vendors.

Just to make things even better, backup software has really improved along
with drive and tape technology.  Arcada Software provides the software for
MicroSolutions and Iomega, and sells an enhanced version on its own.  Other
vendors also have excellent software for backup available.

Just about all of today's backup software offers extensive scheduling options
and various data compression features to squeeze more data onto a single tape.

Sure, we know you already have a tape backup drive on your system.  But
perhaps it's an older unit, with limited capacity.  With today's units, and
today's prices, right now is a good time for you to upgrade.


Accountants on-line

When it comes to technology, accountants generally get a bad rap.  The
stereotype is a green eye-shaded clerk bending over a ledger with a quill pen
in hand.  The reality, as we all know, is much different.  Accountants are
usually quick to embrace a technology once the cost/benefits become clear.
And nowhere is this more evident than in telecommunications, this year's
hottest technology.

Everyone's on the on-line services such as CompuServe and Prodigy.  CompuServe
has long served as a support vehicle for numerous accounting software vendors,
and if you sign onto Prodigy's Special Interest Section, the first listing you
find is one for accountants run by Sid Breman.

The Microsoft Network hasn't been left out either.  F&G, Accounting
Techology's publisher, is a Service Provider on MSN, and you'll find current
and back issues of Accounting Technology as well as its sister publications
The Practical Accountant and Accounting Today.  The Accounting Office, an area
run by Educational Edge, also provides MSN subscribers with access to
accountant-oriented resources.

Even more interesting, however, is how accounting software vendors are among
the leading-edge innovators on the Internet.  SBT, well known for its
accounting software products, has an entire new division with the task of
helping accountants find ways to profit from the Internet.  WebTrader, the
division's first product, offers a secure method for conducting business over
the Net.  Abacus Accounting Systems, another well-known software vendor, is
also heavily into Internet development.

And let's not forget the numerous vendors that have established Web home
pages.  If you have an Internet account, be sure to check out Wayne's Web, the
web "home" of Wayne Harding.  Wayne's the VP of CPA Relations for Great Plains
Software, and his section can be found on Great Plains' Web page
(http://www.gps.com).  If you're an Internet "newbie," Wayne's Web is a good
place to start your Web exploring.


Video conferencing hits the big time:  Here's looking at you, kid

One of the breakthrough technologies in the year just past was video
conferencing.  The basic technology has been available for several years, but
it hasn't made much of a splash because of the incredible amount of resources
needed to make it work.  We've all been reading about PicturePhones, perhaps
the ultimate video-conferencing technology, for years.  And for years, they've
been just around the corner.  Some vendors, such as Casio and Matsushita, have
briefly sold consumer videophones, which sent a single frame of video every
five or ten seconds.  These haven't been successful, as you may as well just
paste a picture of a person you're talking to on the phone.

AT&T has had a bit more success.  If you want to video conference, you can
book some time in a local AT&T center in many major cities and have
full-motion video with other conferencees in similar facilities in other
cities.

The problem is bandwidth.  Video signals, when digitized, comprise a lot of
data.  Normal telephone lines don't have the capability of carrying enough
information in real-time to allow full-motion video to be transmitted.  Even
AT&T has had to go to special dedicated lines for its video-conferencing
services.

This limitation is also felt on the network, but things are changing rapidly.
Today's high-speed Ethernet networks can carry much greater information loads.
And ISDN phone lines are many times faster than standard ones.  Real-time data
compression reduces the amount of information that needs to be transmitted,
while Pentium-level CPUs make it possible to do this compression and
decompression on normal desktop PCs.  Finally, video conferencing is becoming
not just technically feasible, but affordable as well.

While it's not yet an off-the-shelf technology, since it needs somewhat
specialized skills to install and set up, there are some big names getting
into video conferencing.  Intel's ProShare comes in several levels of
capability.  We reviewed the mid-level package, which offers collaboration
over a network, but not video.  With ProShare, video conferencing requires an
ISDN telephone line for each workstation, even if you're conferencing
completely in-house.  Corel's new video-conferencing system only requires an
ISDN line for remote conferencing.  In-house, the video signal is sent over an
unused pair of network wires.

Video conferencing still isn't cheap.  With most of the systems available now,
when all of the costs are tallied up (including a video camera for each
workstation), you can expect to pay in the neighborhood of $1,000 per seat,
with prices expected to drop again this year.  But in a mid-level firm, that's
not all that much money to have instant real-time video conferencing.  It may
even be worthwhile to consider setting up a video-conferencing system between
the firm and its most important clients.  After all, how many other accounting
firms could offer a similar service?


Color inkjets:  Better and even cheaper this year

Okay, we gave these inkjet printers a Diamond last year, so we really weren't
planning on doing it again in '95.  However, we've just finished testing a new
batch of color inkjets, and we have to admit that as impressed as we were last
year, we're even more so this time around.

First off, there are more vendors in the field.  Yes, you can buy an
inexpensive monochrome inkjet, but this class of printers is quickly
disappearing, being replaced by low-cost inkjet printers such as the Epson
Stylus IIs, Lexmark 1020, and HP DeskJet 600.  All of these printers are
"color-capable."  If you replace the monochrome print head with a three-color
unit (cyan, magenta, and yellow), you get full-color output.  The blacks are a
little muddy, since they're comprised of a mixture of the three colors, but
overall the color output looks just great.  And at under $350 (the Lexmark is
under $300), none of these will break the bank.

You'll also have more choices in inexpensive four-color inkjets.  The Canon
BJC-4100 and BJC-600e, HP 660, and Epson Stylus Color II all offer excellent
output on plain paper, and are priced in the $550 price range.  Finally, the
Epson Stylus Color Pro and HP 850 offer great output, good speed, and
office-quality durability for well under $1,000.  For adding color to your
proposals and reports, this is definitely the year of the color inkjet.


Multifunction printer/fax systems:  They dice, they slice

We didn't start out liking multifunction office machines.  The idea isn't bad:
a Swiss-army knife approach of incorporating a printer along with a
scanner/fax machine.  After all, many offices need all of these capabilities,
so why pay for separate machines and give up all of that desktop real estate
when you can put them into one handy package?

When we first looked at this solution, we were less than impressed.  Okidata's
Doc*It, one of the first of the breed, was large, expensive, and required a
separate interface card in your PC.  It worked pretty well, but it definitely
wasn't a machine for the masses.  Panasonic's initial venture into this
market, reviewed in the January 1995 printer round-up, was priced right, but
gave us a bit of difficulty in setup and use.  Both these vendors deserve
kudos for their pioneering efforts.

As with most technology, time has brought improvement.  We're currently
reviewing the new breed of office equipment, and there's been a quantum leap
in what these new units offer.  Hewlett-Packard's Office FX, Canon's
Multipass, and Lexmark's Medley are all inkjet based, and work with plain
paper.  All of them give excellent results, and the Lexmark unit can even
print in color!  Brother's MF-4500 and Panasonic's new unit cost a little
more, but both offer a laser printer, with its additional speed, as the basic
print platform.

Couple attractive packaging, easy setup and use, and reasonable prices (in the
neighborhood of $1,000 for laser-based units, under $700 or so for inkjet
based), and you have a real winner sitting on your desk.


Your desk is alive with the sound of music

Accountants have embraced multimedia with both hands.  And they're not only
using multimedia products, but are creating their own multimedia reports and
presentations.  New presentation packages such as PowerPoint, ASAP, and
Astound have wizards and assistants that take you step by step through the
process.  Pre-designed templates offer just the right background, and OLE
(object linking and embedding) makes it simple to place an "object," such as a
graph, video clip, or even sound file, into your presentation.  There's even a
specialized package from Midisoft called Presentation Partner that makes it
easy to go even further, assembling various multimedia pieces into dynamite
dog and pony shows.

Technology has enabled the average user to incorporate a lot of fairly
esoteric "objects" into everyday presentations.  Video capture boards let you
easily use your camcorder to shoot video clips that just "drop" right into
PowerPoint, Freelance Graphics, or even Word for Windows, using the Insert
Object command.  Lotus ScreenCam makes it possible to capture the action on
your screen while you're running an application.

In fact, about the only place this scenario falls down is on the soundtrack.
A really professional multimedia presentation generally features some sort of
musical accompaniment.  You could just connect your CD or tape player to the
microphone input on your sound card, but that's not really a good solution.
Not only are you stuck with the prerecorded length of the song you're
pirating, but you're also violating someone's copyright.  Sound clip
collections, available on CD-ROM, are a better solution, but they're expensive
and also of fixed length.

A better solution is one of the new soundtrack generators.  Available from
vendors such as Sonic Desktop, Yamaha, and Blue Ribbon Software (recently
acquired by Microsoft), these products let you specify a style (rock, jazz,
swing, reggae, country, etc.), a tempo, and a length, then stitch together a
made-to-order file from musical components.  Each one works a bit differently,
but they all let you adjust the instrument mix to some extent and perform some
degree of blending of musical style when your presentation changes mood.

Obviously, none of these products is as good as having a group of professional
musicians record a custom soundtrack specifically authored for you by a
personal composer.  But even if you have family in the music business, you're
not going to get it done for the under-$200 price tag that all of these
products sport.  And you'll be pleasantly surprised at how good a result you
can achieve with just a little playing around.  It's not essential technology,
but it does let you add a good deal of polish to your presentations at minimal
cost in money and effort.


DOGS

Pentium Overdrive:  Sales shift into reverse

One of Intel's marketing strategies when it was first engineering the
changeover from the 486 to the Pentium was to provide an upgrade path.  Just
as it had enabled you to upgrade 486 CPUs by popping in an "Overdrive" chip,
Intel suggested that system vendors include a spare socket on their 486
motherboards where a Pentium Overdrive chip could be plugged in at a later
time, converting the system to a Pentium-based PC.  Well, it sounded nice in
theory, at least before Intel started shooting its own toes off one at a time.

First came the delays.  With the math problems uncovered in the original
Pentium CPU, you can be sure that Intel wasn't about to bring a replacement
CPU to market with the same flaw.  So that delayed the introduction of the
unit for a while.  (Bang!  There goes one toe.)  Retooling the chip production
lines to produce all the additional Pentiums needed to replace the original
CPUs put the Overdrive project even further behind.  (Bang!  There goes
another.)  Then there was the great socket problem.

When Intel first started pitching the Pentium Overdrive at motherboard
vendors, it specified an upgrade socket based on the pin-out design of the
upgrade chip at that time.  Unfortunately, as the Pentium upgrade project
progressed, the chip was continuously redesigned, and the number of pins that
the chip had was changed.  All of a sudden, the original socket wouldn't work
with the upgrade chip.  (Bang!)  Intel respecified the socket configuration,
and many motherboard and system designers went to a different colored socket.

Even if you are willing to open up your PC before ordering your Pentium
Overdrive and look for the socket (and possibly count the number of holes in
it), you still may not be able to get the right Pentium Overdrive for your
system.  Intel has been very slow in releasing different-speed versions.
(Bang!)  And, assuming you've been lucky enough to find and install the
version for your particular 486 system, you may not have seen the speed
increase you expected, since Intel had to leave off some of the Pentium's
performance features to make it compatible with 486 system design.  (Have we
run out of toes yet?)

There are a few companies that have survived in the system upgrade business.
Evergreen Technologies, Improve, and Kingston still provide modules that let
you wring some additional performance out of your existing 486 at a reasonable
cost.  But at this time last year, there were at least two other companies in
this business; they seem to have gone away since then.  Given Intel's own
experiences, this doesn't seem too surprising.


Novell:  Not so Perfect after all?

Back in the '80's, Novell Corporation was king.  Its NetWare software was the
must-have product if you were serious about having a network.  NetWare is
still the most popular network operating system, but over the years other
products, such as Artisoft's LANtastic and Microsoft's Windows NT, have shown
Novell that it has to work to keep its dominance.

But, riding high with its NetWare success, Novell made some acquisitions that
in retrospect may have done more harm than good.  Its UnixWare division,
intended to make Novell as powerful in the Unix market as it is in DOS, has
come and gone, now residing with SCO.  And WordPerfect, once the king of word
processing and a prized Novell acquisition, is on the block, as is the Quattro
Pro spreadsheet software that Novell acquired from Borland.

It's laudable that a company would want to diversify.  After all, an
essentially one-product company such as Novell is at great risk if that one
product becomes less desirable and/or subject to increased competition.
Novell's big mistakes were buying a company with products that its own
management had no experience with (NetWare isn't a retail product, while
WordPerfect's product line is), and moving too slowly out of the DOS
environment.  WordPerfect may still have the largest number of DOS users of
any product, but who cares.  Like it or not, the world is moving to Windows.

Let's hope Novell's foray into retail applications hasn't done too much
damage.  After all, NetWare is still the standard for networking, and with
less of a drain on its resources, hopefully Novell will become a bit quicker
in addressing some of the challenges that newer Windowing environments offer.
As for WordPerfect and Quattro Pro, it may be that they have peaked and are
now waning.

Tax software vendors:  And another one bites the dust

The year just past was a rough one for tax prep software vendors.  Every year
a few more vendors leave the tax prep market.  Some, such as Prentice-Hall
Professional Software, sell out to another vendor.  In P-H's case, it was
acquired by CLR.  With its own GoSystem and EasyGo products, CLR will most
likely concentrate on the FAST!  audit software it acquired, rather than
expending effort on aging tax prep products that compete with its own.  Two
other vendors, FlashTax and Tax Resources, closed their doors before our
annual 1040 Face-Off over the summer.  Right after our 1040 Face-Off was
completed, a fourth vendor, RAM Software, was acquired by SCS/Compute.

It's pretty inevitable that these won't be the last tax prep vendors to close
their doors.  After all, the professional tax prep market is just about
saturated, with very few new, first-time sales being made.  For a vendor to
gain a new client, it either has to cannibalize some other vendor's user base
or buy out another vendor.  The only other places to generate new business are
out in the retail market, as Intuit is doing with its consumer/retail sales of
business tax products, or moving into entirely new markets, as Pencil Pushers
has done with its CFS services division.

The food chain is a fact of nature.  Big fish eat little fish and are
consumed, in turn, by the next rung up the food chain.  But tax prep vendors
aren't fish; they're people who in many cases have spent an enormous amount of
effort trying to build a business.  Change is an unavoidable part of life, but
we always experience a twinge of sadness when we read about another vendor
passing into the pages of tax prep history.


MIXED BAGS

 ...And sometimes you don't

What we didn't like all that much was Microsoft's Win95 Beta Program.  Billed
as the largest beta test ever, it was plagued by media mismanagement and
deadline pressure.  Once Microsoft decided that it couldn't afford the bad
press that was sure to result if it blew another announced shipping deadline,
the highly touted beta program was mostly for show.  Going through several
"final" release candidates, Microsoft's answer to an inability to solve some
fairly major problems was to pare features out of the operating system.  The
strategy worked; after all, it was able to ship a moderately robust product on
August 24th, as promised.  But it wasn't the product Microsoft initially
intended to ship when beta testing started.

We won't state that Microsoft should have let the deadline slip again to
correct, rather than cut, features it had difficulty getting to work.  After
all, at some point you have to bite the bullet and ship a product, even if it
isn't 100 percent of what you had hoped.  It takes a lot of courage to air
your dirty laundry in public, as Microsoft wound up having to do during its
extensive beta test program of Win95.

What we do take umbrage with is all of the hype that went on with this beta
program.  Not only was Win95 the largest beta test in history, it was unique
in that thousands of copies of beta software were sold as part of Microsoft's
Preview program.  Savvy software vendors such as Symantec's Norton division
jumped right on the bandwagon, with "preview" versions of its Win95 utilities.

Come on, guys.  There's such a thing as carrying things too far!


PentiumPro, not for beginners

Just when you thought it was safe to go back into the computer store, you find
out there's a new big fish in the pond.  Intel has had great success pretty
much killing off the 486 in favor of its Pentium CPU.  But the Pentium is a
couple of years old already, and it's old news.  By the time you read this, a
number of vendors will be advertising, and probably shipping, systems with
Intel's next generation of CPU, the PentiumPro.  The PentiumPro has more
transistors, more cache RAM (moved to a separate chip), and at least on paper,
more power.

But just as was the case when almost every new generation of hardware has been
introduced, the advances in hardware have outstripped most users' ability to
take advantage of them.  Yes, you can use a PentiumPro-equipped PC as a sort
of "super" Pentium.  But only if you are already running 32-bit applications
under a 32-bit operating system such as Windows NT, Win95, or OS/2.  If you
still run mostly 16-bit applications (as most of us do), early benchmarks
indicate that these applications run slower on a PentiumPro than on a Pentium.

Additionally, the early marketing hype on the PentiumPro talked up the
benefits that this new CPU would bring to Asymmetric Multiprocessing.  This
technology uses several CPUs within a system and splits the computational load
between them.  Unfortunately, it's been more difficult to get this technology
working reliably than the vendors had anticipated.  Even with the highly
touted PentiumPro.

Make no mistake about it.  Intel will be successful with the PentiumPro CPU,
just as it has been with its other CPU products in the past.  It just won't
happen overnight.  The Pentium CPU, which will achieve speed of 150s and 175
MHz this year, is still going to be the CPU of preference for a while.


IBM 1-2-3?

And, as long as we're talking about strange acquisitions, let's not forget
IBM's 3 billion dollar purchase of Lotus.  You've got to admire IBM; it's a
company that's succeeded in spite of itself.  First there was the IBM PC, a
product that none of IBM's top management at the time believed would sell.
When it took off like a rocket, quickly becoming the standard for desktop
computing, IBM made a series of incredible design decisions.  Remember the
PCjr?  How about IBM's version of the Compaq transportable?  The P70?  And who
can forget the MCA (Micro Channel Architecture) bus?

As incredible as it may seem with this track record, IBM still manages to make
lots of money.  When you're that big, it takes an awful lot to throw you off
the course.  At the same time, Big Blue doesn't exactly have a stellar record
in applications software either.  How many of you remember TopView, IBM's
answer to the original Windows?  The IBM Accounting Series?  Hollywood?  Were
you even aware that IBM started up a PC software division, acquired marketing
rights to a number of products, then closed down the division?

And who else but IBM could consider OS/2 a hit?  Sure, it really is a great
operating system, and it has shipped a couple of million copies, about what
Win95 shipped in the first month of availability.  Even IBM provides Windows
on its Aptiva PCs that it sells through Radio Shack.

With this string of software successes behind it, it kind of makes sense that
IBM would want Lotus.  After all, Lotus has the tremendously successful 1-2-3,
which will hopefully be available for Win95 by the time you read this.  Then
there's AmiPro, oops, we mean WordPro, the hit word-processing package.

We admit it, we're being mean.  Accountants still use 1-2-3, probably more
than any other specific user group.  But how many are buying the newest
version when they go looking for an upgrade?  1-2-3 has steadily given ground
to Excel as Windows has become the operating system of choice.  It's possible
for a product to go into a slide and recover, but it doesn't happen often.
Most of the other Lotus applications, such as Freelance Graphics, are also
being overtaken by products from other vendors.

But it's a good bet that IBM really wanted Lotus for the wildly successful
Notes product.  Notes is the premier groupware product on the market today,
and it almost single-handedly set many of the standards for workflow office
products.  But the paradigm has changed with the popularity of the Internet.
Notes was designed around (and optimized for) a network environment.  The
Internet is sort of a super wide-area network, and the current version of
Notes doesn't work as well with it as some other technologies.  You can be
sure IBM is working on it; it's got a lot of strength and experience in
client-server technology, which is one of the bases of the Internet.

Having many of Lotus's top management people take a hike after the acquisition
can't be helping matters, however.  Notes is a "big company" kind of product.
Lots of "big companies" have made large investments in Notes technology, so
there's a very strong reason for IBM to make a commitment to keeping the
momentum going with the product.

The downside is that technology changes quickly; witness the Internet.  And
while momentum can often be good, it also makes it difficult to change
directions quickly.

Will Notes (and Lotus) survive the IBM approach?  Right now the acquisition is
a Mixed Bag.  But it could go either way this year.


Color lasers:  Set lasers on intermittent

On paper, a color laser printer is almost irresistible.  For around $6,000, or
not quite twice what one of the original LaserJet printers sold for, you get
the best of both worlds.  When you need black and white, your printer zooms
out a speedy 12 pages per minute.  And, when there's a client presentation or
report to do, gorgeous color pages flow from the printer, on plain paper, at 3
pages per minute.  With competition for clients getting fiercer by the minute,
even that six grand price tag doesn't seem all that imposing, measured against
the print-on-demand capabilities offered by one of the new color lasers.
Color inkjets are terrific, but ah, for a color laser!

That's the way it would work if a color laser was as easy to use out of the
box as regular monochrome lasers are.  That hasn't been our experience,
however.  When a major vendor of color lasers offered us the opportunity last
year to look at its latest model, we jumped at the chance.  Weighing in at
over 100 pounds, it took two of us to unpack it and move it into position, and
a fair amount of time to set it up.  Mechanically, with four different color
toners (cyan, magenta, yellow, and black), these printers are more complex
than a single-color laser.  Even this setup, though somewhat time-consuming,
isn't beyond the abilities of most potential users.

But in several months of testing, we ran into problem after problem.  Flaky
drivers for Windows and Windows NT drove us nuts.  Problems with long print
jobs were also disconcerting.  Sometimes the job printed in its entirety,
sometimes the same job printed halfway through, then started spewing pages of
PostScript code.  The vendor's technical support was helpful, but in the end
we decided that we had experienced just too many problems to continue our
review.  Thanking the vendor, we offered to come back at a later time for
another look.

We have another vendor's color laser currently under review at the moment.
This is a new product, and the vendor has a strong background in providing
terrific software drivers.  We won't mention the vendor since we want some
more experience before we decide on a full-scale review, but so far, so good.
We've been running Windows 3.11 drivers under Win95 with no problems yet.  The
next step is to try networking the unit and moving it between a number of
different PCs.  At over 100 pounds (all color lasers are heavy!), this won't
be easy, but we want to make sure that this unit doesn't have the same
problems we ran into with the last printer.  If it doesn't, than you can
expect a review soon, and maybe in next year's Diamonds and Dogs, we can
change the Mixed Bag into a Diamond.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Top Financial Planning Software


Financial planning software can help you and your clients find perfect ways to
earn more money.  Here's a selection of top packages to help you find the
perfect solution for your clients' needs.

The All-Star Line-Up.  BNA Income Tax Planner, BNA Software, 1231 25th St.,
NW, Washington, DC 20037, $495; with Fifty State Planner, $890.  Available now
for either Windows or plain DOS (the DOS version is called BNA Income Tax
Spreadsheet), BNA's planner lets you project federal income tax for up to 10
years.  With the optional Fifty State Planner, you can do the same for all 50
states, the District of Columbia and New York City.  It calculates regular,
alternative minimum and capital gains, self employment, lump sum and estimated
taxes and lets you input data from K-1s and 1099s.  Along with the Income Tax
Planner, BNA sells a Corporate Tax Planner and Estate Tax Planner.

Easy Money Plus, Money Tree Software, 1753 Wooded Knolls Dr., Philomath, OR
97370, (503) 929-2140, $500; Golden Years, $500; Retirement Solutions Plus,
$250.  Easy Money Plus prepares the key pieces in a client's financial plan,
including net worth, cash flow, retirement, survivor, education funding,
estate taxes and income taxes.  It uses questionnaires to create its reports.

Golden Years produces a 52-year projection of assets, income, expenses and
income taxes using a Lotus 1-2-3 for Windows template.

Retirement Solutions Plus supplies nine programs that cover lump sum and early
retirement distributions, 401(k) and IRA accumulation accounts and other
retirement issues.

ExecPlan, ExecPlan, Inc., 777 Alexander Rd., Princeton, NJ 08540, (609)
987-5000, $1,995.  ExecPlan's estate-planning features let you draw up asset
distribution plans.  Using a flowchart, you move assets between family members
and the program recomputes the results.

ExecPlan also offers federal and state tax planning, retirement and education
planning, stock option analysis and cash management.  You can do investment
planning, draw up a capital needs analysis in case of disability or death and
prepare a financial profile.

Vista, ViewPlan, Inc., PO Box 80788, San Diego, CA 92138, (800) 826-2127,
$699.  A Windows-based estate-planning package, Vista provides visual
presentation tools, such as flowcharts and graphs, along with text, that
illustrate estate tax consequences for your clients.  A DOS version, Estate
Forecast Model, is available, and ViewPlan offers Data+, a $99 Windows and DOS
add-on program to help you gather client asset information.

In addition, ViewPlan sells Factuary, a $349 Windows program for calculating
what-if scenarios and tax effects for clients; Progeny, a $349 DOS product
that graphically displays the tax benefits of using generation skipping; and
Benequick, a $349 Windows and DOS product that calculates charitable gift tax
deductions and illustrates their benefits.  Later in the year, ViewPlan
intends to offer Beneview, a Windows product that will graphically display the
tax advantages of charitable trusts.

Expert Series, Sterling Wentworth, 57 W.  200 South, Ste.  500, Salt Lake
City, UT 84101, (800) 752-6637, $695 per module, $1,995 for full system.
Sterling Wentworth's Windows update to its DOS-based Planman incorporates
Retirement Expert, Portfolio Expert, Estate Expert, Risk Management Report and
Expert Tool Kit modules.  Retirement Expert provides 55 reports that you can
customize through a drag-and-drop interface.

Portfolio Expert lets you evaluate your clients' investment objectives and
define 10 portfolio categories and nine portfolio allocations.

Estate Expert analyzes your clients' current estate value and tax liabilities
and estimates what they'll be in the future.

The Risk Management Report covers survivor needs and disability income.  And
the Expert Tool Kit handles lump sum distributions, accumulation, mortgage
refinance, income tax and cash flow.

Financial Planning Professional, Lumen Systems, Inc., 4300 Stevens Creek
Blvd., Ste.  270, San Jose, CA 95129, (800) 233-3461, $1,495 single-user.
This comprehensive financial planning system can produce either modular or
full plans, or macro or micro plans, depending on the amount of information
you want.

Leonard 2000, Mobius Group, P.O.  Box 13959, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709,
(800) 632-3044, $1,500.  Leonard 2000 generates professional-looking reports
packed with information and graphs.  The reports are organized into sections
for the Objective and Recommendations.

In addition, Mobius sells Leonard 5000, which covers asset and risk
management, cash flow and income taxes and retirement and estate planning.

M-PREPS (Professional Retirement Planning System), a $200 product from Mobius,
offers extensive modeling, historical rates of return for assets, and
projections in full color reports.

PFP Partner, American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, P.O.  Box
2209, Jersey City, NJ 07303-2209, (800) 226-5800, $595 for AICPA members, $655
for non-members.  The AICPA's financial planning product automates goal
calculations, producing a five-year statement of projected net worth,
five-year cash flow projection and tables for education, retirement and
user-specified goals.

In addition, the software lets you try out what-if scenarios, showing what
happens when you increase annual contributions according to any rate.  It
handles risk management and performs a needs analysis for life and disability
insurance.

Professional Series, International Financial Data Systems, Inc., P.O.  Box
888165, Atlanta, GA 30356-0165, (800) 554-8004, Professional Series/3, $599;
Professional Series/2, $399; Penny Pincher II, $199.  Professional Series/3
provides an interactive database, including an investment and tax shelter
library, client directory, balance sheet projection by asset category,
mortality table, tax rate maintenance programs and a variety of personalized
reports, including five-year projections of AMT and federal income tax.

Professional Series/2 is a more scaled back product that can store up to 30
investments or tax shelters.  Penny Pincher II analyzes net worth, education
cost and capital needs.

Profiles Plus, Financial Profiles, Inc., 5421 Avenida Encinas, Ste.  A,
Carlsbad, CA 92008, (800) 237-6335, $695.  Profiles Plus includes personal
financial planning and business planning modules, client data management and a
run-time version of Harvard Graphics.

ProPlan, Financial Planning Consultants, Inc., 2507 N.  Verity Pkwy., P.O.
Box 430, Middletown, OH 45042-0430, (800) 666-1656, $495; Lifescape graphing
module, $85; monthly support, $95.  ProPlan handles planning in a variety of
areas:  income tax, investment, risk management, educational funding, cash
flow, estate, survivor income and retirement.  It figures estate income and
liquidity, analyzes retirement income and retirement account projections and
computes the effects of disability for either spouse.

Quicken Financial Planner, Intuit, P.O.  Box 3014, Menlo Park, CA 94026, (800)
816-8025, $39.95.  This retirement planning product takes your clients who use
Quicken through an interview about their finances and retirement goals and
builds a plan.  To refine the plan, they can just click a button and see what
happens if they save more money or less in the bank, retire sooner rather than
later, and invest more conservatively or aggressively.  The program helps
choose an appropriate mutual fund and assists with planning other goals such
as college and a second home purchase.  To top it all off, there are 30
minutes of multimedia advice from Newsweek columnist Jane Bryant Quinn.

Total Resource, Wilson Associates International, Inc., 1355 Terrell Mill Rd.,
Bldg.  1462, Ste.  200, Marietta, GA 30067, (800) 831-7636, $2,495 ($1,000
rebate available).  Total Resource lives up to its name, with capabilities in
the areas of marketing, practice management, asset tracking and portfolio
management, general financial planning, tax and cash flow, retirement, estate,
insurance, education, disability and compliance and commission tracking.  It
includes a database of 2,500 securities and lets you set up your own asset
categories for portfolio tracking.

You can also set up a client prospect database with the system, use
questionnaires to gather data from clients and produce financial statements.

For other purposes, you can produce a survivor needs analysis, see the cash
value of insurance policies, analyze disability needs for your clients and
their spouses and track the status of buy and sell security orders.

Financial planning software can provide valuable information for your clients
and rewarding returns for your practice.


MICHAEL COHN is senior editor of Accounting Technology.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Financial Planners' Secrets of Success


After 10 years of grinding out monthly financial statements and tax returns,
Peggy Ruhlin shut down her CPA practice to go into financial planning.  And
she never looked back.  At the height of the next season, she called her
harried friends at the old firm.  "I'm going skiing," she told them.  "What
are you doing?"  She could almost hear their teeth gnashing.  "I went on two
vacations during that first tax season.  It was wonderful."

Since then, Ruhlin has built a major financial planning practice, Boudros &
Ruhlin, in Columbus, Ohio.  Boudros & Ruhlin manages about $250 million in
client funds, making it a major discount broker's biggest operator in the
region.

And she is not alone.  More and more tax and accounting professionals, many of
them CPAs, are getting into financial planning.  Some enter the field by
accident, pushed by faithful

clients seeking help as they enter their most fruitful years.  Others are
pulled by the huge promise of an exploding market of monied but fretful
baby-boomers.

Different Challenges.  To be sure, the typical fee-only financial planning
firm remains as small a business as the average tax and accounting practice.
Industry sources say most offices have one owner, who may net about $75,000 a
year, and one assistant.  About 25 percent of the financial planners are
women, a much higher level of ownership than in accounting.  Few practices
will have more than $10 million in funds under management, priced at a 1% fee
or less.

But freed from billing by the hour, a practitioner's income is limited only by
his or her ability to develop clients.  Fees based on a percentage of assets
under management can rise with little or no incremental costs, meaning every
new dollar falls straight to the bottom line.  In a bull market year, every
tick upward in the Standard & Poor's index is another clang of the asset
manager's cash register.  "When the S&P is up 25%," said one practitioner,
"clients don't notice the 1% annual charge."

"If your target market is small business and professionals," says CPA Bob
Phillips, "you end up dealing with financial planning issues whether you like
it or not."  Phillips is one of eight partners at the CPA firm of Whipple &
Co., which, with 60 people and revenue of more than $5 million, is one of the
10 largest firms in Indianapolis.

In his firm, Phillips is the one charged with the mission of building the
financial planning practice.  "We decided years ago to help our clients plan
their personal lives as systematically as we do their businesses," he says.
As a result, Phillips is now playing an active role in his clients' investment
decisions and portfolio structuring.

But serious financial planning work, which always involves actual investment
decisions and execution, is much different from traditional estate planning.
The leading financial planners, whether they work on commission or on
fee-only, relish their roles as active players.  They share a desire to be
more than a mere advisor.  They also cherish the challenge of making
investment decisions, choosing products and running money.

People-Oriented Focus.  Many traditional CPAs and tax professionals just don't
have the constitution for it.  "There's a lot more uncertainty in this work,"
says Phillips.  "All of a sudden, you are much more accountable for a lot of
things you can't control."

"You have to be very people-oriented," adds CPA Cynthia Conger.  "It's a lot
more difficult for the technical types to get into the counseling aspects of
this work."  Conger, now one of two principals in the Arkansas Financial
Group, in Little Rock, earned her CPA certificate in 1981, using it first as a
corporate controller and later in insurance sales.  She started full-blown,
comprehensive financial planning in 1985 with an associate from the insurance
agency.

At first, she shunned tax returns.  But bending to client demand, today
Conger's Arkansas Financial Group handles about 175 tax customers a year,
including corporate and fiduciary forms.  Her firm also handles accounting at
six to eight small businesses.  But the core of the business is the 250 to 300
financial plans she writes a year and the $35 million in assets under
management.  Eventually, she and her partner plan to launch a trust company to
administer all the trusts they've put in place for clients.  But before that,
Conger may launch a line of administrative services for individuals, to handle
routine bill-paying and banking chores, which could be invoiced monthly.  "We
deal with a lot of double-doctor households who just don't have the time to do
this kind of thing," she says.

Gary Shalhoob, a Dallas financial planner, agrees.  "CPAs need a much broader
perspective as a financial planner," says Shalhoob.  "You have to weigh not
only the estate and tax consequences, but also the investment ramifications as
well."  Shalhoob developed financial planning units first at Bank of America
and then at Deloitte & Touche and Price Waterhouse before starting his own
firm, Resource Management Group.  He is also a contributing author to "Tax &
Financial Planning for Older Clients," issued by Practitioners Publishing Co.
of Fort Worth, Texas, an affiliate of Faulkner & Gray Inc.

Today Shalhoob works with CPAs, trading referrals, convinced that Big
Six-sized financial planning practices are not economically sensible.  "This
is not a business you can build on leverage," he says.  "All the service is
very personal, nothing can be delegated."  But firms are also limited in their
range of movement.  They might be reluctant to recommend specific stocks or
financial companies, if they are involved as auditors.  Mixing audit clients
and financial planning clients can also complicate carefully groomed
relationships.  "One bad year in the market for a CFO could blow your audit
contract," Shalhoob says.  And, with a big firm's overhead, pricing is a
problem if you can't work on commission.  "Anyone trying to do fee-only
financial planning has a very difficult time making money," Shalhoob says.

So, many CPA financial planners do what Ron Humeney has done.  Humeney, a
Southfield, Mich., CPA, runs two businesses-Starfire Financial, to handle tax
preparation, and Starfire Investment Advisory Sevices, to sell products and
manage assets.  If they are unfettered by CPA regulations, they might do what
Ed Gerstein and Gregg Fisher have done.  Gerstein ran a Brooklyn, N.Y., tax
practice solo until two years ago when he brought nephew Gregg into the
business.  Today, Gerstein crunches tax returns for about 1,500 clients, while
Fisher is attempting to leverage that database into a financial planning
practice.


RICK TELBERG is editor of Accounting Today, also published by Faulkner & Gray.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

This Just In:  Getting Back to Business


If you cringe every time you hear another Congressperson say how great it
would be if only everybody paid a flat tax, it's time for you to investigate
options in business tax preparation.  Compared to the near-universal griping
that goes on about the 1040 individual tax, few politicians are getting much
sound bite time on the evening news if they propose axing corporation taxes.
Sharpening your practice's focus on business tax clients could help save it
from rough times in 1997.

Perhaps in anticipation of greater demand for professional business tax
products next year, software vendors are beefing up their 1065, 1120, and
1120S lines with more capabilities this year.  Even if your firm already has a
solid foundation of business tax clients and the software to service them, you
may want to consider where your current vendor is heading compared to others
in the industry.  We checked with them to find out what their plans are for
the software they'll be shipping this season.

Alpine climbs every mountain

Alpine Data is packing more features into its 1995 Tax/Pack Professional
business modules.  You'll be able to access a preparer scratchpad from any
screen, so you can take notes on a client whose return you're preparing.  Also
more accessible will be the pop-up calculator, which you'll be able to bring
up from within any field.  And a new monthly calendar utility will be popping
up as well.

Alpine is also leaving room for your laser forms software.  It offers a laser
fill feature that lets you view and enter data on laser forms that aren't
included in the Tax/Pack software.  Tax/Pack will then save the data that you
type in to a separate area from the business return data.

Form 1120 customers will now be getting a full billing module.  And Alpine
plans to add the billing module to its 1065 and 1120S products as well.

AM wake-up call

It's morning in America, and AM Software is already enhancing its business tax
software for the coming season.  Whereas the AM-Tax LaserForms product was an
optional add-on last year, this year AM is including it with its 1065, 1120,
and 1120S programs.  But despite bundling the laser software, AM isn't
ignoring other types of printers.  It has improved its graphical printing
features, so you can get official-looking forms on inkjet and dot-matrix
printers without resorting to special fonts or extra software.

Networked offices will now be able to enjoy network compatibility with AM-Tax,
so multiple users can share data files while keeping their own system
settings.  AM has also simplified data entry by offering convenient pick lists
on certain forms.  You'll be able to access them by pressing a function key,
choose the entry you want, point to it, and the program will enter your choice
into the field.

Lower renewal prices will please existing customers.  They're down 20 percent
to $129.  And to go along with the new network compatibility, you can add
extra AM-Tax stations for only 20 percent of the original, first-computer
software price.

More pluses for Andersen

Arthur Andersen LLP is showing its Big 6 muscle with enhancements to its A
Plus business tax line.  A Plus Tax 1120 and 1065 are gaining per-return
pricing and more comprehensive calculations.  You'll also see interfaces to
the AICPA's ATB (Accountant's Trial Balance) and Andersen's own electronic
workpapers products.

For 1065 users, Andersen is providing a special allocations worksheet, as well
as inter-product transfers of K-1 data.  The K-1's will automatically print
with the 1040, saving time for A Plus Tax 1040 users.  Also saving time will
be a direct interface to CD-ROM tax research products like CCH U.S.  Master
Tax Guide, RIA OnPoint, and BNA Tax Practice Series.

Andersen has tinkered with the A Plus interface as well, consolidating screens
and improving screen and application flow.  A multimedia training course will
be available.  And on the boards for next year is a Windows version.

If you're in the tax department of a large corporation or have large corporate
clients, also check out the brand-new Windows-based AACTS (Arthur Andersen
Corporate Tax Solutions) line.  Aimed at corporations with multiple entities
or multiple filing responsibilities, it will handle federal and state tax
compliance, and prepare the 1120.  AACTS will integrate with other Windows
applications, by using facilities like DDE (Dynamic Data Exchange), so it can
update data from other Windows apps in real-time.

One product in the AACTS line, DataOnDemand, will establish dynamic links
between an Excel spreadsheet and your corporate tax information.  Another
product, AACTS Real-Time Tax, will integrate with high-end general ledger
applications such as SAP and Oracle; it will also include support for SQL
(Structured Query Language) and ODBC (Open Data Base Connectivity) standards.
A third product, AACTS-International Planning, will let you build complex tax
scenarios over multiple-year periods, such as calculating dividends and loans
from foreign subsidiaries.  It's a whole new aact for Arthur Andersen.

ATX enhances the spreadsheet

ATX Forms has enhanced its TaxSolver line of spreadsheet-based tax prep
software by adding a Windows-based forms program.  The result is ATX's new
Saber line.  Unlike TaxSolver, which required you to combine the ATX templates
with either 1-2-3 or Excel, Saber cuts out the need for third-party software
by including a built-in spreadsheet program.  Saber also provides an audit
trail, along with the ability to create formulas and write directly on the tax
forms.

ATX sells its 1065, 1120, and 1120S programs in several ways.  Each return is
available in a Basic version for $49, and a Professional version for $99.  The
Basic version includes a few of the most important supporting forms and
schedules, along with extension and depreciation worksheets.  The Professional
version provides more than 100 supporting forms and schedules, together with
the ability to create client letters and invoices.

In addition, bundled packages are available for preparing the 1065, 1120, and
1120S, along with other types of forms.  A basic version of this bundle,
called Business Basic, sells for $149.  The Professional version costs $295.

CCH proves it's a pro

CCH is upgrading the Windows version of its ProSystem fx 1065, 1120, and 1120S
programs by adding interfaces to general ledger and time and billing products.
Also being added to the 1120S product is an interface to CCH Tax Assistant for
S Corporations, a practice management system with research, analysis, and
compliance features.

Installation and printing will also be on the upswing in ProSystem fx.

GoSystem keeps going and going...

CLR/Fast-Tax's GoSystem 2 is really going places in both its DOS and Windows
versions.  The system now supports fast 28,800 bits per second transmission
speeds for electronic filing, and CLR will be offering NetWare 4.1 and Windows
95 support as well this season.

The 1065 program for DOS and Windows will let you perform multiple partner
transfers on the same day.  And it will handle transfers with capital
contributions and distributions while using the same locator, as well as do
transfers for more than five excluded partners.

The 1120 software for DOS and Windows will offer an express consolidation
feature to speed up consolidation time.  You'll also be able to delete rental
properties.  In addition, CLR has reorganized the rent and royalty input, and
will be enhancing the 1120 program's list of activity codes.  The program will
summarize state tax liabilities and supply a common input for state
intangibles.

The Windows version alone has several enhancements.  It now offers
administrative functions that used to be found only in the DOS version.  The
View menu will include a Received Date option.  And CLR is going to be
providing a Windows version of its TaxServer product and will support a
Windows Portable Organizer.

Upcoming hyperlink capabilities in the Windows product will add hyperlinks to
fields, as well as "direct to organizer" hyperlinks.  Workpapers will allow
overrides, DIF import and export, and hyperlinking by field.

Also on the way are better navigation capabilities, including a File
Manager-like expanding folder metaphor.  You'll be able to customize menus
with activity descriptions, toggle menus on or off, bring up a new "active
forms" view, and edit and format customized letters for all return types.
Lots of changes are coming for GoSystem users.

Digitax does graphics

Cold River Software has been promoting its Windows-based 1040 software,
Veritax, for the past couple of seasons.  But even its DOS-based tax product,
Digitax Business Returns, is getting some graphical enhancements.  The 1065,
1120, and 1120S programs will be offering graphically enhanced supporting
schedules and letters.  Also going graphical are the manuals.  They'll be
available in both printed form and in a printable, searchable Adobe Acrobat
electronic format.

Cold River's also moving toward better technical support.  A 24-hour FaxBack
service is now available, as well as a home page on the Internet's World Wide
Web.  Surf the Cold River rapids at http://www.cold-river.com.

CPAS makes new converts

CPASoftware's business tax software is undergoing a conversion for the
upcoming filing season.  You'll be able to convert entities from 1120 to
1220S, or 1120S to 1120.  And CPAS is not only converting its 1120, it's
consolidating it as well.  You'll be able to consolidate up to 10 corporations
with the 1120, as well as prepare supplementals for the first four pages of
your consolidations, along with supplementals for applicable forms, schedules,
and supplemental schedules, such as the 4562, Schedule D, and other income.

In addition to conversion, salvation is at hand.  CPAS's new archiving
features let you save tax returns, input detail, workpapers, and other files
in a compressed format.  CPAS is passing the silver platter too by offering
access to CD-ROM research material.  State clicks will be another new option,
allowing you to buy use of a state package one return at a time (similar to
the pay-per-return concept).

Speaking of states, you'll be able to compute up to five states with a single
compute.  New states joining the CPAS flock include Arizona, California, New
York, and Texas for the 1120.  Entering the 1120S fold will be California, New
York, Ohio, Texas, and Wisconsin, and new 1065 states for Arizona, California,
New Jersey, and New York.  Only one new city return will be added to the 1065,
1120, and 1120S, but it's a big one:  New York City.

Creating the Ultrabusiness

Creative Solutions is building a better business solution for this coming
season.  It's adding 10 new states to its 1120/1120S package, UltraTax/1120,
upping its coverage to 31 states for both C and S corps.  In UltraTax/1065, 13
new states are joining the Union, for a grand total of 23.  These new programs
will be available on the UltraTax CD-ROM and as pay-per-return options.
UltraTax/1120 is also gaining a two-year comparison and calculation to support
the IRC Section 1377 (a)(2) election for termination of a shareholder
interest.

A new feature to speed data entry to the ultra-quick level will be an Index of
Tax Subjects that helps you locate the proper section of the appropriate data
entry screen when you're not quite sure where to input a particular item.
You'll also be able to generate custom selection lists of commonly used items
specific to your area, such as local banks.

Drake makes good

Drake Software will let you print all its forms in either laser or dot-matrix
mode this season.  You'll be able to access on-line help for almost every data
entry field, and written documentation will be improved.  Over 35 federal
forms will be available.  Drake will also offer a new pay-per-return option,
priced at $250 for up to 20 returns per computer, and $10 apiece for
additional returns.

Dunphy does it

Dunphy Systems' federal 1120 program will offer support this season for Form
1120-W (Estimated Tax for Corporations), with a three-page quarterly
worksheet.  And Dunphy will provide Ohio users with a new quarterly look-up
table for county personal property rates in its Ohio FT1120/FT1120S package.
Michigan users too will be seeing some enhancements.  The new Michigan Single
Business Tax (SBT) program will support all 17 forms for that tax, including
extensions, estimates, and amended returns.  You'll also be able to import
company and shareholder information into the Michigan SBT from other federal
programs, such as Dunphy's 1040, 1065, 1120, and 1120S software.  The Michigan
SBT will even include laser forms software, so you can make official-looking
printouts for your Michigan business clients.

Exactax minds its business

Exactax has been integrating software from the Business Tax Service of New
York with its own system, and this season will be offering a trial balance
worksheet input system.  You'll be able to input information through a trial
balance income statement and balance sheet into the Business Tax System, so
you can complete the books and use the year-end trial balance, instead of
converting book data into tax return format.

Other enhancements will include automated multiple-state processing, along
with new state returns for Arizona, California, Connecticut, Delaware,
District of Columbia, Florida, Hawaii, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, New
Jersey, New York, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Virginia.  Exactax
is also making its supporting schedules and instruction letters easier to
read, and its estimated tax section more comprehensive and automatic.  The
program will compute Section 277 Co-op Housing figures, and will offer more
flexibility when you enter detail on a Schedule K-1.

Business Tax System will provide comprehensive net operating loss and
contribution carryover schedules, along with more comprehensive financial
statements, such as the statement of cash flows, interim financial statements,
and sole proprietor (Schedule C) financial statements.  You'll be able to
generate a financial statement from the book data you enter to create a tax
return.

In addition, the system will automatically print the original extension form
for each return that you have on extension.  And it will handle unlimited
K-1's and rental income, as well as comprehensively report rental detail for
each K-1.  You'll be able to prepare automatic book/tax adjustments for items
such as depreciation, amortization, contributions, entertainment, penalties,
officers life insurance, federal income tax, Section 263A, and automobile
lease inclusion.  Exactax will offer expanded customer service hours, from 6
am to 7 pm Pacific time (or 9 am to 10 pm Eastern time).  That should match
many accounting firms' regular hours this tax season.

Intuit pursues two markets

For tax year 1995, Intuit is making a big push to upgrade its business tax
products, for professional tax preparers and small-business taxpayers alike.
A new Homebase feature in the professional software will provide convenient
access to client files and main program functions (such as printing and
transferring).  You'll be able to access the entire TurboTax ProSeries line
from the Homebase as well, and generate any number of copies you want of forms
and schedules for inclusion with your clients' returns.

ProSeries/1120 for Windows will offer an ACE depreciation worksheet.  Fifteen
new states will join the corporate business return list:  Colorado,
Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan
SBT, New Jersey, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Texas, Virginia, and
Wisconsin.  Client files will be interchangeable with the DOS version.  And
pull-down pick lists will be available for certain fields, such as business
codes and depreciation methods.

ProSeries/1120S for Windows will add a shareholder's basis worksheet that
automatically gets amounts from the Schedule K-1 worksheets.  You'll be able
to have an unlimited number of K-1's, and Intuit has improved both K-1 input
sheets and data entry.  Thirteen new states have been recruited to the 1120S
team:  Colorado, Connecticut, Georgia, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, New
Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and Wisconsin.

Meanwhile, partnerships haven't been overlooked by Intuit.  ProSeries/1065 for
Windows supports unlimited K-1's and the new K-1 input sheets, as well as
interchangeable client files with the DOS version.  Seven new partnership
states include Florida, Georgia, Illinois, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, and
Pennsylvania.  Furthermore, the California Limited Liability (CA 568) company
return will be available this season, and it will read and transfer data from
the 1065 program.

Intuit isn't stopping there with business tax software.  As discussed in this
issue's Editor's Note, it's also bringing out TurboTax for Business.  This
$79.95 product will enable small-business owners to prepare their own 1065,
1120, and 1120S returns.  As with the personal version of the 1040 product,
TurboTax for Business will include tax advice and tax planning suggestions.
Complete IRS instructions and full-text versions of IRS publications for small
businesses (as well as the text of a book called "Tax Savvy for Small
Business" by tax attorney Fred Daily) will be available on-line, and the help
facility will be context sensitive.

TurboTax for Business will use an interview approach to take taxpayers through
the preparation process.  It can import accounting data from QuickBooks and
Quicken, and will provide automatic error checking and tax-saving tips while
preparing a return.  Intuit will be offering 49 Windows state modules, sold
separately.  After TurboTax for Business prepares a return, it will go back
and check for omissions and errors, and alert users to possible audit items.
In addition, Intuit will be bundling Netscape's Navigator with the package, so
taxpayers will be able to access the new TurboTax home page on the World Wide
Web (http://www.intuit.com/TurboTax) to get tech support, tax advice and
information, and state software.  MacInTax for Business will also be available
for Mac users.

Lacerte adds up

Lacerte Software is adding more forms, features, and states to its
professional tax prep line.  New to its 1120 program, for example, is Form
1120W, the Estimated Tax Worksheet.  And joining the Lacerte 1120 states will
be Delaware, Kansas, Missouri, and Utah.

In the Form 1120S program, you'll be able to print K-1 instructions, as well
as collated copies of Schedule K-1, the shareholder transmittal letter, and
K-1 instructions.  When preparing S Corp returns, you'll have the opportunity
to calculate the excess net passive income tax, and print certain election
statements for S Corps.  New 1120S states will include Florida, Kansas,
Missouri, and Utah.

For the 1065 program, Lacerte will now print Schedule K-1 instructions, along
with the contents of the client letter.  States will follow the example of the
federal program on the invoice setup; partnership states will allow for
billing per state K-1, so you'll have an additional option besides billing in
a lump sum.  The Additional K-1's printing option will include a Schedule K-1
collation routine, with three new global user options and three new override
codes that you can make specific for your clients.  When you get to the end of
a return and set the Additional K-1's to generate a specific number of copies,
the program will print the Schedule K-1 Transmittal Letter, federal Schedule
K-1, federal Schedule K-1 instructions, the state Schedule K-1 (or a
Lacerte-generated Partner Summary), and (when required) the state Schedule K-1
instructions.  You can then distribute them to as many partners and members in
your firm as you please.

The new Jumptopartner routine doesn't necessarily put you on the fast track to
promotion in your firm.  But it does let you jump back and forth between
partners in all of the 1065 program's Special Allocation screens.  Even when
you jump in this way, the cursor and line position will stay the same as in
the last entry, making it more convenient to enter special allocations.  This
routine won't replace other input methods; it's simply one more handy-dandy
feature provided by Lacerte.  Also new to the 1065 will be state returns for
Florida, Kansas, Missouri, and Utah.

For 1065, 1120, and 1120S programs, new enhancements will include book
depreciation schedules that let you enter and track depreciation for book
purposes.  You'll also have the ability to print different numbers of copies
of depreciation schedules for 1995 and 1996 regular tax, AMT, and book
purposes.  Lacerte will also let you amend prior-year returns as well as
override "corrected" amounts.  There's power for you:  the ability to change
history.  Also new for this coming season in all the programs are slip sheets
and filing instructions.

Laser surgery

Laser Systems is powering up its TaxWorks Corporation 1120, S Corporation
1120S, and Partnership 1065 Business Systems for next season.  All three
programs will generate financial statements that are prepared on an income tax
basis.  You'll also be able to print a customizable letter to accompany the
statements.  When you update clients from last year, you'll have the option of
carrying the ending balance sheet detail information over to the current
year's beginning balance sheet fields.

Three new options will be available to smooth out K-1 processing and printing.
These will let you process, view, and print returns with or without the K-1
information included.

In all the Business Systems will be a new General Information screen.  And
Laser Systems has standardized the format of the date, Social Security, and
Employer Identification Number fields.

In addition, Laser Systems is adding electronic filing to the 1065 System.
For the 1120 System, a new Federal Net Operating Loss Worksheet and Charitable
Contribution Worksheet will help you keep track of NOL and charitable
contribution deduction and carryover figures.  Lastly, the 1120 System is
getting Form 1120X.  X marks the spot for TaxWorks development.

Corporate relief

Micro Vision Software is integrating its 1120 and 1120S software, Tax Relief
CORP, with other vendors' software to improve these programs' productivity.  A
general ledger link will let you import data from major client write-up and
general ledger programs.  The software will also link with Microsoft Excel and
Timeslips.  And the company recently purchased Summit Software, another
business tax software developer.

New states for the Windows version of Tax Relief CORP will include New Jersey
and New York.  For DOS users, new states are Colorado, Delaware, Georgia,
Ohio, and Texas.  Through a third-party developer, it's providing DOS users
with integrated state programs for Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, District of
Columbia, Hawaii, Idaho, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine,
Maryland, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New Hampshire,
New Mexico, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Carolina,
Tennessee, Utah, Virginia, West Virginia, and Wisconsin.

For 1065 DOS users, Tax Relief PART is adding two new state programs developed
by Micro Vision, California and New Jersey.  And through a strategic
partnership, DOS users will be getting access to more state programs that
integrate with Micro Vision's own DOS-based software.  These will include
Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan,
Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma,
Oregon, S.  Carolina, W.  Virginia, and Wisconsin.

For all its Tax Relief products, Micro Vision has added the ability to dial
into its bulletin board from within the program so you can download
corrections and get questions answered.  Client files will be fully
interchangeable between the DOS and Windows software, and Tax Relief for
Windows will also be compatible with both the DOS and Windows state modules.
You'll be able to change your data path from the activate screen, and Micro
Vision is adding expanded fields throughout the software, along with more
detailed diagnostic messages.  Finally, Tax Relief products will be available
on CD-ROM with either an unlimited use license or on a pay-per-return basis.

Pencil Pushers gets to the point

The Damirus Corp., which makes Pencil Pushers Tax Software, is focusing most
of its development efforts on a future Windows product and on shipping its DOS
product bug-free and on time.  In the meantime, for this tax season, it's
adding a Florida corporate return to its business tax line, along with a few
unusual business credit forms.

SCS/Compute advances on both fronts

SCS/Compute is enhancing both its Tax Machine and LMS Tax lines.  For Tax
Machine, you'll be able to print K-1 labels for partners, shareholders, and
beneficiaries.  New state modules will include Louisiana, Mississippi, and New
Mexico.  One new city module, a Philadelphia S Corporation return, will also
be available.  Tax Machine will be released on CD-ROM, and you'll be able to
link the program to other accounting products, such as SCS's own DataWrite and
the AICPA's ATB.  Or you can use Audisys's TAXi to import accounting
information into Tax Machine.

For LMS Tax Business Programs, SCS will be offering simplified data entry
screens and input forms for the 1065, 1120, and 1120S.  You'll be able to
print mailing labels for each K-1 in the partnership and S-Corp returns.  SCS
is improving LMS's link to DataWrite and ATB, and offering TAXi for importing
data from other accounting applications.

TaascFORCE is up to the task

Tax and Accounting Software Corp.  (TaascFORCE) is building a better
Professional Tax System.  This coming season, it will be providing a free
Practice Manager that generates specialized client lists and sorted mailing
labels.  Other new extras will include file compression, the ability to create
an itemized schedule for any input field, carryforward of specified state
information from last year's state returns, and support for up to 999
depreciable assets.

New states for the 1065, 1120, and 1120S products will include Alabama,
Arkansas, Connecticut, District of Columbia, Louisiana, and New Mexico.  New
forms on the roster will be 1120A (Corporation Short Form), 1120X (Corporation
Amended Return), 2848 (Power of Attorney), 8271 (Tax Shelter Registration
Number), 8586 (Low Income Housing Credit), 8822 (Change of Address), and TD F
90-22 1 (Foreign Bank Accounts).

On the 1120S and 1065, TAASC has enhanced the Schedule K-1 in several ways.
The software will automatically handle special allocations, let you select
which shareholder or partner K-1's to adjust for rounding, and print
shareholder/partner numbers on each K-1.

In addition, the Professional Tax System will be able to convert existing C
Corp data to an S Corp return, and will add a new field where you can enter
the title of your firm's signing officer.  The transmittal letter for the
partnership state programs will offer paragraphs about the tax due and
estimated tax.  And Form 4684 will now support multiple casualty dates.  Next
tax season will be less of a casualty with TAASC on the job.

TaxByte does more

TaxByte will be expanding the depreciation capabilities of its Tax
Commissioner business tax products, increasing depreciation capacity from 250
assets to 450.  A trial balance import feature is also new, along with an
enhanced direct data input system, and more automatic calculations.  TaxByte
has also added general letters and customizable, client-specific letters for
each K-1, along with an enhanced, automated invoice feature that does updates
for time and billing.

In the 1120 package, there will be a net operating loss carryforward feature
from prior years.  Tax Commissioner will also carry over depreciation from the
1040 version into the business tax products and perform conversions from one
entity to another, such as for a C Corporation that becomes an S Corp.  Lots
of transitions are underway in the business tax arena, and Tax Commissioner
will be policing them.

TAX$IMPLE builds up

TAX$IMPLE's 1995 Business Tax Programs are looking to 1995 and beyond.
They'll include a three-year comparative summary report and will automatically
generate supporting schedules.  You'll be able to do year-to-year transfers
for all your balance sheets, worksheets, and supporting schedules.  TAX$IMPLE
will also support RAM drives, and will let you transfer business K-1's
directly into the TAX$IMPLE 1040 program.  The business programs are also
gaining Forms 851, 1120X, 1139, 4466, 8810, the 1120-A short form, Schedule H,
and Schedule A for Form 1120-W.

Mouse support is also on schedule for this season, along with enhanced
printing features.  You'll be able to choose specific forms and the number of
copies per form to print, as well as print state and federal forms in
combination.  Text for 22 topics will be available for your transmittal or
cover letters.  You'll be able to say plenty with TAX$IMPLE.

TenKey has it together

TenKey will be offering four business tax programs in one this season.  Tax
Shop Entities will contain 1120, 1120S, 1065, and 1041 programs in the same
package, together with laser software and a depreciation program.  The
software will be available for Windows (with Windows 95 compatibility) this
season, and you'll be able to transfer data from the DOS program to the
Windows version.

The Windows version will also include all the features in the DOS program,
such as built-in electronic mail and communications.  This allows access to
TenKey's on-line Problems Resolution Database, which gets updated with each
message received from an on-line user.

Pennsylvania will be joining the entire Tax Shop Entities state roster, and to
just the 1065 software TenKey is also adding California, Illinois, and New
York.  In addition, a third-party add-on program, TAXi Tax Import Bridge, will
be available to import data from other vendors' general ledger and client
write-up software into Tax Shop Entities.

Growing Universal

Universal Tax Systems is improving its TaxWise business tax software with a
galaxy of new options.  You'll be able to print a mailing label with your tax
returns or from the Query Database Screen.  The program will highlight
incomplete forms in red.  You'll also be able to invoke the 1120, 1120S, and
1065 modules without exiting to DOS.  The program will flag estimated amounts,
so you'll be able to distinguish them from your actual data.  Universal will
also let you order federal and state 1065, 1120, and 1120S programs from the
same CD-ROM platter as the 1040 and 1041.

New for this season are 18 state business modules, bringing TaxWise's total to
23 states:  Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Florida, Georgia,
Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, New
Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina,
Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and Wisconsin.  In addition, you'll have the
ability to print out as many blank forms as necessary for a client.

New menu options will enable you to apply updates, install state software,
copy master forms and macros from one user to another, batch your problem
returns together for transmission to Universal's service bureau, shell to DOS,
and install soft fonts.  Universal will also be offering a conversion program
from its 1040 product to do a prior-year carryforward of client data.

In addition to these new features, Universal is enhancing some old ones.  The
business modules will include customized database and diagnostic screens.
Mailing labels will be able to contain phone numbers.  You'll be able to query
the database to learn the amount of a fee deposit, and access a scratchpad and
check information when you've printed more than a single check.  The client
letter has improved to allow for multiple letters, letterhead paper,
signatures, refund or balance-due amounts, and if-then logic for which
paragraphs to include.  The depreciation worksheet has also been enhanced,
letting you access a new spreadsheet while TaxWise is displaying a list of
existing assets.  It will let you compute next year's depreciation, display
it, and show a list of depreciated assets.  All in all, TaxWise seems to be
getting wiser every year.

Xpress train to your taxes

Xpress Software is improving practice management and database functions in
Xpress Business Returns, its 1065, 1120, and 1120S software.  The company is
also expanding the messages and diagnostics it provides for the preparation
process.  And Xpress is developing an interface for importing data from other
programs, along with adding state business returns for Alabama and Louisiana.

Vendors like Xpress are making improvements where they can to their business
tax products.  And with the world of 1040 tax prep increasingly moving into
the hands of sophisticated, PC-equipped taxpayers, it's a good idea to beef up
your practice with the latest business tax software, so you can provide
whatever services your business clients require.


Michael Cohn is senior editor of Accounting Technology.

For More Information

Alpine Data, Inc., 737 S.  Townsend Ave., Montrose, CO 81401, (800) 525-1040,
fax (303) 249-8511, http:\\alpine@rmii.com.

AM Software, PO Box 25010, Kansas City, MO 64119, (800) 858-8537, fax (816)
741-1517.

Arthur Andersen LLP, 2805 Fruitville Rd., Sarasota, FL 34237, (800) USA-1040,
fax (813) 953-5310.

CCH, Inc., Worldway Postal Center, PO Box 92938, Los Angeles, CA 90009, (800)
45-PROFX, fax (310) 543-8104.

CLR/Fast-Tax, 2395 Midway Rd., Carrolton, TX 75006, (800) FAST-TAX, fax (214)
250-8104.

Cold River Software, Inc., 4420 Varsity Dr., Ann Arbor, MI 48108-2274, (800)
DIGITAX, fax (313) 677-6647, http://www.-cold-river.com.

CPASoftware, One Pensacola Plaza, Ste.  500, Pensacola, FL 32501, (904)
434-2685, fax (904) 433-8198.

Creative Solutions, 7322 Newman Blvd., Dexter, MI 48130, (800) 968-8900, fax
(312) 426-5946.

Drake Software, 106 Palmer St., Franklin, NC 28734, (800) 890-9500, fax (704)
524-9549, http://www.1040.com

Dunphy Systems, Inc., 6740 Huntley Rd., Ste.103, Columbus, OH 43229, (614)
431-0846, fax (614) 431-0776.

Exactax, Inc., 2301 W.  Lincoln Ave., Ste.  100, Anaheim, CA 92801, (800)
352-3638, fax (714) 778-2571.

Intuit, Inc., 100 Juliad Ct., Ste.  107, Fredericksburg, VA 22406-1124, (800)
934-1040, fax (800) 685-7036, http://www.intuit.com/TurboTax.

Lacerte Software Corp., 4835 LBJ Freeway, Dallas TX 75244-6098, (800)
765-7777, fax (214) 770-8955.

Laser Systems, PO Box 407, Kaysville, UT 84037, (800) 230-2322, fax (801)
552-8900.

Micro Vision Software, Inc., 140 Fell Ct., Hauppauge, NY 11788-4360, (800)
TAX-RELIEF, fax (516) 232-3481.

Pencil Pushers Tax Software (division of the Damirus Corp.), 10 New England
Executive Park, Burlington, MA 01803, (800) 370-2500, fax (617) 273-0575.

SCS/Compute, Inc., 2252 Welsh Industrial Ct., St.  Louis, MO 63146, (800)
326-1040 fax (206) 644-7372.

Tax and Accounting Software Corp.  (TAASC), 6914 S.  Yorktown Ave., Tulsa, OK
74136, (800) 998-9990, fax (918) 493-6189.

TaxByte, Inc., 1801 6th Ave., Moline, IL 61265, (800) 245-8299, fax (309)
764-0976.

TAX$IMPLE, Inc., 3155 Rte.  10, Ste.  114, Denville, NJ 07834, (800) 323-2662,
fax (201) 366-5877.

TenKey, 5422 Carrier Dr., Ste.  201, Orlando, FL 32819, (800) 300-8244, fax
(407) 351-0966, tssales@tenkey.com.

Universal Tax Systems, Inc., 215 Broad St., Rome, GA 30161-3021, (800)
755-9473, fax (706) 236-9168.

Xpress Software, Inc., 1327 Broad River Rd., Columbia, SC 29210, (803)
731-1040, fax (803) 750-4144.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Editor's Note:  Another Nail in the Coffin?


I've just come out of a meeting with Intuit, and I'm both impressed and
disturbed.  You know Intuit.  It's the company that bought TurboTax a few
years back.  TurboTax already pretty much owned the consumer tax prep market,
and a great deal of the professional market as well, when Intuit bought
ChipSoft.  With savvy marketing and constant improvements, the vendor has been
able to keep its position in an increasingly turbulent and voracious market.
Having captured the high ground, Intuit is about to fire the opening salvo in
a new war.  And if you don't react the right way, and quickly enough, you
could be one of the ones who gets winged.

Taking it to the streets

What I found both exciting and disturbing is Intuit's announcement of consumer
versions of its business tax products.  Of course, "consumer" is probably a
bit of a misnomer.  Perhaps the term "retail" is more accurate, though these
products do differ a bit in capability from the ProSeries entity products.

But make no mistake about it.  If you currently prepare 1065, 1120, or 1120S
returns for the non-Fortune 1000 set, these products will let your current
clients do a pretty good job in many cases of preparing their own returns.  As
with the current crop of retail, consumer-oriented 1040 products, just how
good a job depends on the complexity of the business transactions and
organization, and how savvy the person trying to produce the return is.  At
the very least, if this series of products is even half as successful as
Intuit's consumer version of TurboTax 1040, it has the potential to do a lot
of damage to the revenue stream in many accounting and tax prep practices.

The end of the world as we know it?

This move into your client base isn't totally unexpected.  After all, did you
really think that the PC had empowered just you?  You haven't been blind to
the advantages offered by computerizing, and neither will some of your
clients.  And the more work they do, the less will be left for you.

But this is old news.  The accounting profession has undergone some dramatic
changes in the last decade.  And it will continue to change in the years to
come.  That's part of life.  And, to be realistic, most professions undergo
similar, if sometimes less dramatic, changes.  Just look at the practice of
medicine.  With the advent of managed health care plans more of the burden of
the health care process is placed on the consumer.  FDA approval of formerly
prescription medications for over-the-counter sales has accelerated this
process.  Think of these products as the Quickens and TurboTaxes of the
medical profession.

New challenges = new opportunities

But the availability of more options for self-care hasn't put doctors out of
business.  After all, you've always had the option of forgoing the physician
and trying to go it alone.  Sometimes you can.  Unless you're in frail shape,
there's not much a doctor can do for you if you're suffering from a cold or
flu.  You can pretty much take care of yourself.  It's when that cold or flu
turns into something more dangerous that the doctor's involvement becomes not
only desirable, but frequently critical.  You might be as good as any doctor
when it comes to a cold, but pneumonia is another story.  That requires
medications that aren't available to you without a doctor's say-so.  And
there's good reason for that.  Administration of these medications requires
that someone have the training and experience to recognize when they are
appropriate, and the judgment to know which medication, and how much of it, to
use.

And training, experience, and judgment are really what are important in our
profession as well.  Yes, you are going to lose business clients to computer
programs that let them prepare their own returns.  Get used to that, because
even if it doesn't happen this year, it is going to happen.

But that doesn't mean you have to give up your tax practice, only that you
have to change with the times.  Because no matter how easy Intuit and other
vendors make the tax preparation process, there are always going to be
questions that require a judgment call.  And judgment isn't something that can
be easily packaged in a computer program, artificial intelligence research
notwithstanding.  It comes from experience, and the long application of this
experience to real-world situations and decisions.

I think that the real money isn't going to be made by the vendors of tax prep
software.  It's going to be made by readers like you who have the savvy, guts,
and vision to be able to adapt.  To stop thinking of themselves as tax
preparers, and start thinking of themselves as tax consultants.  And who take
the initiative in marketing themselves as a solution and source of experienced
advice for those consumers of both the personal and business tax prep products
who are willing to do the grunt work, but smart enough to understand that they
will occasionally need to turn to someone with the training and background to
help them face those judgment calls.

New challenges have a way of also creating new opportunities.  I think the
practice of our profession is going to be very different in coming years.  And
I also think that Accounting is going to be not only a lot more interesting,
but for people with the right attitude, a lot more profitable as well.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Andersen BC Looks At Systems Union's SunSystems Accounting Software


If you or your clients need an accounting software program with powerful
multicurrency and foreign-language capabilities, consider SunSystems, a
product of Great Britain-based Systems Union, Ltd., (10 Bank St., White
Plains, NY 10606, (914) 948-7770).  This innovative program offers tools to
meet the accounting and information requirements of businesses in many
countries.  It's available in 20 languages, including French, German, Spanish,
Russian, Japanese, Chinese, and Arabic.

Systems Union, Ltd.  was founded in 1981 by a small team of financial and
technical experts.  Its SunSystems product was first released in 1982 and has
been regularly upgraded over the years.  Today, Systems Union employs over 300
people in 15 locations, with offices in North America, Europe, and Pacific
Asia.  Systems Union also maintains an international network of
representatives.

Flexible features

SunSystems consists of seven accounting and business modules, as well as
several utility software packages.  Accounting and business modules include
Ledger Accounting (Accounts Payable, Accounts Receivable, General Ledger),
Fixed Assets, Corporate Allocations, Sales Order Processing, Purchase Order
Processing, Inventory Control, SunQuery report writer, and the SZ screen
modifier utility.

It's easy to install SunSystems on a PC or network.  Loading the diskettes
takes from 15 to 30 minutes.  The program requires at least a 25-MHz 386 or
486 PC with 8MB RAM for the Windows version, or 540K for the DOS version.  For
this review, we tested the Windows version of SunSystems running on a Novell
LAN.  Although this review focuses on the Windows product, the DOS version
offers similar functionality.

Systems Union's software uses a single set of source code, facilitating
customization, a clean user interface, and high functionality.  SunSystems
also enables you to customize information to meet your unique specifications.
For instance, each SunSystems module can be configured to select and report on
various vendor, customer, asset, and inventory information by using analysis
codes.  You can customize these codes to track and report transactions by
customer region, customer sales territory, vendor group, item product type,
and asset location.  And you can customize the chart of accounts by using
account analysis codes.  They provide a 60-character code block, with up to 10
alphanumeric characters for the account code, plus 50 additional characters.

The SZ utility, a screen modifier, lets you customize input screen labels.
(However, data screens cannot be reconfigured to call additional prompts, nor
can you develop new forms using existing ones.)  In addition, you may need to
modify multiple screens when you want to make changes to an input screen,
since other screens use data from input screens.  Although SZ is flexible when
changing text descriptions, field lengths, and removing unnecessary fields,
you need to document all changes, since upgrades override all of SZ's changes.

By and large, however, each module promotes user flexibility.  For example,
the Ledger Accounting module, which consists of Accounts Receivable, Accounts
Payable, and General Ledger, lets you configure journal types in which journal
entries are preset and posted according to classifications such as cash
receipts, prepayments, sales invoices, and foreign currency journals.

You can also configure the Sales and Purchasing modules with various types of
predefined sales and purchasing transactions.  You'll be able to enter preset
information for orders according to the type of order (for example, sales and
purchase order types for specific customers, vendors, countries, or items).

But while the Purchasing module has been designed for flexibility, none of its
standard reports lets you sort information by purchase order type, and only a
couple allow for sorting by analysis code (analysis codes permit you to
organize information in all the modules).  The Purchasing module also lacks a
report writer for customizing or designing reports, or for reporting on
purchase order information by analysis code or purchase order type.  One way
to solve this problem is to use the SunQuery report writer to customize
reports.  When Systems Union releases the purchase order layout report writer,
as well as a Report Definition utility for the Purchasing module, this step
won't be necessary.

Besides the problems with the Purchasing module's reports, we also had
difficulty copying multiple purchase and sales orders in the Purchasing and
Sales modules.  Although the copy command (<F3>) successfully duplicated the
previous Header information screen, field by field, the <F3> key could not be
used for the detail screen.  This is because it only copies the detail line
above the current detail line of the purchase order, as opposed to the last
detail line in the previous purchase order.  This problem was solved by
implementing a macro procedure to record the information for the first PO,
which allowed us to copy the same information into new purchase and sales
orders.

The gang of four

SunQuery, the user-defined transaction-level report writer, offers flexible
data selection, report layout, and sorting features.  Although SunQuery is
fairly flexible and includes more GUI enhancements in its latest version, the
fully graphical report writer that's currently under development will be an
especially welcome upgrade for Windows users.

The Ledger Accounting module includes three other report writers:  Financial
Analysis, Financial Statements, and Financial Tables.  The Financial Analysis
Report Writer provides the easiest way to report on expenditures, in summary
or detail, with flexible sorting options.  The Financial Statements Report
Writer offers enhanced reporting facilities that produce customized income
statements, balance sheets, and other financials.  The Financial Tables Report
Writer can produce reports in a matrix format that you can consolidate from
multiple ledgers to do comparisons of companies or individual departments.
Each report writer is easy to customize.

The latest release of SunSystems also includes a powerful new enhancement, the
Data Dictionary.  The dictionary stores all the information related to
SunSystems data files, including field name, length, start position,
justification, and so forth, in a single location.  This feature enhances the
Ledger Accounting module by including a Report Definition tool that lets you
customize the layout and content of standard SunSystems reports.  It also
allows you to create an unlimited number of custom layouts, because the Report
Definition tool can now read the Data Dictionary directly.

Systems Union is currently developing the Report Definition for all other
SunBusiness modules as well, including Purchasing.  The Data Dictionary should
make it easier for outside vendors to develop and maintain links and
interfaces with SunSystems.  That will facilitate implementation of features
such as Form Entry and Document Imaging, enhancing SunSystems' leadership
position in the marketplace.

We were unable to alter SunSystems' reports with third-party tools because it
didn't generate reports in ASCII format.  Although the reports could be
designed to be generated in other third-party tool formats (such as Lotus),
the generated reports only included summary raw data and therefore did not
include column headings or subtotals.  However, we plan to use the newly
released Data Dictionary as the link between a third-party report writer to
generate and alter the look of the reports (font types and sizes).

The wide, wide world of accounting

The program's international accounting flexibility is one of its strongest
selling points.  It's an excellent solution for international businesses whose
books need to conform to the accounting conventions of a particular country.
Users can access a common database in their choice of the following languages:
English, French, German, or Spanish.

Strong multicurrency support is another program hallmark.  You can work with,
consolidate, and report in an unlimited number of currencies, as well as
maintain inventory and create multicurrency orders and invoices.  The program
also performs currency conversion during data entry, and converts foreign
currency to base currency or vice versa.

A sophisticated mapping facility offered in the program allows you to map out
a chart of accounts from one database to another to satisfy country-mandated
chart of accounts and company-wide reporting standards.

SunSystems offers predefined charts of accounts to accommodate varying
statutory requirements for more than 50 countries.  The program complies with
domestic and international financial standards, such as GAAP (Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles), FASB (US standards), CICA (Canadian
standards), SSAP (Institute of Chartered Accountants of England and Wales),
and IAS (International Accounting Standards).

New features have been added to address some of the European tax reporting
requirements for the Value Added Tax (VAT).  Although SunSystems allows you to
customize VAT reports and procedures for maintaining VAT information, the new
version includes an updated Tax Listing Report and a Day Book Listing that
generates sequential references against transactions.

Strong security and more

SunSystems Accounting Software sports strong data security features.  You can
restrict any user's or company's field access to menu options, analysis codes,
or account types.  And you can set up user groups for easier maintenance and
tighter reins on security.

SunSystems includes drill-down capability within its Ledger Accounting module,
letting you trace a journal entry back to its source.  It's designed to post
only balanced journal entries and offers the option to "put the journal
on-hold" if corrections or supervisory approvals need to be made, making the
product a real-time solution.  SunSystems also lets you post entries in
separate accounting periods, as long as the periods are "open" and you can
access them.

A powerful, flexible budget ledger feature lets you maintain up to 10 budget
ledgers at either the account or project level.  This provides a great deal of
flexibility for financial reports and analysis.

The combined ledger is designed to present information in real time.  All
reports and inquiries paint an immediate snapshot of a company's actual
position rather than its position the last time you ran a report.

An intermediate ledger, or rough book, allows all users to post complete
transactions in a working ledger.  This feature, originally designed to meet
Italian statutory requirements, helps reduce numerous adjusting entries.

Issues and challenges

SunSystems is a very flexible accounting system and can provide powerful
functionality if you set up the system properly.  But you'll need to invest a
great deal of time and effort into designing the system before implementing
it, since an incorrect installation can lead to major modifications later, and
you may overlook key features if you implement the setup phase too hastily.

The average cost of a single-user SunSystems license (for both Windows and DOS
versions) ranges from $2,000 to $5,000 per module, and for a four-user license
from $2,500 to $10,000 per module.  Complete product support is available
through comprehensive manuals, a telephone hot-line, on-line system help,
messages, and user defined help areas, where specific on-line assistance is
provided.  You can also direct questions regarding any SunSystems module to
the technical support staff by paying an additional support fee, which
includes free upgrades upon request and use of technical bulletins.  A full
range of client-server products is also available, including support for SQL
Server and Oracle.

The Sun will come out tomorrow

What does the future hold for SunSystems?  Over the years Systems Union has
become a leader in international accounting and business applications by
offering a wide range of solutions for small to large companies.  Systems
Union allies with many major hardware and software vendors, keeps abreast of
new technology, and focuses research and development efforts on improving its
product.

The company plans to continue enhancing the graphical user interface (GUI) for
each operating environment it supports.  In addition, the current Microsoft
SQL Server version of SunSystems will be ported to Sybase SQL Server 10.  This
will allow support for SQL technology on a number of Unix platforms, including
the RS/6000, Sun SPARC, and HP 9000 machines, as well as SCO Unix systems.

Although SunSystems is currently available in 20 languages, Systems Union
intends to add new translations over the next three years.  In addition,
Systems Union plans to work with foreign-language authors to improve
documentation and modules.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Information Services:  In Search of On-line CPAs


With various commercial on-line services (such as CompuServe, America Online,
and Prodigy) and the Internet in the news so much these days, you're probably
wondering if it's worth your time to check out their diverse offerings.

For the average accountant, the answer is a qualified yes.  There are specific
resources for accountants on CompuServe and the Internet, as well as features
on America Online and Prodigy that might appeal to the average accountant.  In
this article, we'll review the major on-line services, as well as examine
accounting-related services on the Internet.

On the one hand, the major on-line services feature a limited number of
accounting-related subject areas.  Only CompuServe devotes entire areas to
discussions of accounting information.  On the Internet, there is a Usenet
newsgroup devoted to financial software.

So what's an accountant to do?

The commercial on-line world is mainly a good place for accountants to find
additional information about computing.  Most computer magazines sponsor
on-line forums of some sort, ranging from ZD Net on CompuServe (which includes
information from PC Magazine, PC Week, and more) to the varied offerings on
America Online's Newsstand service (representing PC World, Windows, and
WordPerfect magazines).  And all three commercial services feature a wealth of
mainstream financial information, ranging from extensive market reporting on
the Prodigy CNBC area to a wide variety of investment information on the
America Online Personal Finance Forum (including Morningstar Mutual Funds
listings, a Tax Forum, and various magazines).

Try before you buy

In addition, America Online and CompuServe feature large libraries of
shareware-software that you can try out and pay for later if you like it.
While a good chunk of shareware tends to be amateurish, many useful programs
are available, particularly small tools that perform specific functions.

A search through the America Online software libraries, using the keyword
"accounting," yields over 800 matches.  Granted, this number includes many
home-oriented shareware packages for tasks like balancing checkbooks and
calculating mortgage payments, but some of the software may be of interest to
the accounting professional.

And, of course, there's one additional reason to go with any on-line service:
universal electronic mail.  If you join a commercial on-line service or
procure an Internet account, you can exchange electronic mail with any other
Internet or commercial service user.  (This doesn't extend to files, by the
way; a file attached to an America Online mail message can be received only by
an America Online user.)  With over 28 million e-mail users in America, you
can be sure you'll have a few clients who will appreciate the instant
communications offered via e-mail.

Who else is out there?

Other specialized on-line services are available that you may find useful,
depending on your needs.  Dow Jones runs an on-line business-news service that
you can access via MCI Mail (800/444-6245) or Knight Ridder (formerly Dialog)
Information Services (800/334-2564).  The DowVision service is also accessible
from Coopers & Lybrand's Tax News Network (800/528-5816), which provides
extensive tax information of its own, in addition to the Dow Jones material
and articles from other tax research providers.  Both the LEXIS/NEXIS on-line
service (800/227-4908) and Knight Ridder feature Dun's Financial Records Plus
and Standard & Poor's Corporate Descriptions.  You can also find useful
accounting information on Creative Solutions' bulletin board system ARNE
(800/968-8900).

Before you get started

To access on-line services or the Internet, you'll need a modem-the faster,
the better.  A high-speed modem is a good investment.  These days you can find
decent high-speed modems running at 28.8K bits per second for $200 or so.
America Online, CompuServe, and many Internet service providers offer 28.8Kbps
access, while Prodigy and CompuServe top out at 14.4Kbps.

America Online and Prodigy require you to use their free software to access
their services; you can find Prodigy starter kits in most computer stores,
while America Online distributes its access software with many magazines, as
well as through direct mail solicitations and bundling deals with computer
makers.  You can access CompuServe with any communications software package
(such as Procomm Plus), but a graphical front-end, WinCIM, is also available.
Getting on the Internet typically means using specialized software, especially
if you want to access the World Wide Web (see "The Net Surfer" in the December
'95 issue of Accounting Technology for more details).

America Online

America Online combines a lot of consumer-oriented information with a slew of
on-line magazines, such as Your Money and Worth.  Most of this information is
probably of little interest to the average accountant.  Yes, there are some
areas you might find useful in an eclectic practice, such as the Morningstar
guide to mutual funds, but by and large these services are for generalists,
not accountants.

The newest version of AOL software for Windows (there is a Mac version as
well) will feature full Internet access, however, including a top-notch Web
browser from InternetWorks.  It should be fully released by the time you read
this article.  And America Online is the cheapest commercial on-line service,
making its Internet access even more financially attractive.

CompuServe

The only major on-line service to feature forums specifically for accountants
is CompuServe.  The Accounting Vendor Forum offers areas run by various
accounting software vendors (including Best!Ware, BNA, Champion Business
Systems, Manzanita Software, NEBS, Open Systems, Outlook Software, SBT
Accounting, SCALA, Solomon Software, Versatile Solutions, XP Systems, ZPAY
Payroll, and others), as well as a number of general discussion groups (The
Break Room, Ask the CPAs, Accounting Training, Tax Issues, and Accounting
Software).

While discussions in the vendor forums probably won't interest you if you're
not using the vendor's software, the general discussion areas are lively and
filled with postings.  I found one message describing a hypothetical business
transaction, in which the author asked other members of the forum what the
appropriate journal entries and taxable income and deductions would be, and
whether the transaction qualified as a royalty, commission, or sale of
intangible property rights.  This question yielded several responses from
other accountants participating in the forum.  In addition to advice and
discussion, software libraries specifically for accountants are available on
the forum.

The recently opened Accountants Forum on CompuServe is sponsored by the AICPA.
It includes message areas devoted to general information and ethics;
accounting; audit, compilation, and review; taxes; information technology;
personal financial planning; management accounting and industry; government;
CPA firms; universities and colleges; and management consulting.  Also within
the forums, you will find separate libraries devoted to many of these same
subjects.

CompuServe also allows access to the Internet (including File Transfer
Protocol and Telnet features, Usenet newsgroups, as well as the World Wide Web
if you use CompuServe's NetLauncher software).  For any accountant, it's clear
that CompuServe is the place to begin the on-line quest, if only because of
the existence of an Accounting Vendors Forum and the AICPA's new Accountants
Forum.

CompuServe's pricing plan allows access to over 3,000 Internet addresses,
including e-mail.  They also offer software for DOS and Macintosh users.

Prodigy

As the most consumer-oriented major on-line service, Prodigy doesn't provide
much information of direct interest to accountants.  But that doesn't mean
Prodigy is a total wash, only that its information tends to be general in
nature.

Prodigy does have the most extensive financial information on-line, however.
It's the official on-line service of CNBC, the cable service that devotes
daily programming to business topics.  Yes, you'll find the stock listings
offered by all the major on-line services.  You can also buy and sell stock on
Prodigy and set up "track lists" to keep tabs on specific stocks in your
portfolio.  And Prodigy's CNBC area goes further by offering complete market
information, including Dow Jones averages, gold prices, Treasury bond yields,
and a U.S.  dollar index.  It also gives you an overview of futures and
mutual-fund information, with listings of over 6,000 funds.  And for financial
experts, Kiplinger's magazine is on-line.

In addition, Prodigy offers full Internet access, including newsgroups, file
transfer capability, and a World Wide Web browser.  While the Internet is a
vast, amorphous entity, you'll find some useful resources there for an
accounting practice, and one way to reach those resources is through Prodigy.

Prodigy's pricing plans are more varied, offering plans starting at $9.95 per
month, with its top plan costing $24.95 per month.  Each plan includes a
number of free access hours, with minimal charges for additional hours and
minutes.  Prodigy also offers on-line software compatible with DOS and
Macintosh machines, providing access for almost all computer environments.

The Internet

Despite the ad-hoc nature of the Internet, a surprising number of resources
are available on the Net that your firm could find valuable.  The main trick
is finding their locations.  I've done a few searches and come up with several
accounting resources on the World Wide Web that can also serve as a
springboard to other Internet accounting treasures.

With a Web browser, good places to start are the Accountants Home Page
(http://www.servtech.com/re/acct.html) and the Accounting Resources on the
Internet Home Page
(http://www.rutgers.edu/Accounting/raw/internet/internet.htm).  Both sites
offer listings for other accounting resources on the Web.  Some of these
listings are general in nature (most of you won't need to know about the NY
State Assembly or care about accessing the THOMAS Web service run by the
Federal Government).

Some sites, however, are operated by prominent accounting organizations.  For
instance, the Education Materials Committee of the American Accounting
Association runs its own home page
(http://www.rutgers.edu/Accounting/raw/aaa/aaa.htm), which also contains
pointers to other accounting-related resources on the Internet.  In addition,
there's a low-traffic Usenet newsgroup called
comp.os.ms-windows.apps.financial where you can discuss various Windows-based
financial applications.

Load up your software and log on

The on-line world is rapidly becoming a valuable business tool in American
society.  While some services, such as America Online and Prodigy, still need
to beef up their accounting-specific resources, there's a wealth of
information already available on CompuServe, the Internet, and several
specialized services.

The on-line world has a way of creeping up on you, and it won't be long before
information services begin creating more content of interest to accountants.
The brand new Microsoft Network, in fact, is already developing such
resources, and you'll find Accounting Technology, as well as other Faulkner &
Gray accounting publications, and areas such as the Accounting Office and the
CCH Business Owner's Toolkit, on-line there right now.


Kevin Reichard contributes to a variety of publications and has written 15
computer books for MIS:Press/M&T Books.  His electronic-mail address is
reichard@mr.net.


America Online America Online Inc.  8619 Westwood Center Dr.  Vienna, VA
22182-2285 (800) 827-6364

Price:  $9.95 per month, five free hours; extra hours cost $2.95

Requires:  Windows software needs 80386-based PC or better, 4MB of RAM, VGA
graphics or better, 2,400-bps modem or better, mouse.

The Balance Sheet

Assets:  Full Internet access; wide range of discussion areas.

Liabilities:  No specific forums for accountants.


CompuServe CompuServe 5000 Arlington Centre Blvd.  PO Box 20961 Columbus, OH
43220-9910 (800) 487-9197

Price:  Standard Pricing Plan is $9.95 per month for 5 hours of connect time.
Extra Internet hours cost $2.95 per hour.  The Super Value Club Plan costs
$24.95 per month for 20 hours of connect time.  Extra hours cost $1.95 each.

Requires:  Windows software needs 80386-based PC or better, 4MB of RAM, VGA
graphics or better, 2,400-bps modem or better.

The Balance Sheet

Assets:  Specific forums for accountants; many software libraries.

Liabilities:  Most expensive on-line service if you wander past the free
services.


Prodigy Prodigy Services Co.  445 Hamilton Ave.  White Plains, NY 10601 (800)
PRODIGY

Price:  Basic Plan offers 5 hours of Core features for $9.95, with extra hours
costing $2.95; Value Plan offers unlimited access to Core features and 5 hours
of Plus features for $14.95, with each extra hour of Plus costing $2.95; 30/30
Plan offers 30 hours for $29.95, with each extra hour costing $2.95.

Requires:  Windows software needs 80386-based PC or better, 5MB of hard disk
space, 4MB of RAM, VGA graphics or better, 2,400-bps modem or better.


The Balance Sheet

Assets:  Strong financial tracking capabilities; full Internet access.

Liabilities:  Little content of direct interest to accountants.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Practice Development:  Form 5500 Follow-up


In the August 1995 issue we looked at eight pension return preparation
packages.  These ranged from simple forms-oriented programs to comprehensive
employee benefits administration systems.  As a follow-up, this time around we
looked at two additional entries in this growing field:  ATX Tax Solver 5500
Benefit Plan and Shepard's Form 5500 System.

ATX solves your 5500 needs

Offered by ATX Forms Inc., ATX Tax Solver 5500 Benefit Plan differs from the
other pension software packages we've looked at in that it's spreadsheet
based.  The vendor's family of software includes modules to prepare forms in
all the major income tax-filing areas, including individual, business,
fiduciary, and payroll taxes.  In addition to tax preparation products, ATX
also offers a depreciation system and a tax planner.

All of ATX Forms' applications are available in either 1-2-3 or Excel
versions.  ATX supplied the software to us on a single 3.5-inch diskette, and
we quickly installed it by simply typing ATX at the command line prompt.  We
used the Lotus 1-2-3 for Windows edition for this review, but the software
supports both the DOS and Windows versions of 1-2-3.  You can also get any of
the ATX products for the Macintosh (which work with the Mac version of Excel).
And, if you'd rather not have to play with a spreadsheet at all, ATX just
introduced its Saber line of software, which doesn't require you to have a
spreadsheet program installed.

The 47-page user guide covers operating instructions for all of the ATX
modules, and provides information for specific modules as needed.  The
documentation, though not voluminous, adequately covers getting started;
entering, saving, and printing tax information; menus and macros; tips and
techniques; and troubleshooting.  Instructions in the manual and on-screen are
good enough that someone not familiar with spreadsheets will be able to
produce returns.  If you already feel comfortable using a spreadsheet, you'll
be right at home with the product.

Once you're in the spreadsheet program, select the main file, !OPENATX, to
reveal starting instructions and a list of supported forms.  Forms included in
the package are the 5500, 5500-C/R, 5500-EZ, supporting schedules A, B, C, E,
F, G, P, SSA, and forms 2848, 4506, 4571, 5558, 8453E, 8821, 8822, 945, SS4,
and W9.  To process a client, check off the forms you wish to prepare, then
press Ctrl-N.  This automatically creates a taxpayer directory, copies the
forms into the directory, and opens Page 1.  The program makes good use of
spreadsheet macro facilities, including over a dozen macros that automate such
tasks as opening, updating, saving, and printing files.  You can also select
these tasks from a pull-down menu.

How many forms am I holding up?

One useful feature is that you can have more than just a single form open at
the same time.  Just how many can be open simultaneously depends on the amount
of memory available.  Given enough memory, you could conceivably have them all
open.  Once you open a form, you can key your data into an on-screen
reproduction of the original form.  The screen is color-coded, displaying the
form in black, the data in blue, and the instructions in purple.  You have a
choice of using Input Mode (by pressing the Ctrl-I key combination), or you
can move around freely as in any spreadsheet.  If you choose Input Mode, the
right arrow key takes you to the next input cell.  All cells not requiring
input are protected, and the program carries over standard information, such
as name, address, and identification numbers, to other forms as appropriate.

ATX Tax Solver 5500 automatically performs math calculations on the financial
input areas and produces balanced statements.  However, it's still possible to
have an out-of-balance condition, since the program automatically carries the
net asset amount from the balance sheet to the income statement.

When you complete one page or form, you call up the next, until you've
finished them all.  You can easily print to an HP-compatible laser printer by
using the macros provided, and ATX also supports dot-matrix and inkjet
printers.  You have the option of selecting and printing one or all forms, and
using a batch-printing mode.  The printed forms are clear, professional
looking, and IRS approved.  No diagnostics are available to alert you to
problems or erroneous input, but you can produce a two-year comparison of the
income and expense entries to provide some troubleshooting help.

To transfer client information to the next year, a macro (Ctrl-U) updates the
new forms with carryover information.  ATX Tax Solver 5500 doesn't produce an
invoice or client transmittal letter, however, and Forms 990-T and 5330 Return
of Excise Taxes Related to Employee Benefit Plans are not available in this
module.

No help for the weary?

On-line help is pretty much taken for granted these days, and this is one
place in which ATX Tax Solver 5500 is a bit weak.  If you've grown used to tax
prep software that gives you explanations and advice on a line-item basis, you
may be a bit disappointed.  ATX assumes that you know what you're doing when
it comes to Form 5500 preparation.  While the standard spreadsheet help
screens are available, neither the screen nor manual provides help on the
technical aspects of 5500 preparation.  You also need to step through
inapplicable input boxes; since the program doesn't automatically skip them,
you need to know which items require responses.

ATX Tax Solver 5500 isn't the fanciest product to produce 5500s.  But for a
reasonable price, it supplies an efficient way to get the job done, although
it does require you to be conversant with the Form 5500 preparation process.

Should you need help, technical support is available on weekdays from 9 a.m.
to 5 p.m., EST.  The back of the manual also offers some troubleshooting
advice.

Does Shepard's lead the flock?

Shepard's/McGraw-Hill is a well-known, venerable publisher of books and
services.  Less well-known is its expanding line of software.  One of the
newest is the Shepard's Form 5500 System reviewed here.  Other Shepard's
software products include a tax forms library in addition to an integrated
family of estate planning, preparation, and accounting programs.

The software is Windows based, and you install it through the Program Manager
by using the File Run command.  The install routine establishes a new program
group, with separate icons for the 5500 and 5500-C/R.

The User's Manual is a brief 11 pages, but it covers basic program operations
efficiently.  It uses screen shots to good advantage to illustrate the primary
steps.  Making up for the sparse documentation is extensive on-line help to
assist you in working with the program, along with on-line IRS instructions
for the forms and line-by-line instructions.  Particularly useful is the split
screen option; while you input various lines on the form in the upper window,
the instructions for those lines automatically appear in the lower window.

Most practitioners don't produce Form 5500 all that frequently, so a nice
feature in the help function is the indexes for two Shepard's publications,
ERISA Practice and Procedure and Guide to Pension and Profit Sharing Plans.
Shepard's offers these books at a discount to purchasers of its 5500 software.

Clicking on the program icon brings up the opening screen, consisting of Page
1 of the 5500 form.  The familiar Windows menu and tool bars cross the top of
the screen.  In addition to standard icons on the tool bar, you'll find icons
for the six pages of the 5500 form.  You can use these icons to open one or
more of the pages at the same time.  Supporting forms are accessible from the
Form pull-down menu, including Schedules A, B, C, E, F, G, P, Form 5558, and
SSA.

To start a new return, just begin inputting information into the on-screen
Page 1.  Otherwise, open an existing file using the File menu or icon.  Input
is straightforward and easy since you're working with an accurate reproduction
of the actual form.  When you enter an item, the cursor automatically moves to
the next input field, and you can use the Tab key or mouse to skip a field.
The software doesn't automatically skip inapplicable entry fields, so you need
to be aware of which entries are appropriate, based on what you've entered
previously for a client.

Shepard's Form 5500 System carries over names, dates, and identification
numbers to other forms.  It automatically totals amounts in the financial and
numerical fields, and carries over the total of net assets on the balance
sheet to the income statement to show the change in net assets.  Everything
balances fine, but be careful if you change amounts later, or the income
statement may no longer foot.

With your input complete, you're ready to print.  As with the ATX package
reviewed above, the Shepard's software provides no diagnostics to alert you to
potential errors or inconsistencies.  Printing to an HP-compatible laser
printer produces crisp, clear IRS forms, however, and Shepard's includes
downloadable soft fonts.  You can print one, several, or all forms at once.
This 5500 system doesn't contain client transmittal letters, invoices, or
Forms 5500-EZ, 5330, or 990-T, though you can obtain the forms by purchasing
Shepard's separate forms library package.

Technical support is available at a toll-free number on weekdays from 7:00
a.m.  to 5:00 p.m.  Mountain time.

Shepard's Form 5500 System is easy to learn and use, letting you produce
high-quality 5500 forms in a short time.  Although it lacks some bells and
whistles of more comprehensive (and expensive) packages, it does the basic
task of creating a Form 5500 very well.


Gerald Herter, MBA, CPA is president of Sterman, Higashi & Herter, an
accounting firm in Tustin, CA.


ATX Tax Solver 5500 Benefit Plan Price:  $99 ATX Forms Inc.  P.O.  Box 630
Washburn, ME 04786 (800) 944-8883, (207) 455-4603 fax (207) 455-0963

The Balance Sheet

Assets:  Practical, well integrated, spreadsheet-based package; produces
professional-looking forms.

Liabilities:  Lacks on-line help screens or instructions for 5500 preparation;
few diagnostic or data management features.


Shepard's Form 5500 System Price:  $129 Shepard's/McGraw-Hill, Inc.  555
Middle Creek Pkwy.  Colorado Springs, CO 80935-3530 (800) 525-2474, (719)
488-3000 fax (719) 481-7391

The Balance Sheet

Assets:  Straightforward; easy to use; attractive Windows interface and forms
output; good on-line help for the price.

Liabilities:  Lacks diagnostics.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Newspages:  Tax Vendors for Sale


An offer you can't refuse Dept.  What would you do with a couple of billion
dollars?  Illinois-based tax research publisher and tax prep software
developer CCH, Inc.  announced in late November that it had been sold to
Wolters Kluwer NV, an Amsterdam-based international publisher, for a cool $1.9
billion.  CCH's product line includes ProSystem fx, CCH Access, and CCH Tax
Assistant.

According to CCH public relations manager Mary Dale Walters, the Dutch company
wanted to acquire CCH's technology knowledge for use in the European market,
as well as to increase its presence in the US market through technologies like
the CCH Business Owners Toolkit on the Microsoft Network.  She doesn't foresee
many immediate changes in CCH's own product line, however.

"There's a chance of new and better technology down the road," she says.  The
cash infusion "will give us more impetus for continued development.  We're
already aggressively pursuing on-line activities.  We can do more."

Founded over 103 years ago, CCH was named Commerce Clearing House until last
year.  Although it's a publicly traded business, the majority of stock has
been in the hands of the Thorne family up until now, and Oakleigh Thorne,
president and CEO, will continue to manage the company.

One hurdle that CCH and other vendors were working on overcoming at press time
was Congress's and the President's budget wrangling last autumn.  "Obviously
we can't do anything until they do something," says Walters.  "At this point,
we're not sure when we'll have that legislation.  There are a number of
retroactive provisions in that bill."  Although CCH began shipping a
preliminary version of its tax software as early as November, the delays in
the final forms may mean that many taxpayers will have to file amended
returns.  For extra info, you can call CCH at (800) 45-PROFX.

More tax mergers Dept.  The CCH deal was preceded last autumn by another tax
vendor acquisition.  This one involved RAM Software, makers of RAM 1040
Professional Tax Software, which was picked up by SCS/Compute, makers of Tax
Machine and LMS Tax.  Unlike SCS's purchase of Accountant's Microsystems
Inc.'s Tax Machine line several years ago, SCS won't continue development on
the RAM program.

"They're taking features in RAM and adding it to their own," says RAM vice
president Frances Michelon.  "They wanted to expand their market share."
RAM's head programmer Richard Michelon will be writing a program to convert
RAM 1040 Professional Tax Software data to Tax Machine and LMS Tax formats.

SCS is setting up special support lines to help RAM customers make it through
the transition, according to LMS Tax product manager Lou Ann Vandemore.
"We're contacting each of their customers and offering them LMS Tax and Tax
Machine," she says.  Future RAM-inspired enhancements to SCS's tax products
may include its multistate processing, speed, and the way it accounted for
automobiles.  Call SCS/Compute at (800) 736-4587 for more information.

New on CD-ROM dept.  The second issue of Faulkner & Gray's The Electronic
Accountant began shipping last November.  Featuring advanced multimedia
functionality, the new issue is the first out from the product's new
Editor-in-Chief (and Accounting Technology Consulting Editor) Laurence K.
Zuckerman, CPA, MST.

The cover story, "Discomania:  The Best CD-ROMs for Accountants," includes
demonstrations of popular tax research, forms, spreadsheet, and CPE software
products.  Also on the disc are war stories about malpractice insurance,
pension compliance tax planning, 1040 software, installing a tape backup
drive, and the manufacturing practice niche.  For a free copy of the
Electronic Accountant, call (800) 535-8403.

Down with Unix Dept.  Platinum Software announced the general release of
Platinum SQL NT 3.2 last November, a client/server accounting solution that
takes advantage of Microsoft's BackOffice suite, primarily its Windows NT and
Microsoft SQL Server components.  New modules in Platinum SQL NT include Asset
Management and Advanced General Ledger Allocations.

A new financial alerts feature will send an administrator an e-mail alert if a
specified threshold is exceeded, such as a cash balance going above or below a
certain level.  Queue cards will help train users through processes like
entering vouchers.

The new release signals a switch in strategy for Platinum, which used to
support the Unix market by running on top of Sybase's version of SQL Server.
No longer.  Platinum is now betting on Windows NT over Unix.

"We have to make a choice," says Kevin Dowling, Platinum's vice president of
marketing.  "We see more and more of our customer base have been interested in
an NT and SQL Server solution.  We think Windows NT will be the dominant
client/server operating system.  We decided to focus our energies on providing
a solution that's integrated and almost plug-and-play with BackOffice,
reducing the risks of having all the pieces fit together."

To help its Unix customers make the transition, Platinum is becoming partners
with Microsoft and Compaq to provide the necessary software and hardware.
"We'll release product upgrades for a year and do product support for the year
after that," comments Dowling.  "They can continue to use the product and will
have access to the source code at the end of 1996."  Dowling also says that
another vendor may eventually take over Platinum's Sybase offering.  Platinum
SQL NT sells for $10,000 to $15,000 per module, plus per-user fees.

Several modules for the network-based Platinum for Windows product are also
finally in release, including two general ledger modules (standard and
premiere), along with a cash management module.  By the time you read this,
accounts payable and accounts receivable should be available, and in March,
Platinum plans to release order entry, purchase order, and inventory modules.
For more information on these products, call Platinum at (714) 453-4000.

Going vertical Dept.  Intuit's latest editions of QuickBooks move the
market-leading small-business accounting solution onto the path of vertical
accounting software.  QuickBooks 4.0 takes a small-business user through a
step-by-step interview that customizes their books according to the industry
they're in and generates customized documentation for over 20 different
industries.  The software also offers customized fields, as well as different
methods of handling income.  Other new features include contact management,
to-do lists, mail merge, and the ability to print 1099, 940, and 941 forms.

This new QuickBooks line will be available in several iterations, in both
Windows ($99) and Macintosh ($119) versions on disk, and in a Windows version
on CD-ROM ($129).  QuickBooks Pro 4.0 for Windows ($189) and QuickBooks Pro
4.0 for Macintosh ($189) will add time tracking, estimating, and advanced job
costing features.

The company has also announced a fix to a bug in version 3.0.  When QuickBooks
3.0 was allowed to condense data, the average cost of inventory items could be
affected, causing inventory values and the cost of goods sold to be under- or
over-valued.  Intuit estimates that only a few users will be affected by this
error.  For more details, call (800) 238-4247.

In other Intuit news, the company is introducing a version of its retail
TurboTax and MacInTax programs designed with special business advice for
customers who need to prepare their own Schedule C.  The product will be
called TurboTax (or MacInTax) for Business/Sole Proprietorship.  For more
details, check out Intuit's new Web site at http://www.intuit.com/TurboTax or
you can just call them at (800) 934-1040.  Fresh fruit Dept.  The latest
version of Peachtree Accounting for Windows, Release 3.5, began shipping in
November.  It offers a multimedia setup feature with video and audio clips
that take small-business users through the process of automating their books.
The $129 program includes 75 business templates.

Other new features provide management tools such as an events log that alerts
you when quotes expire or invoices go uncollected.  Also new are a to-do list,
alert signals for when customers exceed credit limits and inventory items are
down, and additional customized reporting and drill-down capabilities.  To
learn more, phone (800) 247-3224, or connect to the Peachtree Web site at
http://www.peach.com.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Quicklooks:  MAXShare and Hijaak Graphics Suite


Problem:  you have a phone, fax machine, and modem, but you only have one
phone line.  Or you have several phones, modems, fax machines, and other
telecommunication devices, and more than one phone line, but still not enough
lines to go around.  Expensive solution:  add more phone lines and pay an
extra $250 or so per line every year to the phone company.  Another expensive
solution:  set up a network, including a complicated network modem
configuration.  Better solution:  make a one-time investment of about $349 in
MAXShare, a new state-of-the-art line-sharing device.

At approximately 6.5 by 9.5 by 1 inch, MAXShare doesn't take up a lot of desk
space.  However, it does allow you to share multiple telecom devices
automatically.  In fact, MAXShare permits up to eight devices to share up to
four lines.

MAXShare is easy-to-use hardware that works with your existing phone lines.
It uses an included 9-volt power transformer that plugs into any standard AC
electric outlet.  After you plug the transformer into the back of MAXShare and
your electrical outlet, simply connect MAXShare to a standard RJ-11 phone jack
and then connect your phone, fax, modem, or any other telecom device to one of
MAXShare's eight RJ-11 jack connectors.  The entire process takes only
seconds.  There are no switches to set, no software to install, and no network
required.  If you do need technical support, it's available toll free, from
Monday through Friday, from 9 to 5.

Automatic routing

MAXShare's operation is completely transparent.  It automatically routes
incoming calls to the assigned telecom devices.  In other words, MAXShare
sends calls that come in on phone line 1 to telecom device 1, calls that
arrive on phone line 2 to telecom device 2, and so on, up to the unit's
four-line maximum.

There are limitations, of course.  For starters, modems connected to telecom
device jacks 5 through 8 cannot receive incoming calls.  Perhaps more
important, if the telecom device associated with an incoming call is in use,
MAXShare does not route the call, and the caller hears a continuous ringing
signal (there is no charge to long-distance callers when this occurs).  This
may be inconvenient for your callers, and you certainly would not want your
primary client phone lines to behave this way.  However, you can minimize this
problem (for example, by using your modem after business hours).

MAXShare also prevents accidental interruption of phone lines in use and is
designed to eliminate conflicts.  For example, when a modem attempts to dial
out, the modem in essence takes its "handset" off-hook, "listens" for a dial
tone, then dials the number.  Enter MAXShare.  When it detects that your modem
has gone off-hook, it assigns it to any phone line that's available.  At this
point, the modem gets the dial tone that it's waiting for and makes the call.

But what if you try to access a modem when all outgoing MAXShare lines are in
use?  MAXShare will cause your modem to deliver a "No Dial Tone" message to
your communications software, which typically prompts you to try again later
when phone lines are available.  MAXShare will not interrupt the current
session in progress or cause irritating or costly disconnections.

Room to grow

MaxShare offers several advantages.  For starters, competitive line-sharing
devices, which may be less expensive than MAXShare, only work with a single
phone line.  MAXShare accommodates up to four phone lines, which gives you
room to grow.

In fact, if you're considering setting up a network to share phone lines and
telecom devices, you may want to consider MAXShare as a more affordable
alternative.  It makes adding extra phone lines easy and reduces the need for
more network modems.  MAXShare also connects to any modem; you can use it with
virtually all PC, Macintosh, and Unix workstations.

Currently, I have my telephone, fax/answering machine, and modem hooked up to
MAXShare, which is connected to a single outgoing telephone line.  MAXShare
works well for my SOHO (Small Office/Home Office) setup, and this versatile
device may be helpful for you too.

-Laurence K.  Zuckerman, CPA, MST


HiJaak Graphics Suite

Boldly go where no accountant has gone before.  Instead of just using a
spreadsheet program in your practice to graph data in financial statements and
other reports into bar and pie charts, and a presentation graphics program to
dazzle clients at meetings, and a desktop publishing program to produce
newsletters and related correspondence, you can use HiJaak Graphics Suite to
relieve the frustration of employing separate tools for heavy-duty graphics
chores.  It matches up programs and graphical data with compatible file
structures, sharpens your output, and lets you capture, modify, and enhance
images.  The $99 Suite provides an integrated set of utilities with
sophisticated graphics capabilities.

Each program in the Windows-based Suite performs different functions.  You can
use them separately for simple tasks, or collectively for multi-function jobs.
Browser, the desktop publishing program, manages files and organizes projects,
offering easy access to the other components.  Smuggler helps you search for
and import files from other applications in over 75 formats.  TouchUp turns
dull, fuzzy images into bright, crisp ones, and offers various enhancement
capabilities.  PRO is a screen capture feature that saves images in many
formats, and Draw lets you customize and modify images with 15 drawing tools.

Killing two birds with one stone

If you're comfortable using Windows, you can get started quickly, but
operating the program fully and efficiently takes some time and patience.  My
first encounter with the program was a few months ago while reviewing pension
software packages (Accounting Technology, August 1995).  HiJaak PRO produced
the screen shots that appeared in the story.  Being short on time and long on
pension packages, I ignored other features and ventured directly into
capturing the screen images.  Surprisingly, I was able to produce
professional-looking illustrations in short order, with a quick stop over in
Retouch and File Conversion.  E-mailing the images to the editors didn't
affect their quality or reduce the resolution size.  I later returned to the
program for a closer look and discovered the extensive nature of the other
programs within the Suite.

Available on eight 3.5-inch diskettes or one CD-ROM, HiJaak loads through the
Windows File Run command.  The CD-ROM version contains 3,000 additional clip
art images as a bonus.  Full installation requires 40MB of hard disk space,
but running the program from the CD requires only 1MB of disk space.

HiJaak furnishes you with a several-hundred-page User Guide that contains
screen pictures and diagrams for each application.  The Getting Started manual
includes an overview and installation instructions, along with a four-lesson
tutorial that shows you how to create a flier combining text and graphics from
various sources.

To organize the components in your project, begin with HiJaak Browser.  Here
you catalog, view, and search for files.  A file index tree similar to the
Windows File Manager appears on the left side of a split screen, allowing you
to collect various files that contain pertinent data for the job at hand.  On
the right, Browser displays "thumbnail" images of the files in the collection.
You can open, copy, print, or move these images.  When you're ready to work on
a thumbnail, you drag it to the appropriate icon to launch the HiJaak program
you need.

For example, you may have a thumbnail of a map you want to use for a project.
Just drag the thumbnail to the HiJaak PRO icon to launch that program.  With
the thumbnail now in PRO, you set the options for how you want the image
captured and where to store it.  PRO takes a "snapshot" and places it in a
file.  If the designated application requires the image to be in a different
format, PRO can convert it at your direction.  PRO can capture pictures in
both Windows and DOS environments.

To place the picture in your text file, first open HiJaak Smuggler.  Smuggler
stays running in the background until you're ready to use it.  In Browser's
file manager, locate the file containing your text; it will appear as a
thumbnail.  Clicking on the thumbnail launches the word processing app in
which the text was written.  Smuggler will have attached itself to the title
bar of the word processor, so you just click on the icon there.  After
indicating where you want the picture, as well as its size and resolution,
Smuggler places it there.

Touch up your images

If the image appears fuzzy or dark, you can filter it with HiJaak TouchUp.
TouchUp works with color, grayscale, or black and white images in a variety of
formats.  It produces an instantaneous display while you change various
factors, so you can experiment and adjust the image as you go.  A variety of
retouch tools are at your disposal, such as color, texture, brightness,
contrast, halftones, airbrush, pen, eraser, sharpening, softening, embossing,
sculpting, highlighting, sizing, positioning, and more.  Even though you may
need to consult the manual to learn each of these tools, you can intuitively
perform many tasks on your own by simply moving various gauges and trying the
tool icons.

With HiJaak Draw, you can create some of your own artwork to convey a
particular message in your project.  Draw contains a vast array of drawing
tools.  Whether you merely want to produce a geometric figure with some text
inside, or compose a new work of art, Draw will accommodate you.  The Draw
manual is over 350 pages long and offers ample features and intricacies to
serve both amateur and professional illustrators.

Draw lets you organize artwork into multiple layers and pages.  Twenty-three
drawing methods extend the versatility of its 15 drawing tools for creating
lines, boxes, circles, and other objects.  For example, it offers seven
methods for drawing a rectangle, such as corner-to-corner and
center-to-corner.

Your freehand drawing can be natural, or you can set tolerance limits that
smooth out irregularities in your lines and shapes.  You can also program your
text in many fonts and shapes, so they can flow straight or curve around
objects at your command.  Additional tools help you position, shape,
transform, and arrange these objects.  They can be painted with a choice of
several color models, each with seemingly endless colors and gradations.

Draw sets up and manages various clipart libraries, letting you easily import
and export images.  Numerous print options accommodate your specifications.
For instance, if the finished product exceeds your paper size, Draw can tile
the picture onto several sheets if you want a large image, or scale it down to
a single sheet.  And if you're sending artwork to a printing press, you can
produce the work in color-separated format.

How suite it is!

When you incorporate the five HiJaak modules into the HiJaak Graphics Suite,
the result is a comprehensive, integrated solution to your graphics needs.
You'll be impressed with all you can do graphically to enhance client
presentations and proposals with relatively little expertise, with the help of
this useful, time-saving software.  l

-Gerald Herter, CPA


MAXShare Price:  $459 MAXBase, Inc.  668 American Legion Dr.  P.O.  Box 2127
Teaneck, NJ 07666 (800) 631-1121

The Balance Sheet

Assets:  Effective telecommunication device; easy to set up; accommodates up
to four phone lines.

Liabilities:  Lines in use do not produce a busy signal-rather a continous
ring.


HiJaak Graphics Suite Price:  $99 Inset Systems Inc.  71 Commerce Dr.
Brookfield, CT 06804 (203) 740-2400

Requires:  IBM PC or compatible, 386 or better, 4MB RAM (8MB recommended),
Windows 3.1 or later, 40MB hard disk space for full installation or CD-ROM
plus 1MB disk space.

The Balance Sheet

Assets:  Powerful, comprehensive set of graphics utilities, functional in a
wide variety of formats.

Liabilities:  None significant.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Creative Uses of Life Insurance Abound


"One of the last great tax shelters," said Charles Ratner, a principal in
Ernst & Young's Cleveland office and the firm's national director of personal
insurance counseling, when describing life insurance.  He explained the reason
is that life insurance's cash value builds up tax-free and can be accessed
during the insured's lifetime through tax-free withdrawals and loans and there
is an income tax-free death benefit.

Whole or variable life insurance is usually favored because of the substantial
cash value that can be built up.  Also, second-to-die policies are
increasingly being used when the marital deduction can insulate the first
spouse's estate from estate tax.

Tax-Wise Moves.  If you don't want the policy proceeds to be included in an
insured estate, then you must make sure that the insured was never the policy
owner or the insured must have transferred ownership more then three years
before death.

A common way of making sure that the insured doesn't own the policy is through
the creation of an irrevocable life insurance trust (ILIT).  The insured
normally transfers cash annually to the ILIT to pay the premiums.  If
possible, the trust takes out the policy so the above three-year rule doesn't
come into play.  In order for the cash contributions to qualify for the gift
tax annual exclusion, the ILIT normally gives the trust beneficiaries a
Crummey withdrawal power.

In setting up an ILIT, a financial planner must be aware of whether a
generation skipping transfer (GST) tax can apply.  Because life insurance is a
leverage vehicle, the amount that can eventually be subject to the GST tax can
be quite substantial.  Accordingly, there is a strategy that can allocate part
of the GST $1 million exemption to amounts being transferred to the trust.

ILITs are also being used in conjunction with lifetime charitable transfers.
Bill Fleming, director of personal financial planning in the Hartford, Conn.
office of Coopers & Lybrand, noted that wealth transferred to charity is often
replaced by using the savings on income taxes from the charitable transfers to
purchase life insurance that is owned by a ILIT.  "This technique works
particularly well if the individual is in their 50s, rather than their 60s,"
added Fleming.

Split Dollar.  Many of the more creative uses of life insurance involve
split-dollar insurance being used as compensation.  A split-dollar arrangement
basically allows the insured to pay the lower term value of a policy while the
employer pays for the cash-value part of the much higher premium.  What
usually happens is that the company pays the entire premium and then reports
income to the insured.  The amount reportable as income is based on tables
(PS-58 for individual policies and PS-38 for survivorship policies) or the
term equivalents provided by the insurance company.  No deduction is allowed
for the employer.  The net result is that the insured owns the policy and owes
the company the amount that it paid as cash-value premiums.  Normally, at a
later date (or at the insured's death) the company is paid back.

A split-dollar arrangement can be used for an owner of the closely held
business or for a key employee.  The cash value is growing tax-free and,
usually on retirement, if desired, the insured can withdraw premiums and even
take a loan against the policy.  As long as the policy is not surrendered, the
insured is getting a tax-free stream of income.  (Note:  The same tax-free
stream is available with normal respect to whole or variable life.)  Upon
death, the payout will be reduced by the amounts owed on the policy.  Fleming
said that split-dollar insurance is particularly attractive to transfer to an
ILIT "because the value of the gift subject to the annual exclusion is the
lower PS-58, PS-38 or term premium value."

Tom McCaskill, president of McCaskill & Associate, a family business
consulting firm in Wichita, Kansas, widely uses a variable split-dollar
insurance policy as the funding mechanism to pass the business to younger
generations when a business owner is alive.  He pointed out that a variable
policy allows the business to fluctuate the insurance premiums to a prescribed
maximum and also allows the insured to make the investment decisions with
respect to the policy.

Split-dollar arrangements are also used by large shareholders of publicly
traded corporations so that there are sufficient funds to pay estate taxes,
according to James Hodge, chairman of The Eyrie Group based in Danville,
California, a consulting company to first-generation business owners.  Hodge
makes an important point about all split-dollar arrangements that you want to
eventually rollout the company (end its premium payments).  He said that as
the insured gets older, the imputed income that the insured will have
increases if the company is paying the entire premium.

Life insurance is also widely used in cross-purchase agreements.  That is when
owners of closely held business purchase individual policies on each of the
other co-owners.  The problem is if there are five business owners, then each
owner has to buy four policies.  According to Fleming, many business owners
now use an escrow or partnership arrangement whereby only five (rather than
20) policies are purchased and the surviving owners each receive a portion of
the insurance proceeds, which are used to purchase the deceased business
owner's stock.

Bigger Hazards.  Although the benefits of life insurance are substantial, the
risks are also substantial from a tax standpoint.  McCaskill says there are
numerous pitfalls along the way that can trip up the plan.  One is that you
can overfund the premiums so that the IRS will say it is not an insurance
policy building up tax-free.  Also, there will be problems if the insurance
company imposes a penalty for a partial surrender or if a surrender is
considered by the IRS to be a complete surrender of the policy with a huge
income tax liability being imposed.

McCaskill said that a common problem he sees with split-dollar is that the
company and individual don't follow through and make a formal split-dollar
arrangement.

Ratner warned that you must particularly watch out for inflated expectations
about the rate of return of investments in variable life policies.  He added
that the amount of premium selected should be able to sustain the death
benefit even against poor performance of the investment.  He summed up his
concerns this way, "You don't want to make today's solution tomorrow's
problem."

HOWARD W.  WOLOSKY, J.D., LL.  M., is executive editor of The Practical
Accountant.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-22</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B021-6</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi115.html 205.156.212.5 19970115003054 text/html 201154
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:27:08 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:57 GMT
Content-length: 200964
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi115.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>PEOPLE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1756 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>BRIEFS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(652 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Thomson adds SCS/Compute to Menzies' growing stable</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(469 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>FORECAST &REVIEW:  By the numbers:  The top 10 news events of 1995</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1185 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Letters</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2431 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>TECHNOLOGY:  TECH BRIEFS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(547 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>CONSULTING INSIGHTS:  Microsoft dominance leads tech trends for '96</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(979 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>FASB rules on nonprofits' investments</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(177 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>Pentagon battles $20 billion in bad accounting</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(627 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>5 New Standards Highlight FASB's 1995 Accomplishments</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(956 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>NEW PRODUCTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1215 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>FASB faces 2 departures, rushes to finish projects</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(828 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><A HREF = "#13"><LI>PRACTICE MANAGEMENT FORUM:  For better recruits, target professors, survey&nbsp;says</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1172 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>HOT TIPS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(575 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>CompuServe campaign colors Block 2Q results</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(262 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>TAXING ISSUES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(536 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>J.D.  Edwards looks to find resellers for Genesis line</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(396 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>With more low-end releases, vendors eye reseller programs</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1063 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>ACTION IDEA:  How to have a successful seminar</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(150 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>Budget worries kill workload relief bill</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(560 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>Congress passes tort reform bill with veto override</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(703 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>TAX PRACTICE:  Former Navy CPO sails into friendly tax prep waters</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1881 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>Study finds employers liable for $95B error on non-exempt employees</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(360 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>AICPA, AT&T cite businesses</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(99 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>Expect the unexpected:  Trends to watch</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1173 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>Quotables, 1995</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(440 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>THE BEST OF FOOTNOTES 1995</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(617 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>Rogue AAA 'Club' demands change</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(293 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>Get real, AICPA tells flat taxers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(963 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>Geo.  S.  Olive acquires local health care consulting firm</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(829 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>IRS tells how workers can declare 'independence'</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(516 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>Audit & Accounting:  Change Of Auditors</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2566 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>SOFTWARE REVIEW:  Budgetary moves add steam to fund accounting</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3056 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#34"><LI>COMING EVENTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(593 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

PEOPLE


ARIZONA

Dave Stocking, partner-in-charge of Eide Helmeke's Phoenix office, has been
elected chairman of the firm's management committee.  The management committee
functions as the firm's board of directors and sets firms policy.

CALIFORNIA

Greg Garrison has been appointed chairman of Price Waterhouse's entertainment,
media and communications group and managing partner of the firm's Southern
California practice based in Los Angeles.  Garrison has been with the firm for
19 years, previously serving as manager of the products industry practice in
St.  Louis.  Chuck Bauer, former chairman of the firm's EMC practice, has been
named co-chairman of the firm's products division.  ...  Susan K.  Screen has
been named shareholder of Stonefield Josephson in San Francisco.  Screen
provides litigation support services and income tax and financial planning
advice.  ...  Robert E.  Wacker, of R.E.  Wacker Associates in San Luis
Obispo, has been elected to serve on the board of governors of the Certified
Finanical Planner Board of Standards.  Wacker has been a CFP licensee since
1988.

CONNECTICUT

Mark A.  Semmelrock has joined Cole, Frago, Cusick, Chestler & Co.  in
Wethersfield as manager of computer systems and consulting, as a result of the
firm's merger with MAS Associates.  Sarah Murach has joined the firm as
supervisor of computer systems and consulting, and Dawn Pfeffer has joined as
a staff accountant.

DELAWARE

Carl Turner has been named to the board of directors of Wilmington-based
Siegfried Schieffer & Seitz.  Turner will serve as adviser to firm president
Robert L.  Siegfried Jr.  Turner formerly served as vice president in charge
of General Electric's semiconductor business, advanced technology and computer
systems.

GEORGIA

Clarence E.  David III has been named a shareholder of Atlanta-based Habif,
Arogeti & Wynne.  David performs financial statement examinations and tax
compliance and planning.  He joined the firm in 1987.  ...  Donna G.  Barwick,
partner with the law firm Lefkoff, Duncan, Miller, Grimes, Miller & Barwick of
Atlanta, has been elected chair of the Certified Financial Planner Board of
Standards board of governors for a two-year term.

ILLINOIS

Nora Gile has been admitted as manager of the tax department of Nykiel Carlin
& Co.  in Schaumburg.  Gile formerly served as supervisor of the tax
department of Skokie-based Michael Silver & Co.  ...  Chicago-based
Brook+Weiner+Sered+

Kreger+Weinberg has elected Gordon Johnson to member of the firm.  Johnson has
been with the firm for the past 15 years and was promoted to manager in 1988.
Sheldon Weiner and Robert J.  Krawitz, both members of the firm, have
successfully completed the examination to become certified business valuation
analysts.

KENTUCKY

John A.  Switzer has been named managing partner in the Louisville office of
KPMG Peat Marwick.  Switzer had previously served as managing partner of the
firm's Lexington office.

MASSACHUSETTS

Vitale, Caturano and Co.  in Boston has made new additions to its staff.
Gordon Earle has been appointed director of the firm's technology consulting
group, Deborah Cafarella has been named network specialist and Steven Brown
has been admitted as groupware engineer.  ...  David J.  Underwood has joined
Jones, Camp & Associates in Worcester as a supervisor.  He formerly worked
with O'Brien & O'Brien.  Peggy A.  Thieriot has been admitted as a staff
accountant.  Richard G.  Howarth Jr.  has been promoted from an experienced
accountant to a senior accountant.  Joseph P.  Furnari has passed the CPA exam
and has been promoted to in-charge accountant.  Cassandra A.  Camp, partner of
the firm, has been re-appointed as the New England representative to the
technical issues committee of the Private Companies Practice Section of the
American Institute of CPAs.

MARYLAND

Walpert, Smullian & Blumenthal in Baltimore has elected David S.  Leibowitz
and Deborah O.  Schultz principals of the firm.  Leibowitz works primarily
with retail automobile clients.  Schultz specializes in profit improvement and
financial consulting for privately owned wholesale distributors and
manufacturers.  Linda K.  Diehl has joined the firm's legal services
consulting group.  Prior to joining WS&B, Diehl worked for eight years as a
consultant for Altman Weil Pensa in Newtown Square, Pa.  ...  Warfield,
Garrett & Associates in Baltimore has been accepted for membership to
CPAConnect, a network of CPA firms.

MICHIGAN

Fremont-based Gerbers Products Co.  has appointed Stan VanderRoest corporate
controller.  Prior to joining Gerber in 1989, VanderRoest worked for Coopers &
Lybrand.

MINNESOTA

The St.  Paul office of McGladrey & Pullen has promoted James M.  Parks and
Rick D.  Rodenbeck to partners.  Parks provides consulting services in the
areas of employee benefits and qualified retirement plans for the firm's
business clients.  He has developed and leads the upper Midwest region
retirement plan administrative and consulting group.  Rodenbeck specializes in
providing tax planning and consulting services to clients in the financial
services industry.  With his promotion, he assumes the role of regional
coordinator of tax services for financial institutions.  In the Minneapolis
office, Peter Rasmussen has been promoted to partner and Alan W.  Lusk has
been promoted to senior manager and information technology group practice
leader.  Rasmussen provides assistance in business financing and operational
issues for the firm's clients.  Todd Anderson has been promoted to senior
manager in the Bloomington office.

MISSOURI

Michael C.  Abfall has been promoted to manager and Stephanie D.  Czeschin has
been promoted to senior in the controllership services department of St.
Louis-based Grace & Co.

NEW YORK

Philip R.  Rotner has been named general counsel of Deloitte & Touche upon the
retirement of Howard J.  Krongard.  Rotner, who is based in the New York
office, previously served as a partner in the San Francisco law firm
McCutchen, Doyle, Brown & Enersen.  ...  Goldstein Golub Kessler & Co.  in New
York has admitted Eric S.  Holzberg, Christopher S.  Reed, Jill Zelenko and
Stuart B.  Zlotolow partners.  Charles J.  Riess has been admitted as
principal.  Riess is responsible for the management and development of the
business services and solutions group.  Debra J.  Feiger, a senior staff
member in the tax department and personal finance group, has been designated a
certified financial planner by the Certified Financial Planner Board.  ...
Russell T.  Glazer has joined Hauppauge-based Peare & Heller as a shareholder
after merging his practice, formerly part of Kutzin & Glazer in Mellville,
with P&H.  ...  Erick L.  Avni joined Valley Stream-based Biscotti, Toback &
Co.  as a junior accountant.  ...  Craig Morris & Co.  in Syosset has admitted
Roberta Bos Hill to assume responsibilities for the firm's audit services.
Hill worked in the New York and Melville offices of Touche Ross and Co.  from
1975 to 1979.  ...  Frank W.  Sluter has been named partner of Satty, Hollis &
Ciacco in Roslyn.  He has been with the firm for the past 10 years and
specializes in working with nonprofit clients.  ...  Senior tax partner Alan
E.  Weiner of Melville-based Holtz Rubenstein & Co.  has been admitted to
represent clients before the U.S.  Supreme Court.  ...  Lisa Haynie, an
accountant with Marcum & Kliegman in Syosset, has been elected president of
the Long Island Chapter of the American Society of Women Accountants.

NORTH DAKOTA

Gary Ness, tax partner of Eide Helmeke's Fargo office, has been elected vice
chairman of the firm's management committee.  Ness joined the firm in 1978,
becoming partner in 1984.  Jim Thompson is a newly elected member of the
management committee.  He has served as partner-in-charge of the Minot office
since 1987.

OHIO

Michael P.  Bohan has been appointed managing director of professional and
technical services by the Institute of Management Accountants.  Bohan
previously served as corporate controller of BP America Inc.  in Cleveland.
He also worked as an audit partner at Deloitte & Touche in New York, serving
as director of accounting standards.  ...  Saltz, Shamis & Goldfarb has
several new hires.  Mary M.  Kulak, formerly with Hausser & Taylor for more
than seven years, has been named firm administrator in the Cleveland office.
Bruce E.  Manes has been admitted as a senior associate of the tax department
and Maria V.  Martino is an administrative assistant in the employee benefits
department.  Both are in the Akron office.  ...  Tom Bialota has joined
Hausser + Taylor's Canton office as a tax supervisor.  Prior to this position,
Bialota spent more than 30 years with the Internal Revenue Service, holding a
variety of positions including tax auditor, internal revenue agent, computer
audit specialist and group manager.  ...  James T.  Martin, former president
and CEO of Meaden & Moore in Cleveland, has been elected vice chairman of the
Accountancy Board of Ohio.  Martin was appointed to the board two years ago by
Gov.  George V.  Voinovich.

SOUTH CAROLINA

Irvine T.  Welling, managing partner of Elliott Davis & Co.  of Greenville,
has been elected chairman-elect of Moore Stephens North America.  He succeeds
Stephen B.  Humphries.

SOUTH DAKOTA

Bob Wiedeman has been re-elected to the management committee of Eide Helmeke.
He serves as partner-in-charge of the Sioux Falls office.  Wiedeman has been
with the firm since 1979 and was admitted to the partnership in 1981.

WISCONSIN

Wipfli Ullrich Bertelson has hired Greg Freeman as director of tax services in
the Appleton office.  Freeman has more than 11 years' experience in the
individual and corporate tax service area.



CFP board elects new members

DENVER - The Certified Financial Planner Board of Standards has elected new
members to sit on the 1996 Boards of Ethics and Professional Review, Examiners
and Practice Standards.

In other news, Loyola University in Chicago has been registered with the
Certified Financial Planner Board of Standards.  Students completing the
university's financial planning program will be eligible to sit for the
national CFP exam.

Appointed to the Board of Ethics and Professional Review are Lewis M.
Wallensky of Lewis Wallensky Associates Inc., of Los Angeles; L.  Martin
Miller, managing partner of Cogen Sklar of Bala Cynwyd, Pa.; and Katherine
Vessenes, president of Vestment Consultant Inc., of Bloomington, Minn.

Mark J.  Smith, president of M.J.  Smith & Associates, Aurora, Colo., has been
appointed to serve on the 1996 CFP Board of Examiners.

James L.  Budros, principal of Budros & Ruhlin Inc., of Columbus, Ohio,
Herbert K.  Daroff, senior partner of Capital Analysts of New England in
Quincy, Mass., and Patricia P.  Houlihan, partner of Cavill and Co.  in
Oakton, Va., have been selected to serve on the CFP Board of Practice
Standards.

The CFP Board is a nonprofit professional regulatory organization founded to
enforce education, experience and ethics requirements for CFP licensees.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

BRIEFS


IIA rips internal audit outsourcing

ORLANDO, FLA.  - Terming the move by CPA firms into internal auditing "a
threat to the objectivity and independence of the audit process," the
Institute of Internal Auditors is calling on federal regulators to impose new
mandates on outsourced internal audits.

Companies should be forced to disclose the practice in their annual reports,
said IIA president William G.  Bishop in a letter to Securities and Exchange
Commission chief accountant Michael Sutton.

"If a public accounting firm performs all the internal auditing activities on
an outsourced basis, it becomes, at the very least, an indirect advocate of
management's assertion" over its internal control structure, said Bishop.

"An organization's external auditor cannot assume significant responsibilities
for performing internal auditing and, at the same time, retain its
independence in both fact and appearance," the IIA said in a new position
paper.


Coopers fees up 7% to $1.9 billion

NEW YORK - Coopers & Lybrand said its United States revenue for the year ended
in September gained 7 percent from 1994, to $1.905 billion.  Overall
consulting revenue gained 15 percent, led by a 45 percent growth in fees from
information and communications industry clients.  Business assurance services
gained 5 percent and the tax practice expanded 12 percent.  Worldwide, the
firm reported a 13 percent sales advance, to $6.2 billion.

U.S.  fee growth was led by a 30 percent gain in the firm's pharmaceuticals
and chemicals sector, 29 percent in media and entertainment, 20 percent each
in insurance and health care, and 15 percent in high tech.  The firm's human
resources advisory line grew 16 percent, to become one of the top five such
consulting practices in the nation, Coopers said.


Moss Adams acquires Kimball Dixon

SEATTLE - Regional firm Moss Adams has acquired local Medford, Wash., firm
Kimball, Dixon & Co., bolstering its West Coast presence.

The $59 million Moss Adams now has 17 offices from Canada to Mexico, with a
concentration in Oregon, said managing partner Bob Bunting.  "We're filling in
that I-5 corridor, growing geographically," he said.  "We've done very well
positioning ourselves as a dominant firm in small markets."

The six partners and 16 employees of the $2 million Kimball Dixon join Moss
Adams, said managing partner Ron Dixon, who initiated the merger talks two
years ago.


CLR buys PW tax software

CARROLLTON, TEXAS - Computer Language Research took another step to make
itself the dominant player in corporate taxation with the purchase of Price
Waterhouse's tax software line.

CLR acquired Price's TMS software for about $15 million.  The price includes
$11 million for the software and the remainder for accrued support liability.
CLR is also planning to hire from 125 to 135 Price employees.  By comparison,
CLR had 947 employees when it issued its annual report earlier this year.

Price Waterhouse has 1,200 TMS users, according to Price spokesperson Jan
Butler.  But that number includes licenses, which several individuals could
have access to at a particular site.  Butler declined to discuss TMS revenue.

Price also agreed that CLR's GoSystem 2 will be its exclusive in-house
preparation line.  CLR has a similar arrangement with KPMG Peat Marwick.  As
part of the extended transition, Price will dedicate the services of three
partners involved in TMS for the next four or five years.


Corrections

"Homes boggle flat tax planners," (Dec.  11-31, 1995) incorrectly said
taxpayers annually deduct mortgage interest worth $58 million, charitable
contributions of $17 million, state and local taxes of $26 million, and real
estate taxes of $14 million.  In fact, the figures should have been rendered
in billions, not millions.

"Automatic Software puts Big Business on market," Tech Briefs, (Nov.  20-Dec.
10, 1995) reported incorrectly the company's location and phone number.
Automatic Software is based in Los Altos, Calif., (415) 919-2000.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Thomson adds SCS/Compute to Menzies' growing stable


by Robert W.  Scott


ST.  LOUIS - Looking for resources to compete more effectively in a
consolidating market, SCS/Compute will be acquired by giant Thomson Corp.  in
a deal valued at just over $30 million.

The acquisition is the latest in a number of notable deals announced in recent
weeks that signal increasing consolidation.  Others include the purchase of
CCH Inc.  by Dutch publishing giant Wolters Kluwer and Computer Language
Research's purchase of the TMS corporate tax business from Price Waterhouse.

SCS/Compute's own financial position in an increasingly competitive market was
clearly a factor in its decision.  "We've been strapped for resources," said
Robert Nolan, SCS/Compute's founder, chairman, president and chief executive
officer.

Nolan, who plans to remain president and chief executive, said all software
companies were facing strains from high- fixed costs.  "I think that is going
to be exacerbated by Windows development," said Nolan.

Thomson is assigning SCS/Compute to the Research Institute of America Group,
which includes Warren Gorham & Lamont and Practitioners Publishing Co., and is
headed by president Euan Menzies.  Thomson also owns Accounting Today through
a separate subsidiary.

RIA is getting an opportunity to develop a broad line of tax and accounting
products.  SCS/Compute has two tax software packages, LMS/Tax and Tax Machine;
a write-up package, Datawrite; and a growing number of client software titles.

Nolan agreed to sell his 1.1 million shares to Thomson U.S.  Holdings, a
division of Thomson Corp.  of Toronto.  Thomson has launched a tender offer
for another 1.5 million shares outstanding - all at a price of $6.75 a share,
up from recent trading at $2.375.

The deal will cost Thomson more than just the stock price of $17.5 million.
It must also redeem preferred stock and long-term debt owed to SCS/Compute's
major lender.

While growth in the tax preparation market has clearly reached a plateau,
Menzies said he sees opportunity.  "We are confident we can take market share
away from other companies," he said.

But RIA is not getting a market leader in SCS/Compute.

Industry sources rank SCS/Compute at about seventh place in terms of overall
market share.

But Nolan cited Thomson's deep pockets as an important aspect of the deal.
Harvey Stein, executive vice president of Pencil Pushers Software of
Burlington, Mass., agreed, saying "it gives them a base to acquire other
companies."

During the last year, SCS/Compute had made three acquisitions, to mixed
reviews.  SCS/Compute picked up, for example, In-the-Black software, a low-end
package it was forced to rewrite.  In the last quarter, SCS/Compute acquired
SaltWare, a sales tax line, for

$130,000 and stock now worth $54,000.  SCS/Compute also agreed in the last
quarter to buy RAM Software, a tax preparation line with 400 users, for about
$500,000.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

FORECAST &REVIEW:  By the numbers:  The top 10 news events of 1995


Death and taxes.  The two constants made plenty of appearances in 1995's
accounting news.

Death claimed an independent Kenneth Leventhal and a logical way to account
for stock options.  Taxes - and what needs to be changed about them - were
discussed everywhere from executives' roundtables to kitchen tables.
Sometimes death and taxes came together, as in the cancellation of last year's
taxpayer compliance measurement program.

But all wasn't gloomy.  Experiments, such as KPMG Peat Marwick's Baymark, and
expansion, such as American Express Tax and Business Services' (dreaded, to
some) growth, breathed fresh air into this year's news.

Through it all, the American Institute of CPAs is undergoing a transformation
that should help members cope with all the issues raised by Accounting Today's
Top 10 stories of 1995.

1.  "Melancon rattles top ranks of AICPA":  When Barry Melancon replaced
long-time AICPA president Philip B.  Chenok July 1, he pledged to reduce
bloat, break down bureaucratic fiefdoms and modernize the institute's
operations.  But he surprised even his closest supporters in October when he
began a massive restructuring with a shake-up of top management ranks.  He
trimmed the number of executive staff positions and directors.  Additional
layoffs of from 5 to 10 percent were expected late last year.  The changes
were made, Melancon said, to focus on an area he targeted as important since
his nomination - delivering products and services members want.  The new and
improved AICPA also launched an advertising campaign aimed at making chief
executives and other decision makers in large companies think of CPAs as
business advisers.  An Accounting Today survey found that not only do CPAs
support advertising that would enhance their image, they would be willing to
spend more than the $3 million the AICPA budgeted for the program.  2.
"Overhaul or not, big changes loom":  If you can't guess what this headline
referred to, you were on a year's vacation.  Yes, alternative income tax
systems - especially the flat tax - were debated ad nauseam in 1995.  In
addition to a flat tax bill proposed by Rep.  Dick Armey, R-Texas, an
Unlimited Savings Allowance plan was proposed by Sens.  Sam Nunn, D-Ga., and
Pete V.  Domenici, R-N.M.  Others in Congress called for a national sales tax.
Whatever the philosophy, the message is clear:  The tax system must be
reformed.  And the experts say we're as close as we've ever been to a change
in the current income tax system.  Look for the issue to figure in this year's
presidential campaign.  3.  "Texas board sues American Express":  The Texas
State Board of Public Accountancy joined Florida in its crusade to stop
American Express Tax and Business Services Inc., formerly known as IDS
Financial Services Inc.  The board wants a Texas state court to forbid
American Express from signing its name to any financial statement that implies
that it is an accountant.  The statements also may not contain any wording
indicating it has expert knowledge in accounting unless it complies with the
Public Accountancy Act.  Under the act, the only business entity that can do a
compilation is a CPA firm.  American Express claims that the case is "all
about competition."  4.  "Tort reform leaps hurdle in Congress":  The
accounting profession - and the AICPA - were poised to win the battle for
litigation reform.  The bill would have reduced the financial liability of
accountants for fraud by their corporate clients and limited investors'
ability to collect damages from accountants and others with deep pockets.
Unfortunately, President Clinton vetoed the bill late last month.  5.  "Few
mourn as IRS kills TCMP audits":  A collective sigh of relief could be heard
from tax practitioners across the country in late October, when the Internal
Revenue Service announced it was going to indefinitely delay last year's round
of taxpayer compliance measurement program audits.  The IRS had planned to
select 153,000 tax returns and subject their owners to rigorous checkups, but
backed out after Congress refused to fund its entire $8.2 billion proposed
budget.  The IRS conducts the TCMP audits to gauge both the level of voluntary
compliance and the best methods for selecting tax returns for future audits.
The AICPA had been troubled by the IRS' plan to subject all individual TCMP
victims to a "financial status" test or "economic reality" check.  During a
financial status audit, taxpayers are quizzed to find unreported income.  The
so-called "economic reality" checks also caused headaches as practitioners saw
clients answering IRS inquiries about cash on hand at home, in a safe deposit
box or "hidden somewhere."  6.  "'Filing season from hell':  House panel rakes
IRS chief over coals":  The tax world was abuzz and aghast last tax season as
measures used by the IRS to detect fraud were holding up refunds and trying
taxpayer's patience from coast to coast.  Taxpayers claiming the earned income
tax credit didn't receive their cash credit until the IRS double-checked
taxpayers' and dependents' Social Security numbers.  Former H&R Block
president Harry Buckley called last year "without a doubt the most difficult
tax season" when it came to customer dissatisfaction.  Buckley blamed the
complaints on the "IRS' inability to effectively communicate the procedural
changes."  Taxpayers who paid extra to have their returns electronically filed
were especially aggravated at having to wait for their refunds.  7.  "Politics
kills FASB stock options plan":  After more than a decade of study and more
than two years of increasingly acrimonious opposition, the Financial
Accounting Standards Board dropped its plan to force companies to charge
executive stock options against earnings.  The FASB backed down only after it
became clear that pursuing its plan could prompt the Republican-controlled
Congress to seize accounting rule-making from accountants and place it under
government authority.  Constituencies in industry, especially high-tech
interests, claimed the change would have devastated "the fastest growing
segment of the economy.  In the end, the FASB voted to seek only footnote
disclosure."  8.  "Leventhal deal firms up Ernst's real estate muscle":  In a
deal that joined two real estate giants, Ernst & Young acquired Kenneth
Leventhal & Co.  Los Angeles-based Leventhal's operations, once the 11th
largest U.S.  accounting firm, are run as a business unit within Ernst &
Young.  Leventhal's departure left only three second-tier firms:  Grant
Thornton, McGladrey & Pullen and BDO Seidman.  9.  "With $1.9B sale, CCH gains
Dutch uncle":  CCH Inc., the nation's largest tax publisher, was acquired for
$1.9 billion by Netherlands-based Wolters Kluwer NV, a European giant, in a
transaction announced late last year.  The deal ended the 103-year reign of
the Thorne family over a business that now generates $600 million in revenue.
10.  "Peat makes grab for Wall St.  fees with franchise deal":  KPMG Peat
Marwick blazed a financial services trail when it launched an investment
banking unit, called KPMG Baymark, with a group of veteran Wall Street
investment bankers.  The unit is providing private placement debt and equity
financing to Peat's middle-market corporate finance clients.  While Peat
dreamed of the millions of dollars in fees Baymark could generate, some CPAs
questioned whether the firm could maintain its independence with clients who
have signed on to Baymark.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Letters


Ethics dilemma has two sides

This is in response to your story ("FBI douses report it wants CPAs to squeal
on clients," Aug.  21-Sept.  10) which refers to a USA Today article,
"Accountants should turn in crooked clients."

From these articles it is assumed that all three entities involved in this
dispute believe that CPAs have few ethical standards.  Your article also
suggests that CPAs are not turning in clients unless the behavior is "so
egregious" that in order for the CPA to avoid being tainted by it, he or she
contact the authorities.

According to the American Institute of CPAs Standards Rule 102 ammended May
20, 1991, "a member ...  shall not knowingly misrepresent facts or subordinate
his or her judgment on others."  Yet, they are following standards by not
informing the Federal Bureau of Investigation about clients because a member
cannot "disclose any confidential client information without the consent of
the client."  CPAs also fear the consequences of whistleblowing, such as
losing the confidence of their clients or, worse, getting fired by the firm.

One of the questions not answered in your article is, what reward is the FBI
willing to offer to CPAs if they do turn in their clients?  If CPAs are
greatly involved in a crime, they would also be prosecuted.  If prosecuted,
these CPAs would be terminated as members of the AICPA.  Arguments from both
sides should be presented in the same article.

Every time CPAs take on new clients, they should use their integrity to decide
whether to get involved with "dirty clients."  CPAs are obliged to protect
their clients, yet they cannot knowingly misrepresent facts.  If they
understand and remain objective, they should be able to control the problem.

Perhaps this issue could be resolved within the AICPA rather than by
outsiders, such as the Securities and Exchange Commission.  However, as
ethical and professional behavior will always be, this issue will remain
debatable.

Amy R.  Barrie Moscow, Idaho



Your report on Linda Pappajohn's recent speech at the AICPA Practice
Management Conference ("Clarity, ranges keys to compensation policies," Nov.
6-19, 1995) included some solid advice on salary issues and compensation
policies.  However, I want to share my surprise at the sample salary ranges in
the article, specifically for marketing directors, which range from a low of
$21,317 to a high of $28,778.

A quick call to Linda informed me that the salary ranges in the chart were
provided to her by the Minn-Dak chapter of the Association for Accounting
Administration.  During our conversation, Linda thought that the low ranges
may reflect the salaries of secretaries with little background in marketing
who have been promoted.

I don't know of a seasoned marketing director who will work within those
salary ranges.  In fact, according to a Gallop & Robinson poll, the average
annual salary for marketing directors in all industries is $80,478.  A loose
rule of thumb among marketing directors in various industries:  You should be
paid 1 percent of a company's gross.

Marketing directors in accounting firms often take on two other roles:
director of public relations - average annual salary $55,500, according to the
Public Relations Society of America - and director of advertising - average
annual salary $61,611, according to Gallop.  Even studies within our own
accounting industry, specifically the Pencor Report, publish that 17 percent
of full-time marketing professionals earn between $50,000 and $75,000
annually.

If there is any validity to the Minn-Dak ranges, it's no wonder that Lee
Berton of The Wall Street Journal reported recently that midsized firms are
having problems competing with the Big Six.  (Incidentally, Boulay, Heutmaker,
Zibell & Co.  is noted in Berton's article as a firm that is prospering by
fighting the Big Six on our own turf with advertising, promotional videos and
client satisfaction programs.)

Regardless of statistics, the truth is accounting firms need marketing
directors who will work as partners with firm management, challenging them to
increase business, market share, opportunities and awareness with marketing
programs and strategic plans.  And believe me, no marketing director of that
caliber will consider working for the salary ranges listed in the Minn-Dak
chart.

If accounting firms are settling for marketing directors with little, if any
experience, and basically leading them by the nose, they will get what they
pay for - small results within their comfort zone.  My advice to accounting
firms, especially since they usually hire one marketing professional and not a
whole department, is to hire the best you can afford.  In this age of fierce
competition, it's breakthrough marketing led by seasoned marketing pros that
will set apart the winners from the losers.

Lyne P.  Manescalchi, director of marketing, Boulay, Heutmaker, Zibell & Co.
Minneapolis


Boards must address unfair competition

The letter to the editor by Bernard Kiely, of New Jersey, ("State boards need
more power," Oct.  9-22) misses the major issue- the unfair competition that
purchasers such as American Express Business Services inherently have.

They are only buying accounting write-up and tax practices to ultimately sell
financial products to their clients.  That is why they can charge far less
than a CPA, who is prohibited by most state boards from doing the same thing.

The Federal Trade Commission was thinking along the same lines when it ruled a
few years ago that CPAs could sell financial products, with full disclosure,
to clients for whom they don't provide audit or review services.

Most state boards are like ostriches with their heads in the sand, living in
the regulated past, and will only be forced to go along with the FTC when
litigated to do so.

This is an issue that affects all CPAs, large and small.

Kevin A.  Lawrence, CPA Los Angeles



Mesonic thanks you for mentioning our Windows 95 Financial Accounting Software
in Tech Briefs ("Mesonic offers Windows 95 accounting," Sept.  11-24).  This
was the first mention in your publication of an accounting software vendor
shipping a Windows 95 accounting software package.

You can imagine our suprise when the next issue of Accounting Today reported
that another vendor claimed to have the first approved Windows 95 accounting
software ("SourceMate claims win with first Windows 95 accounting," Oct.
9-22).  Mesonic would like to challenge this claim.  Mesonic's Windows 95
version has been available since the beta days of Windows 95.

A stringent testing procedure must be successfully completed and verified
prior to a product being awarded the use of the "Designed for Windows 95"
logo.  This testing establishes whether or not a program is eligible to be
submitted to Microsoft for the Windows 95 logo.  Mesonic's software package
WINLine 95 passed this test Sept.  13, 1995.  Furthermore, this same article
states that, "SourceMate is field testing its Visual AccountMate with several
accounts ...  The product is scheduled to have several modules shipping in
November."

WINLine 95 is currently shipping 20 modules, several of which are available
without any wait.  Because WINLine 95 was derived from our NT version, which
has been on the market since 1993, your readers can be assured of a reliable
program and not a first-level release.

WINLine 95 accounting software by Mesonic is truly the "first Windows 95
accounting system" to both pass testing and to be available on the market.

Jeffrey Green, director of reseller support, Mesonic Oakdale, Pa.


AmEx KOs Fla.  board in CPA title bout

by Sandy Hock


TALLAHASSEE, FLA.  -- In a decision that's expected to sweep the country, a
federal judge ruled that an American Express Tax and Business Services Inc.
manager could call himself a CPA even though he works for a non-CPA-owned
company.

In doing so, Chief Judge Maurice M.  Paul of the U.S.  District Court for the
Northern District of Florida struck down Florida statutes that prohibit a CPA
employed by a nonlicensed accounting firm and performing only non-attest
business services from telling clients that he or she is a CPA.

"This decision will affect most states," said Sarah McKenzie, national
director of firm development and government affairs for Minneapolis-based
American Express Tax and Business Services.  "That's why we brought it to
federal court.  It was a constitutional issue."

In the wake of the decision, American Express was reportedly readying a
massive new expansion program.  The company finished fiscal 1995 in June with
$40 million in fees from about 341 professionals in 55 offices.  High-ranking
AmEx strategists were said to be formulating a plan to reach $200 million in
revenue by the end of the decade.

Chief Judge Paul ruled that the Florida regulation infringed on CPA Stephen
Miller's freedom of speech.

Miller, senior managing director of American Express' Tampa office and lead
plaintiff in the case, expressed relief that his 18-month court battle was
over.

"It's been a real tough year," Miller said after the judgment was handed down
last month.  "Everyone asks if I'm a CPA and I have to give them a lot of
explanation about the legalities of what I can tell them.  It puts a lot of
caution in their minds."

The Florida Board of Accountancy will vote on whether to appeal the decision
to the U.S.  Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit in Atlanta at its meeting
this week, said John J.  Rimes III, a Florida assistant attorney general.

"Obviously, the state isn't happy," Rimes said about the Miller case.  "We're
disappointed in the outcome."

Even with the Florida ruling, CPAs working for non-CPA firms should be careful
about how they refer to themselves, Rimes warned.  The U.S.  Court of Appeals
for the Ninth Circuit in California ruled in September that the California
State Board of Accountancy could discipline a CPA affiliated with H.D.  Vest
investment securities for advertising his CPA credentials while also accepting
commissions.  Similar litigation also is pending in Texas and Louisiana, while
a preliminary investigation is underway in Arizona, Rimes said.

"It means there's some confusion out there," Rimes noted.  "There's no
question about that."

If the board doesn't appeal the decision, it could impose a disclaimer for
CPAs who work for firms that aren't regulated by the state, Rimes said.

If the Miller decision holds, it marks the third time in three years that the
Florida board lost a major case.  In June 1994, the U.S.  Supreme Court struck
down a Florida regulation forbidding attorney-CPAs from advertising their CPA
and certified financial planner credentials.  In 1993, the highest court
abolished the board's rule that forbade CPAs from such solicitation activities
as cold calling.

While conceding that fighting such issues as solicitation was an outdated
position, Florida Institute of CPAs executive director Lloyd "Buddy" Turman
insisted that CPAs are dead set in favor of the fight against American Express
on the Miller matter.

And the FICPA maintains that the issue involved is not simply allowing a CPA
to call himself one.  It goes deeper- to the very structure of firms - and the
profession.

"What you end up with is a noncorporate entity being able to provide services
without facing any consequences, except being sued," Turman said.  "Firms will
have a tendency to shuffle licensees in and out of a practice.  If a CPA gets
sued and his license gets revoked for substandard work, you just fire them.
There's no discipline that can be taken against the corporation."

This case, Turman said, "allows you to say you're a CPA, but you don't have to
act like a CPA."

Imagine, he said, a CPA in business who puts together real estate deals with
real estate professionals.  The CPA could take advantage of the "public's
trust for CPAs" by saying he is one, but not perform any of the work
associated with them.

For Miller, however, his case is about his freedom of speech.

"I should have been able to tell the truth," he asserted.  "It was always
awkward.  I'd have to say technically, I've earned my certificate, but the
firm I work for is not a CPA firm.  Unless you ask me, I can't tell you."
Miller, a former Big Six staffer and sole practitioner, began his long,
strange trip against the Florida board three years ago after the board
informed him it didn't like the language his American Express office had used
in a compilation report.  The state then came back jointly against American
Express, which at the time was still called IDS Tax and Business Services.

The action against Miller led American Express to file a suit against the
Florida board in state court in March 1994, charging that the board
discriminated against American Express by holding that its CPA employees could
not prepare third-party statements.  American Express claimed that since
Florida law allows anyone to prepare such statements, it was being unfairly
singled out.  American Express dropped its suit in September 1994 when the
board agreed to allow its CPAs to prepare third-party statements.

American Express renewed its legal efforts in November 1994 when, with Miller
as the lead plaintiff, it decided to test the constitutionality of Florida's
holding-out rule.

American Express had concluded that the June 1994 U.S.  Supreme Court decision
that allowed Orlando attorney-CPA Silvia Ibanez to publicly call herself a CPA
in turn gave American Express employees the right to hold themselves out.
Florida, on the other hand, maintained that the Ibanez case did not clarify
the holding out issue.  That attitude pushed American Express to refile the
suit.

Miller admits that American Express, even though it has only 18 CPAs and a
total of 40 employees in Florida, scares many CPAs in the Sunshine State - and
the rest of the country.

"It's what we represent," Miller explained.  "We're a big corporation with
money behind us.  We have the marketing and operations know-how that local
accounting firms don't.  They think that it gives us an unfair advantage."

In fact, since his legal tussles began, Miller has fielded many telephone
calls from CPAs interested in the American Express system and in hooking up
with the company.  A CPA Miller thought was "interested in joining the fold"
invited Miller and a staff member to visit his office.

"He was antagonistic from the start," Miller recalled.  "I said, 'Why did you
invite us over.' He said, 'You guys are the devil incarnate.  I wanted to know
something about the other side.'"





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

TECHNOLOGY:  TECH BRIEFS


GREAT PLAINS RELEASES DYNAMICS C/S+ FOR SQL SERVER 6.0:  Great Plains Software
of Fargo, N.D., was scheduled to begin controlled release of its Dynamics C/S+
for SQL Server 6.0 this month.  The controlled release includes the Report and
System Manager and General Ledger.  The line is designed to enable midrange
companies to migrate financial applications to Microsoft's BackOffice
environment.  For further information, call (800) 456-0025.

MICRO VISION EXPANDS SUITE PRICING OPTIONS:  Micro Vision of Commack, N.Y.,
has implemented new pricing for its Accounting Professional Suite.  President
Chandra Bhansali said the company offered options because it found users often
had one or more components of the five-package suite, which is sold for $995.
Now, Micro Vision offers its Tax Relief software and any two components for
$795, and $895 with three other components.  For more information, call (800)
829-7354.

SBT LINKS PAYROLL TO THE NET:  SBT Accounting Systems of San Rafael, Calif.,
has designed Pro Series Payroll with WebPay to enable users to interact
on-line with a national clearinghouse that manages direct deposits to or from
any bank.  The software is designed to handle payroll for up to 10,000
employees.  WebPay is part of of an expanding line of InterNet products that
works with the Pro Series.  For more information, call (415) 703-0400, ext.
225.

TELEMAGIC TARGETS ACCOUNTANTS:  TeleMagic of Dallas has introduced the
TeleMagic Professional Accountants Edition of its contact management software.
The program contains templates for small to midsized accounting firms and
includes the book, "Build Your Practice."  Special screens have been designed
for sole practitioners and firms.  The price is $299.  For further
information, call (214) 733-4292 ext.  2865.

MACOLA ENTERS BTRIEVE AGREEMENT:  Macola Software of Marion, Ohio, will ship a
shrink-wrapped client/server package using Scalable SQL or Btrieve database
engines with Macola's Progression and Horizon Series software.  Macola can use
the Server Edition of Btrieve Technologies' Scalable SQL for NetWare, Btrieve
for NetWare and Btrieve for Windows NT.  The two companies will have joint
marketing.  Technical support will be provided by Macola.  For information,
call (800) 468-0834, ext.  297.

CREATIVE SOLUTIONS FIELDS OIL & GAS MODULE:  Creative Solutions of Dexter,
Mich., has introduced the Ultra Tax/Oil & Gas module, which offers four
options for calculating percentage of depletion.  It also works with both
UltraTax/1040 and 1065 and the built-in depreciation capabilities as well as
UltraTax state programs, even for states not following federal oil and gas tax
regulations.  For more information, call (800) 968-8900.

SOLOMON RELEASES SOLOMON IV FOR WINDOWS NT:  Solomon Software of Findlay,
Ohio, is shipping Solomon IV (Server Edition) for Windows NT.  Previously, the
product was available only for NetWare.  A three-user license is priced at
$1,295 per module; $2,795 per module for six users; and $5,095 per module for
25 users.  A conversion utility is available for those using the NetWare
version.  For more information, call (800) 4SOLOMON.

ABACUS DEBUTS 32-BIT PACKAGE:  Abacus Accounting Systems of Edmonton, Alberta,
will release an accounting line based on the R:base SQL engine in the second
quarter.  The new line will be paired with Abacus' Web Order Taker, which will
capture order information on the Internet.  In March, Abacus acquired Microrim
Software, which developed the R:base database system.  For more information,
call (800) 665-6657.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

CONSULTING INSIGHTS:  Microsoft dominance leads tech trends for '96


Crystal balls are cloudy.  But one part of the technology horizon for 1996
remains clear:  it's a Microsoft (desktop) world.

There are technology trends that accountants should consider, such as the
evolution of color laser printing and imaging.  There are market trends,
particularly the continuing consolidation of vendors, that will have more
practitioners buying more software from fewer suppliers.  But in operating
systems and general desktop applications, there's little choice but Microsoft.

Particularly among smaller firms, 1996 is the year to choose whether to move
to Windows 3.1 or to Windows 95.  There's no reason to stick with DOS unless
you are using a computer you should replace, because both Windows 3.1 and
Windows 95 will run DOS applications (Windows 95 runs them very well).

If you are happy with Windows 3.1, stick with it.  There's no compelling
reason for buying 95, although its long file names and improved memory
management are nice, just not critical.

For larger firms, corporate America, consultants and resellers, the choice is
between moving to Windows 95 and Windows NT.  The latter offers stability,
robustness and security- pretty compelling reasons for making a business
decision.  Once Windows NT gets the Windows 95 interface later this year, it's
likely to be the product of choice for heavy- duty users and some consumers.

On the general application side, only in the accounting market is 1-2-3 still
king of the spreadsheet world, and that's not going to last.  Everybody else
uses Excel.  Anybody who attended shows such as PC Expo has got to wonder
about Lotus' (now IBM's) commitment to 1-2-3.  Both the product and name were
invisible in a sea of Notes signs.

And with Novell trying to sell WordPerfect, how many users want to bet on that
product's future in word processing?  The other choice:  WordPro, part of
Smart Suite.  Will that be Microsoft Word or Microsoft Word that your firm
buys?

The major question left in operating systems is whether Microsoft's NT Server
truly will displace Novell's NetWare.  It looks like 1996 will still be a year
of NetWare dominance, with strong gains by NT and the grudging co-existence of
the two products.

The one possible chink in the Microsoft armor:  on-line services.  The
Microsoft Network hasn't taken off yet and for professionals, CompuServe is
still a better service because there are more accountants to talk to on it.

On the Internet, Microsoft would like to repeat its dominance, but here it may
be cut off at the pass by Sun Microsystems and Netscape, both of which support
the Java programming language, an emerging standard.

Market consolidation

There will be more tax and accounting vendors failing or being purchased, with
tax preparation vendors particularly vulnerable.  The need to develop both DOS
and Windows products will simply prove too much for some smaller players.  Add
on likely tax law changes and some companies will simply count their cash and
go home.

Consolidation is not just about changing the number of players.  It's changing
how practitioners buy software.  Instead of buying from many small vendors, it
will be possible to buy a complete tax and accounting line from one source.

Look for the big to get bigger.  Intuit has been flexing its muscles with
development of programs and services such as the Intuit Financial Professional
Program for its Pro Series users.  That's the kind of power that one-product
companies will find hard to match over the long haul.

Movement towards suites will continue.  There is not a true accounting suite
on the market yet.  Micro Vision's Accounting Professional Suite is more of a
bundle of products with different pricing options.  However, true suites, with
build-in interfaces between products, are on the way.

Look for Computer Language Research, CCH Inc., Research Institute of America,
and perhaps Arthur Andersen with its new VantageSource unit, as well as a
number of smaller players, to join this race over the next two years.

The "I" word

Everybody is taking about the Internet.  Surprisingly, it isn't all hype.
But, it remains tough to sell and market most products on the Internet, unless
you are selling a specialty item.

However, the Internet appears to have a bright future in support, distribution
of upgrades and bug fixes, as well as good, old-fashioned electronic mail.

One of the companies pointing to the potential here is SBT Accounting Systems.
It accepts orders via its WebTrader, but since it sells on terms, it doesn't
have to worry about credit card security.

More important, SBT pioneered what founder Robert Davies calls "the poor man's
EDI" (Electronic Data Interchange) and hopes to use the Internet to seriously
cut product returns.

That combination of cost cutting and customer service represents the potential
for 1996.  And many tax preparation vendors are also recognizing the back
office/support potential.  Internet support is going to augment, if not
replace, some conventional bulletin board-based support systems.

Technologies to consider:

* Imaging.  Accountants are only now waking up to the cost of storing
documents.  Imaging is beginning to make an impact at smaller firms which are
the early adopters of technology.  * Video conferencing.  This has been a hot
topic in the broader computer market.  Pricing just hasn't come down enough.
In 1996, it's not quite there yet for smaller businesses and firms.  *
Hand-held computers.  If you didn't need them in 1995, you won't need them in
1996.  * Color laser printing.  The price is not yet low enough to make color
indispensable.  But it's getting close.  It won't be long before we all wonder
what anybody is doing with just a plain black ink printer.  * Wide area
networking.  Any firm with more than one office should at least look at
alternatives to plain old telephone service.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

FASB rules on nonprofits' investments


NORWALK, CONN.  - The Financial Accounting Standards Board has issued a new
rule on how not-for-profit organizations should account for certain
investments.

Statement 124, "Accounting for Certain Investments Held by Not-for-Profit
Organizations," is effective for fiscal years beginning after Dec.  15, 1995.
The statement is the fourth to result from the FASB's project to resolve areas
of inconsistency in accounting and reporting by not-for-profits.

Statement 124 requires not-for-profit organizations to report at fair value
investments in equity securities with readily determinable fair values and all
debt securities, with gains and losses reflected in a statement of activities.
The statement also establishes standards for reporting losses on investments
held under a donor's stipulation to invest a gift in perpetuity or for a
specified term.

"Although a significant number of not-for-profit organizations currently
report all investments at fair value, inconsistencies exist because existing
guidance permitted alternatives," said FASB project manager Susan Weiss.  "The
board believes that fair value more accurately measures the resources a
not-for-profit organization has available to provide its mission-related
services."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Pentagon battles $20 billion in bad accounting


WASHINGTON - Financial record keeping at the Department of Defense is in such
disarray that the Pentagon can't account for more than $20 billion in military
expenditures.

But that's the good news, Defense financial officers told Congress.  As
recently as June 1993 the military had nearly $50 billion in "problem
disbursements" - payments which could not be matched with any obligations -
and dramatic progress has been made since then, they said.

As evidence, Pentagon officials noted that the department expects to overpay
defense contractors by "only" $270 million in FY 1995.  Two years ago,
military overpayments to contractors were approaching $800 million annually,
Defense Comptroller John J.  Hamre said in a letter to Congress.

For their part, however, members of the House government reform subcommittee
expressed little appreciation for the recent improvements in the department's
accounting systems.  Subcommittee Chairman Steve Horn, R-Calif., who summoned
a parade of military accountants to explain the Pentagon's chronically mangled
books, told Defense financial officers that in the private sector their
substandard accounting practices wouldn't pass muster even for "Mom and Pop"
businesses.

Democrat Carolyn Maloney of New York offered an even harsher appraisal,
calling the department's bookkeeping practices "a disgrace to American
fighting men and women."

Military financial officers acknowledge the extent of these problems, but say
they date back to before their watch.

"When I arrived, I learned that the department had serious problems in
matching obligations and disbursements," Hamre said, but these difficulties
"go back 50 years to the founding of the department."

Defense Inspector General Eleanor J.  Hill traced the Pentagon's bookkeeping
troubles back even further, noting that during the Revolutionary War, Army
quartermasters balked at financial record keeping on grounds that the military
could not be run like the "plain business of a common storekeeper."

Now "here we are 216 years later in the computer age and we still cannot
supply Congress with an acceptable accounting of expenditures," she said.

Further complicating the situation are the "flawed business practices that
have built up over the past 40 years" within the department's patchwork of
internal accounting systems.

When the department was created at the end of World War II there were more
than 250 major accounting systems in operation throughout the military.  Even
today, those systems remain "largely incompatible" with one another, and only
three of them comply with the Comptroller General's accounting principles and
standards, General Accounting Office assistant comptroller general Gene Dodaro
testified.

To make matters worse, the Pentagon adopted a policy authorizing any one of
the department's 300 financial offices to write checks on behalf of anyone
else in the department - a procedure that created a "cross-disbursing"
nightmare throughout the military.

As a result, checks were written without first verifying whether there was "a
clear path back to the accounting record in one of those 250 accounting
systems," Hamre explained.  "The result was a business practice [and a
culture] of 'pay now, account for it later,'" he said.

Despite these problems, department's comptroller disputed allegations that
"the department's finance and accounting systems are so flawed that you can't
trust the budget we have submitted to you."

Department officials also flatly deny suggestions that the military's
financial reporting mess is the result of any widespread fraud or misconduct.

Although GAO's Dodaro told Congress that CFO Act audits have revealed
continuing "breakdowns in the department's ability to protect its assets from
fraud, waste and abuse," Hamre disputed allegations of sinister intent.

"The bulk of our problems are the product of innocent mistakes inside a very
complex system where typographical errors produce thousands of mismatched
records that require subsequent research," he said in his letter to Congress.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

5 New Standards Highlight FASB's 1995 Accomplishments


by Glenn Cheney


NORWALK, CONN.  - In 1995, the Financial Accounting Standards Board rode out
the turbulent wake of its stock compensation project and went on to pound out
five new standards and move several other projects into the public forum.

"All things considered, we made good progress this year," declares Dennis R.
Beresford, chairman of the board.

He has good reason for feeling satisfied.  In the first half of the year, the
board issued three new statements that would go into effect for fiscal years
beginning after Dec.  15, 1995.  Statement 120 established rules on the
accounting and reporting by mutual life insurance enterprises.  Statement 121
established the accounting for the impairment of long-lived assets.  Statement
122 deals with mortgage servicing rights.

By the end of the year, two more standards would be issued, and a number of
proposed standards would be released for comment.

Despite the progress, it was the stock compensation furor that attracted the
most attention.  Until the standard was issued in October as Statement No.
123, many companies, public accounting firms, certain commissioners of the
Securities and Exchange Commission and even the U.S.  Senate complained that
the proposed standard was unfair.  The original proposal would have required
companies to recognize stock option compensation as an expense.  The eventual
compromise required only a disclosure of the effects of such compensation.

According to Beresford, however, the fundamental issue was not the recognition
of stock compensation but the recognition of the sanctity of setting standards
in the private sector, a process that should not be influenced by politics or
economic effects.

"The question now is whether we are going to be commended for listening to
what a large majority said," he says, "or whether we will be condemned for
bowing to pressure and encouraging future efforts to get around the
private-sector standard-setting process."

Once stock compensation was out of the way, the board approved its last final
statement of the year.  It was a third standard in a series on not-for-profit
organizations.  Statement No.  124 requires reporting at fair value certain
investments in equity securities and all debt securities.  The new standard
went into effect for fiscal years beginning after Dec.  15, 1995.

Big October harvest

In October the board reaped much of what it had sown over previous months.  A
few days before issuing the stock compensation standard, the board issued an
exposure draft on consolidated financial statements.  If adopted as proposed,
the standard will prescribe when entities should be consolidated and how
consolidated financial statements should be prepared.

A few days later, the board released a special report on hedge accounting and
derivatives.  While it resolves none of the thorny issues that have hindered
progress on this project, it pulls together and analyzes many of the
principles and problems involved.  The board hopes to issue an exposure draft
on this important topic by the middle of 1996.

Then, within a week, the board issued an exposure draft of a proposed
statement on transfers of financial assets.  It resolves long-standing
questions about whether transactions should be accounted for as secured
borrowings or as sales.

Comments on the consolidation and transfers of assets proposals are due in
mid-January.

On a roll, the board issued an Implementation Guide on Statement 115,
"Accounting for Certain Investments in Debt and Equity Securities," in
November and planned a draft on the decommissioning of long-lived assets by
the end of the year.  Originally the project had been dedicated to nuclear
power plants specifically, but in 1995 the scope was expanded to include
similar costs, such as those involved at mining or oil drilling sites.

International outlook

In 1995 the board continued to expand its efforts to shed international light
on FASB projects.

"Every project that we work on now has some significant interchange with our
counterparts in other countries," says Beresford.  "This is no longer
something that happens every few years.  It happens constantly."

The board ended the year with two exposure drafts of international scope that
are ready to go but on hold to keep them in step with offshore
standard-setters.  One, a proposed binational statement on disaggregated
disclosures, will not be issued until the board's Canadian counterpart is
ready to issue a parallel document.  The second, a proposed statement on
earnings per share, is ready but waiting for the International Accounting
Standards Committee to release a proposal on the same issue.

In the third quarter of the year the board tackled a key new project on
comprehensive income.  Deliberations have just begun, but the board is already
considering working with standard-setters in other countries to work toward a
standard with international compatibility.

An important document still out for comment deals with the effectiveness of
disclosures.  The board has been torn by conflicting complaints of burdensome
disclosure requirements and a perceived need for more information among the
users of financial information.

The board is also issuing an Invitation to Comment which addresses issues
raised in reports produced by the Association for Investment and Management
Research and the Jenkins Committee of the American Institute of CPAs.
Comments will do much to determine which projects end up on the board's agenda
in future years.

"We think there are some awfully interesting ideas in both of these reports,"
says Beresford.  "But there are so many ideas that we need to do some serious
prioritization."

At year's end, Beresford concluded that 1995 had been productive and had set
the stage for rapid output early in 1996.  Public response to the various
exposure drafts work will do much to guide the board through the new year.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

NEW PRODUCTS


SOFTWARE

Peachtree Accounting for Windows

Peachtree Accounting for Windows, Release 3.5 features a multimedia setup
routine that includes video and audio clips.  By watching, listening and
answering the appropriate questions when prompted, small businesses can
automate their books quickly.  Over 75 sample business templates provide
detailed examples of successful small business models.  Release 3.5 features a
graphical forms designer, LIFO and FIFO costing and five pricing levels for
each product.

Price:  $129.  Existing Release 3.0 users can upgrade for a $9.95 shipping
charge.  Other Peachtree users can upgrade for $99.

Peachtree Software

(800) 247-3224



SBT's WebTrader 2.0

SBT Accounting Systems' WebTrader 2.0 enables instant, secure sales processing
directly on the World Wide Web.  The program lets businesses post order forms
for products or services on the Web and then automatically processes them and
sends a customer confirmation via e-mail.  WebTrader initiates and completes
the sales process by providing a connection between vendor and customer.

Price:  $1,295.

SBT Accounting Systems Inc.

(415) 703-0400



PowerSolutions' PLANMaker

PLANMaker Version 2.0 for Windows allows the user to create dynamic business
plans for businesses of all sizes whether start-up or existing.  PLANMaker is
also used by consultants to prepare professional business plans for clients.
The software guides the user step-by-step, providing the best formats and
narrative in easy-to-use modules that may be tailored to a wide range of
enterprises.  Complete financial forecasts are also included.

Price:  $129.

PowerSolutions

(800) 955-3337



Mirasoft ForFUND/Govt Accounting for Windows

Mirasoft's Release 2.0 of ForFUND/Govt Accounting for Windows adds full 32-bit
support for Windows 95 and Windows NT.  The product includes general ledger,
budgeting, project/grant management, cash receipts, bank reconciliation,
accounts payable, purchase orders, accounts receivable, fixed assets, payroll,
utility billing and business licenses.  The software is written for use by any
size not-for-profit organization.  ForFUND is developed in Microsoft Visual
FoxPro database language.  The software includes 19 user-definable fields for
easy query and report generation; budget import/export; utility billing cash
receipt fast fill; automatic reversing of posted journal entries; accounts
payable select/de-select process; enhanced print-preview and print-to-file.

Price:  Starts at $2,500 per module.  Upgrades are provided at no charge for
existing Mirasoft users.

Mirasoft Inc.

(800) 414-FUND



TKR Time & Billing for Windows

TKR for Windows utilizes Microsoft Access, which allows access to data from
programs such as Microsoft's Access, Word, Excel and other Windows-based
report writers.  Features include built-in security levels; operator-specific
defaults for data entry; no month-end processing; standard text for invoices;
bills that can be created and saved for review before being posted; automated
preparation of "customized" statements, fixed fee invoices and regular
invoices; extensive management and profitability reporting; and CPE tracking.

Price:  $395 single user version (one to five staff).

E.  F.  Haskell Software

(800) 732-3688



Time & Profit 1.0 for Windows

BytePro's Time & Profit for Windows automates all time and billing record
keeping requirements - clients, calendar, time, billing and accounting.  The
user enters his or her schedule in the calendar register.  Time & Profit takes
this schedule and processes it all the way through billing, then places all
necessary entries into the accounting system.  All billing for the day, week
or month can be accomplished instantaneously.

Price:  $269.

BytePro Corp.

(714) 622-0884



Yardi's Real Estate Asset Management for Windows

The Yardi Asset Management System, a suite of five integrated software
products for asset managers, allows real estate asset managers to capture
performance, portfolio, analytical and operational data.  The system's
holdings reports consolidate financial and occupancy data in one entirely
customizable report.  The product also provides full NCREIF reporting.

Price:  $2,000 and up.

Yardi Systems

(800) 866-1144


HARDWARE

Troy MICR Font and Toner Kits

Troy MICR Font and Toner Kits provide "on demand" check printing capability
for users of LaserJet printers.  The kits include Troy's MICR toner cartridge
and Troy font single in-line memory module (SIMM) with MICR and other security
fonts.

Price:  $399, HP LaserJet 4 and 4 Plus MICR SIMM and Toner Kit; $499, HP
LaserJet 4 and 4 Plus MICR Cartridge and Toner Kit; $399, HP LaserJet 4si MICR
SIMM and Toner Kit; $499, HP LaserJet 4si MICR Cartridge and Toner Kit.

Troy

(800) 944-6757



Best Data Voice and Data Modems

The Smart One Professional series, 288DSVD digital simultaneous voice and data
(DSVD) modems support V.34 data and V.17 fax communications.  The 288DSVD has
voice mail/audio capabilities and a duplex speakerphone.  The 288DSVD
alternately sends and receives voice and data, allowing users to talk on the
phone while sending files, a fax or receiving data.

Price:  $349.

Best Data Products

(800) 632-2378



Micro Express' MicroFLEX-686/133

The MicroFLEX-686/133 , based on the Cyrix 6x86-P133 chip, performs comparably
to a 133-MHz Pentium, while running at 100 MHz.  The computer includes 16MB
RAM, a 4X CD-ROM drive, 1GB hard disk drive, high-density 3.5-in.  floppy disk
drive, mouse and 15-in.  monitor.

Price:  $2,499.

Micro Express

(800) 989-9900


PUBLICATIONS

Encyclopedic Dictionary of Business Terms

Prentice Hall's Encyclopedic Dictionary of Business Terms (cloth, 542 pages)
by Wilbur Cross provides up-to-date information on words, phrases and meanings
to over 500 business and industry-related subject areas.  The guide is a
one-volume source of information on business topics, from historical and
traditional language to the latest terminology in technical communications.
Readers will also find lists of associations, logos, periodicals, demographics
as well as financial and legal information.

Price:  $29.95.

Prentice Hall

(201) 592-2000



Tulane Tax Institute on Video from Totaltape

Totaltape Publishing Co., in cooperation with the 45th annual Tulane Tax
Institute, lets you attend one of the country's most prestigious and
longest-running tax planning conferences.  Totaltape offers eight hours of
commercial broadcast quality video; all CD-ROM programs are multimedia and
feature video or audio - 18 hours of digitally recorded conference lectures
that are fully edited.

Price:  $649 (complete tooling).

Totaltape Publishing Co.

(800) 874-7877



CCH Entity Plus

CCH Entity Plus has three publications - the Limited Liability Company Guide,
S Corporations Guide and Partnership Tax Planning and Practice Reports.  The
CD-ROM disc also has an integrated research module, the Entity Options
Summary, for both broad comparative coverage of the major issues faced by
those considering and comparing business entities and a gateway to in-depth
treatment of each type of entity.

Price:  From $395 to $888 for a one-year subscription.

CCH Inc.

(800) TELL-CCH, Dept.  4819



PPC's Accounting and Auditing CD-ROM Library

Practitioners Publishing Co.'s A&A CD-ROM Library includes 13 of the company's
practice guides, which can be accessed in any combination.  Each CD also
contains PPC's GuideWare software, which permits the user to customize and
edit the guides' practice aids to fit each engagement.

Price:  Dependent upon the number of guides selected.  PPC book owners pay $45
per title.  New customers pay from $121 to $175 per title.

Practitioners Publishing Co.

(800) 323-8724





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

FASB faces 2 departures, rushes to finish projects


NORWALK, CONN.  - After a busy season late in 1995, the Financial Accounting
Standards Board is planning to wrap up as many projects as possible by June
and then size up its future direction according to what needs to be done right
away and what ought to be done over the next several years.

June is a key month because two of FASB's seven board members will be
completing their terms at that time.  Who their replacements will be and where
they stand on various issues is at this point quite unknown.  The board,
therefore, is hurrying to complete most of its current projects while
forestalling work on anything new.

One of the two departing board members, Robert N.  Northcutt, has served as a
voice of experience in corporate accounting.  The other, Robert J.  Swieringa,
comes from an academic background.  The trustees of the Financial Accounting
Foundation are striving to find replacements from those same backgrounds.

"We're trying very hard to finish several of our most important projects
before the two Bobs leave so we don't lose all of the effort they've put in,"
says FASB chairman Dennis R.  Beresford.  "In particular, we'd like to issue
final standards on consolidation policy and procedures, and on transfers of
assets and servicing arrangements.  We also hope to issue an exposure draft on
hedging and derivatives."

A bit further into the future is the leave-taking of chairman Beresford, whose
term expires in mid-1997.  If Beresford has any pet projects he'd like to
escort through the long due-process of setting standards, he'll have to begin
early in 1996.

The board has recently been dedicating itself to strategic planning, something
that was difficult to do during the last decade of responding to the immediate
needs of accountancy.

"We're pretty far along in our strategic plan," Beresford says.  "Over time,
we expect to be more proactive in deciding where financial reporting should be
heading, as opposed to what has primarily been a reactive process.  We'd like
to focus more on tomorrow's problems and less on yesterday's and today's."

One aspect of the board's strategic thought is that the demand for and the
importance of financial reports seems to be declining.

"It has been suggested that instead of looking at nitty-gritty accounting
issues we should be looking at where the financial information package is
going and what part we should play in that," Beresford muses.  "I hope that
over the next year we will be able to develop our game plan for the next five
or 10 years."

Public guidance will come into play in the second half of the year as comments
come in on an Invitation to Comment.  The invitation is a report on action
that has been recommended by the Association of Investment Management and
Research and the Jenkins Committee of the American Institute of CPAs.  The
invitation asks commentators to prioritize possible projects that the FASB
might add to its agenda.

Six months of palpable progress

Between New Year's Day and the Fourth of July, the board hopes to make
palpable progress on a number of important projects.

The comment period for an exposure draft on consolidations policy and
procedures ends Jan.  15.  Public hearings are scheduled for Feb.  20 and Feb.
21, with a final statement possible in the second quarter.

The exposure draft of a statement on transfers of financial assets and
extinguishments of liabilities seeks comments by Jan.  22.  Public hearings
are scheduled for Feb.  26 and Feb.  27.  If all goes well, a final statement
may be issued by the middle of the year.

The board is hoping that an exposure draft on the closure and removal of
long-lived assets - formerly the project on nuclear decommissioning - also
might be finalized in June.  But, like all other projects, that depends on the
nature of comments received.

By June, the board also hopes to hammer out a long-awaited exposure draft on
hedging and derivatives.

The board plans to release two exposure drafts in January in conjunction with
other standard setters.

A proposed statement on disaggregated disclosures will be released in
conjunction with the Accounting Standards Board of Canada, and a proposed
statement on Earnings Per Share will be released at the same time as a
parallel document coming from the International Accounting Standards
Committee.

The FASB's project on comprehensive income was added late in 1995 and the
board has barely begun to grapple with the issues involved.  Nevertheless, an
exposure draft could be issued fairly early this year because the issues are
relatively limited.

The direction of the board in the second half of the year, then, should prove
interesting.  Two new board members will assume seats at the big table in
Norwalk, Conn., and some strategic thinking may have begun to congeal by then.
July 1, then, just might be springtime at the FASB.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

PRACTICE MANAGEMENT FORUM:  For better recruits, target professors, survey
says


Across dozens of campuses nationwide, the battle for tomorrow's business
leaders has intensified.  Recruiting top talent has become more aggressive
than ever and the Big Six have recognized the need to bolster their marketing
efforts.

A consistent presence and favorable reputation with students is fundamental,
but, in this competitive market for superstars, not enough.  To gain an even
greater edge on campus, firms need to strategically target not only the
students, but their professors.

Although the Big Six routinely spend millions of dollars on faculty relations
programs each year, they are receiving a limited return on their investment.
With the exception of Arthur Andersen, which has consistently fostered strong
faculty relations, and Coopers & Lybrand with its recent faculty initiatives,
professors are not impressed.

A new study that measures the effectiveness of these programs reveals that
only a few firms are making a considerable impact.  These firms are spending
their dollars wisely and, in doing so, are positioning themselves to be the
firms of the future.

Until recently, the only method the Big Six had of measuring their reputation
among faculty was through surveys that polled accounting faculty at a large
number of schools.  This method ignores the changes in campus recruiting and
the concentration of resources.

Instead of casting a wide net across hundreds of campuses, many firms are
focusing their recruiting efforts on selected top schools.  In 1986, for
example, one Big Six firm reported hiring just 16 percent of its incoming
class from these top schools.

By 1990, it had hired 26 percent, and now it hires more than 45 percent of new
recruits from its focus schools.  Due to the Big Six's recent, more
specialized recruiting focus at key schools, the sweeping overview of data
collected in past surveys has become extraneous.

In addition, the manner in which the data is collected has caused some firms
to question the survey's accuracy.  To reflect the focused concentration of
campus recruiting and faculty relations, our firm conducted one-on-one
telephone surveys with 150 professors at 59 of the country's top accounting
schools.  The sample included schools such as the University of Chicago, the
University of Illinois, Harvard University, the University of Pennsylvania and
the University of Texas.

To measure the faculty's perceptions of the Big Six, interviewers asked
straightforward questions such as, "which firm has the best relationship with
students and faculty on campus, which firm offers the best advancement
opportunities, and which firm is most successful in growing its practice?"
The study was first conducted in 1993 and repeated in 1995 with 70 percent of
the respondents participating in both.

Distinct tiers have developed

Although the faculty considered all the Big Six firms to be highly reputable
and, at times, difficult to differentiate, they regard Arthur Andersen as the
top firm overall.  Coopers & Lybrand solidified its second place ranking in
1995 by more than doubling its overall score compared to 1993.  Deloitte &
Touche also improved its overall score to place third, while Price Waterhouse,
Ernst & Young and KPMG Peat Marwick all lost votes in 1995.

Arthur Andersen's and Coopers & Lybrand's high rankings were no great surprise
given the tremendous energy and resources both firms devote to campus
recruiting and faculty relations.  Faculty members noted that Coopers &
Lybrand, especially, has increased their efforts to court professors.  Coopers
& Lybrand was ranked as the firm with the best relationship with faculty.  As
a whole, the faculty commented that they appreciated Coopers & Lybrand's
recent efforts to keep them apprised of new technical information.

Arthur Andersen was consistently regarded as the firm with the best
relationship with students.  Faculty perceived that the strength of the firm's
relationship with their students was in direct correlation to the high
offer/accept rate among their candidates.  KPMG Peat Marwick's ranking dropped
significantly compared to 1993, a reflection of their recent reduced campus
hirings.

In the categories of "growing its practice" and "technical reputation,"
faculty ranked Arthur Andersen as the top firm.  Some faculty connected the
growth of Andersen Consulting to Arthur Andersen diversifying its practice.
Faculty ranked Ernst & Young second in growing its practice, commenting
favorably on its May 1995 merger with Kenneth Leventhal & Co.  In terms of
technical reputation, Price Waterhouse slipped in overall votes compared to
1993, but still held its second place ranking.

Ranking brands of milk

For the firms that do not have an overwhelming presence or reputation, the
news is somewhat encouraging.  Because the faculty viewed all the Big Six as
reputable operations, they had some difficulty in rating the firms in areas
such as "best demonstrates technical expertise on accounting topics" or
"offers best advancement opportunities."

One professor commented that distinguishing between the firms in these areas
was comparable to "selecting their favorite brand of milk."

In other areas such as "best use of technology," professors felt that they did
not have sufficient information on which to base an opinion.  From the faculty
point of view in these areas, the field is still level and wide open.  For
firms willing to make investments in educating the faculty in these areas,
their reputation on campus may see a considerable jump.

The courtship of faculty is critical to building a firm's reputation and
talent pool for several reasons.  Fostering strong one-on-one relationships
with faculty provides an alternative pathway for firms to communicate with top
students.

Including the faculty in an overall recruiting program provides firms with
additional campus visibility as well as a means to educate faculty about
aspects of their firms.  When approached by students, professors will then be
able to offer valued and well-informed opinions about the career opportunities
available within any particular firm.

Professors with strategic ties to a firm tend to incorporate its data and
research more readily into not only their own personal research, but also
their curriculum.  Classroom exposure brings the firm to life and provides
students - a firm's future managers or potential clients - with in-depth
examples of a firm's capabilities and specializations.

In addition to financially supporting the accounting department, faculty
suggested other key components to building strong faculty relationships.
These include consistently recruiting and retaining their students, providing
technical information to assist in faculty projects, inviting professors to
participate in faculty-only symposiums, sharing leading-edge information and
fostering individual relationships over informal lunches.  Faculty commented
that a closer, working relationship allows for a more thorough flow of company
and recruiting information.

To reap a strategic advantage on campus, Big Six firms need to take an
aggressive approach in their faculty relationships.  Well-planned investments
will, in the long run, be money well spent.  With greater visibility and
reputation on campus, firms will be able to attract their future business
leaders and impress potential future clients.


Thomas Oh is senior researcher at Hanigan Consulting Group, a New York-based
management consulting firm that specializes in assessment and strategy design
of campus recruiting programs.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

HOT TIPS


SO GET SOME NEW MAGAZINES FOR THE WAITING ROOM:  For every complaint a medical
practice receives, 26 others go unreported, Dunbar, Cook & Shepard is telling
clients.

And according to the White House Office of Consumer Affairs, six of those 26
complaints are serious, the Indianapolis firm says.  As if that isn't bad
enough, each of those 26 unhappy patients will complain to about 10 other
potential patients.

TO OUTSOURCE OR NOT TO OUTSOURCE:  While outsourcing may be an easy road to
lower expenses and improved administrative methods, in the long run quality of
work, confidentiality and staff morale may suffer, Duitch, Franklin & Co.  is
warning its law firm clients.

Carefully weigh the benefits against possible drawbacks before deciding
whether to outsource, the Los Angeles firm advises.  Some issues to take into
consideration include:

* Credibility.  Any forthcoming vendor or freelancer will be happy to supply
your firm with references from other clients.  Check them, and talk to other
professionals.  But above all else, trust your instincts, and if you are
uncomfortable with a candidate keep the work in house until you find a
relationship you are comfortable with.  * Contract and pricing.  Make sure
your firm can get out of a contract, especially if the vendor's work is
unsatisfactory.  Review pricing structure - if it seems too good to be true,
it probably is.  * Staff morale.  Taking work away from a staff member simply
because he or she seems overworked may prompt fear rather than relief.  First
talk to the staff to see if any other alternatives may be more appropriate
than outsourcing.  At some firms, legal secretaries and administrative
assistants have banded together to form an "assistant pool" to help out
overworked coworkers in a pinch.  * Confidentiality.  Review your client
roster and caseload, and check off those clients who might object to their
work being outsourced and those matters that are too sensitive for outside
eyes.  * Damage control.  No one source is perfect - consider how well the
firm can rebound should an outside vendor suffer a major equipment or business
failure.  Determine the cost of salvaging an incomplete project.

DON'T TRUST THAT CRAZY UNCLE LOU:  While forming trusts can steer you out of
some sticky financial situations, naming a trustee can be tricky business,
Gikow Bierman & Talesnick is warning clients.  The Roseland, N.J., firm offers
a list of items to consider when choosing a trustee.

* Name more than one trustee, including a professional adviser.  While a
family member or close friend provides sensitivity to the beneficiaries'
needs, the professional adviser can provide financial accountability.  * Don't
word a trust agreement so that an individual trustee doesn't have to retain a
bond.  While waiving a bond may save the trust money, a bond is the only
protection against embezzlement or misuse of funds.  * Name a "trust
protector" - often a family friend - who can discharge a trustee under some
circumstances or veto some of the trustee's decisions.  * Allow for a change
of trustee in case beneficiaries move out of state.  For example, if the
beneficiaries move to a state that does not have income tax, they may still
have to pay state income taxes if the trustee lives in a state with income
tax.  * Write performance guidelines into your trust, allowing beneficiaries
to change trustees if they fail to meet a reasonable performance standard.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

CompuServe campaign colors Block 2Q results


KANSAS CITY, MO.  - Marketing and expansion costs contributed to H&R Block
Inc.'s higher than expected loss of $8.3 million, or 8 cents a share, on
record revenues of $223.9 million for the second quarter ending Oct.  31,
1995.

That compares to a loss of $1.3 million, or 1 cent a share, on revenues of
$172.9 million for the second quarter ending Oct.  31, 1994.

The company had announced in August 1995 that it had launched a full-throttle
expansion of CompuServe, its computer services subsidiary.

"CompuServe's recent decision to lead the market in offering low-cost Internet
software and access and its agreement to become the exclusive on-line service
outlet for Time magazine are good examples of our aggressive focus," said
Richard H.  Brown, H&R Block Inc.'s president and chief executive officer.
"Our goal is to have nearly 5 million subscribers worldwide by summer."

CompuServe's revenues for the second quarter increased 37.9 percent to a
record $188.4 million, compared to the prior year's second-quarter figures of
$136.6 million.  The division's pretax earnings were $22 million, compared to
$34.3 million for the quarter ending Oct.  31, 1994.

In the second quarter, H&R Block Tax Services reported a pretax loss of $34.4
million, compared to $35.1 million for the quarter ending Oct.  31, 1994.
Revenues declined 0.5 percent to $27.6 million because of decreased enrollment
in the division's tuition tax school.  Brown noted that due to the seasonality
of the tax business, second quarter results are not indicative of the expected
results for the entire fiscal year.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

TAXING ISSUES


IRS DISCUSSES LIFE IN A POST-TCMP WORLD:  Lou Carlow, Internal Revenue Service
Assistant Commissioner (Examination) updated a Dec.  5 meeting of the American
Institute of CPA's Tax Division on the IRS' plans for establishing audit
selection criteria in light of the agency's decision to cancel its taxpayer
compliance measurement program audits.  Carlow indicated that the IRS
currently has an internal task force"attempting to come up with a new system."
Meanwhile, Carlow said, the IRS will continue to rely on three sources for
identifying returns for potential audit:(1) existing DIF(discriminate
function) scores- derived from the last TCMP cycle in 1988; (2) information
from district and national office research projects; and (3) its emerging
market segment specialization program activities.


IRS FLIRTS WITH TAXABILITY OF FREQUENT FLYER MILES:  The IRS recently forayed
into the sensitive issue of whether the use of airline frequent flyer miles
consitutes the receipt of taxable income.  In a recent technical advice
memorandum, the IRS concluded that an employer's air travel expense
reimbursement plan didn't qualify as an "accountable plan" because it
affirmatively permitted employees to keep their miles.  Without "accountable
plan" status, expense reimbursements are included in an employee's income,
subject to withholding, and claimed by itemizers on Schedule A as a
miscellaneous deduction subject to the 2 percent floor.  It is worth noting
that the plan in question specifically stated that employees were permitted to
keep the miles they accrued on business travel.  The TAM generated
considerable public and media attention, and subsequent to its release, IRS
commissioner Margaret Milner Richardson is reported to have told a group of
practitioners that the national office currently has no projects in the
"frequent flyer" area.  (TAM 9547001)

401(K) FRAUD TARGETED:  Labor Secretary Robert Reich announced a campaign by
the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration to crack down on fraud in
401(k) plans.  The anti-fraud effort includes both 300 pending investigations
and a consumer education program targeted against employer misuse of 401(k)
funds.  Some of the "10 warning signs" contained in the consumer education
campaign:late 401(k) statements, former employees having trouble getting
benefits paid and contributions held by an employer for more than 90 days.

FINAL PT PREGS ISSUED:  The IRS has released final regulations under Code
Section 7704 applicable to publicly traded partnerships (PTPs) that define
"established securities market" and a "secondary market or its substantial
equivalent."  The regulations also modify and extend existing safe harbors
from PTP treatment.  The final regulations largely follow earlier proposed
ones.  The preamble to the final regulations also indicates that the IRS is
considering guidance on definitions relating to the PTP exception for certain
partnerships with passive income, and has asked for public input on what the
proposed guidance should look like.  (T.D.  8629)

IRS DELAYS '96 WITHHOLDING FORMS:  The IRS has announced that it is delaying
the issuance of the 1996 Form W-4 due to the possibility of tax law changes in
the pending budget bill that may have an impact on an employee's withholding.
The IRS is asking taxpayers to continue using, and employers to continue
accepting, 1995 forms.  The IRS said that it plans to issue new forms as soon
as possible once legislation is finalized.  (Ann.  95-104)





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

J.D.  Edwards looks to find resellers for Genesis line


DENVER - J.D.  Edwards, which specializes in AS/400 software, has joined the
ranks of companies seeking resellers for its financial line.

Earlier this year the company released Genesis for companies with annual
revenue of $10 million to $100 million.

"It's relatively price competitive with PC-LAN [accounting software]," said
Rick Byrne, director of Genesis operations.

Genesis marks a departure for J.D.  Edwards, which had previously concentrated
on selling enterprise-wide systems on the AS/400.  But it is in line with the
movement of other higher-priced accounting packages into what is referred to
as the middle market.  That market is roughly defined as companies with
revenue of from $10 million to $500 million.

Genesis includes financial, distribution and manufacturing software that can
be sold as a suite.  The manufacturing suite includes distribution and
financials.  Distribution software includes financials.  Byrne said a 20-user
distribution system would cost more than $50,000.

Although many accounting consultants make sales in that price range, many are
not experienced in AS/400 software.  However, there are a few firms which will
be able to play in that arena.

"To play, you've got to have familiarity with that system and have grown up
with the System/34 and 36 world," said Jim Metzler, partner and consultant at
Gaines, Metzler and Kriner, of Buffalo, N.Y.  System/34 and 36 are the older
IBM minicomputers which IBM largely replaced with its AS/400.

Metzler said only a handful of firms do AS/400 consulting, including his.
Metzler's firm also sells the hardware.  He said that the AS/400 is "easier
from a complexity perspective than many networks," but that historical price
points scare away firms.  He views the AS/400 as more cost-effective than
PC-LAN networks, especially for "clients who need multi-tasking and minimal
care and feeding."

Metzler's firm resells and installs software from Daily & Wolcott, a
competitor of J.D.  Edwards.

Genesis supports Windows clients and is Windows 95 compliant, Byrne said.  The
software will operate in both PC and terminal environments.

More recently, J.D.  Edwards introduced the OneWorld line, a follow-up to its
World software.  OneWorld is a client/server package, which expands support of
hardware to work stations running Microsoft NT Server.

More expensive than Genesis, OneWorld is likely to be streamlined in the next
year to 18 months for a version that will also be available to resellers.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

With more low-end releases, vendors eye reseller programs


Santa Claus left a bundle of new low-end accounting software packages under
the tree and visions of new programs for accountants danced in vendors' heads
through the New Year.

In time to welcome 1996, Intuit, Peachtree, BestWare, New England Business
Service, Computer Associates and DacEasy all introduced new versions of their
small business accounting packages.

And those vendors who don't actively recruit CPA firms as resellers or
recommenders were eyeing how to structure programs in order to involve firms.

"We're working on a formal recommender program," said Drew Paxton, Intuit's
International Project Manager, Business Products Group.

Similarly, David Dalton, director of marketing for 4Home Productions, said his
company will investigate a CPA program for its Simply Money.

It's very clear what's at stake.  As NEBS introduced its One-Write Plus
Version 5.0 for Windows, it said that 50 percent of One-Write users say an
accountant recommended the purchase.  One-Write has been particularly strong
in this group in supporting a consulting program.

BestWare of Rockaway, N.J., already had an active channel program for its
M.Y.O.B.  Accounting software, but recently appointed its first Consultant
Program manager.  DacEasy has about 300 certified consultants, many of whom
resell.

Rob Hartlage, a CPA who operates Asystants, a Sellersburg, Ind.-based
consulting firm, said many accountants don't understand the opportunities
low-end consulting offers.

"They [accountants] wonder why someone would pay $99 for a package and then
spend $500 to $1,000 to help use it," said Hartlage.  "They will."

Hartlage consults for DacEasy software and does some limited work with Quicken
and One-Write Plus.  He said despite all the effort to make accounting
software easier to use, clients need someone to help them get started.

Paxton's comments came as Intuit introduced new versions of its line with
QuickBooks 4.0 and QuickBooks Pro 4.0.  There's one change, though- Intuit has
dropped its claim that QuickBooks is bookkeeping software and now aggressively
touts it as accounting software.

Although Intuit claims more accountants recommend QuickBooks than any other
software, the company has not formally enrolled firms in the process.

That's likely to change.  Intuit has already established its Intuit Financial
Partner Program, which seeks to give referrals to CPAs.  The first year was a
bit slim:  10,000 firms signed up, but Intuit only got 7,000 referrals.  The
company hopes to triple referrals this year.

4Home Productions, the small-business, consumer software arm of Computer
Associates, is also looking at establishing a consulting or recommender
program or both, according to David Dalton, director of marketing.

Low-end accounting software is getting more robust, particularly more
customizable, and supposedly easier to use.  But forays into vertical markets
by these vendors may offer accountants more chances to develop consulting
opportunities.

Most of these products allow the user to modify fields in reports or entry
screens or both and to pick from sample charts of accountants from differing
types of businesses, which can be used as templates.  Particularly popular is
the ability to reorder or hide fields.

Drag and drop editing of fields is increasingly popular.  Simply Accounting
for Windows 4.0 from 4Home productions use drag and drop on the home screen.
M.Y.O.B.  6.0 from BestWare supports drag and drop modification of report
fields while DacEasy Accounting & Payroll 95 offers the capability for forms.

This is one of the few areas where the competitors are ahead of QuickBooks,
which requires the use of a dialogue box to rename fields.

Easier setup is also a common goal.  With the Windows version of One-Write
Plus, users set up companies through an interview process.  Intuit of Menlo
Park, Calif.  also has adopted the interview form with QuickBooks and
QuickBooks Pro, while Peachtree Software of Norcross, Ga., carried the
interview setup into the world of multimedia with video and audio clips.
BestWare has used the interview approach since version 4.0 of M.Y.O.B.

In DacEasy Accounting & Payroll 95, DacEasy of Dallas, takes a page from
Windows in offering the Easy Setup Wizard.

QuickBooks Pro is trying to claim unique customization abilities to allow
users to tailor documentation and features for more than 20 different
industries.

Users, said Paxton, "are looking for something that can be made specific to
their businesses."  While other packages provide charts of accounts that can
be used as templates, QuickBooks offers custom documentation for niches, such
as construction.

To a certain extent, 4Home is simply trying to keep pace.  Dalton admitted his
company fell behind its development cycle.  But he added, "I think we'll come
back strong."

Simply Accounting adds the ability to store both prior and current year's
fiscal data and print comparative financial reports.

Besides its customization features and set-up interview, Nebs expanded on-line
help and provided expert definitions of financial and accounting concepts.

DacEasy lays claim to being the first of the group to design its system for
Windows 95.  It offers 100 business templates and offers report customization
through a Report Wizard.  Like QuickBooks, the latest DacEasy software also
includes time and billing and contact management features.

M.Y.O.B.'s report customization is similar in offering more than 100 templates
and enabling drill-down analysis.  It provides time and billing information
less directly, offering the Timeslips Accounting link to pull time and billing
data from Timeslips.  M.Y.O.B.  has also added the ability to import data from
Quicken.


Low-end accounting software

DacEasy Accounting & Payroll 95

Price:  $109

DacEasy Inc.

Dallas

(800) 322-3279


M.Y.O.B.  Version 6.0

Price:  $79.95 to $139.95 depending on platform and payroll option.

BestWare

Rockaway, N.J.

(201) 586-8986


One-Write Plus Version 5.0 for Windows

Price:  $69.95

New England Business Service Inc.

Nashua, N.H.

(603) 880-5100


Peachtree Accounting for Windows Release 3.5

Price:  $129

Peachtree Software

Norcross, Ga.

(800) 228-0068


QuickBooks 4.0 and QuickBooks Pro 4.0

Price:  QuickBooks 4.0 3.5-in.  disk, $99, CD-ROM, $129 (Windows); $119
(Macintosh)

QuickBooks Pro:  3.5-in.  and CD-ROM, $189, all versions.

Intuit

Menlo Park, Calif.

(415) 329-6926


Simply Accounting Version 4.0 for Windows

Price:  $69.95

4Home Productions

(Computer Associates International)

Islandia, N.Y.

(800) 773-5445


Note:  All prices reflect estimated retail prices.

Source:Accounting Today





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

ACTION IDEA:  How to have a successful seminar


Even if you've managed to attract half the business community to your seminar,
your efforts are far from finished.  Not only do you want the attendees to
enjoy the session, but enjoy it enough to attend another one.  Here are some
tips:

* The place - The room should have no distracting elements, and should
accommodate your guests when seated as well as gathered on breaks.  Arrange
seating so attendees participate.  Lighting must be adequate.  Offer
refreshments.  * The program - Distribute handouts so the audience can follow
along.  Humor goes a long way toward holding interest; so does audience
interaction.  Schedule regular breaks, about every 45 minutes.  * The follow
up - Distribute and collect evaluation forms, and respond personally to any
extremely positive or negative evaluations.  Make sure all attendees in your
marketing database receive firm correspondence.

Source:  Rex Meighen &Co., Tampa, Fla.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Budget worries kill workload relief bill


WASHINGTON - The chance that workload compression relief will come to small
CPA firms soon is slim.

A provision that would have allowed partnerships and S corporations to choose
their own fiscal year didn't survive the final conference budget bill Congress
handed to President Clinton.

"It was a major disappointment," said Gerald W.  Padwe, vice president of tax
for the American Institute of CPAs.

The AICPA had been the major backer of the provision, which would have allowed
the pass-through entities to make quarterly estimated tax payments on behalf
of their owners.  The owners would be relieved of quarterly payments if their
companies paid for them.

While the proposal was included in the House of Representatives version of the
budget, its price tag probably forced it to be dropped during conference bill
discussion.  According to Padwe, the AICPA was told the provision would have
cost $335 million through five years.  Another estimate quoted by Lindy Paull,
majority staff director of the Senate Finance Committee, said the bill would
cost $355 million over seven years.

Either way, it's not a phenomenal total when you consider the size of the
budget.  But it was worth enough to be used as part of the budget bargaining
bonanza.  Padwe speculated that the provision was axed when Rep.  Bill Archer,
R-Texas and chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, had to find ways to pay
for making the proposed capital gains tax cut retroactive to Jan.  1, 1995.

Rep.  E.  Clay Shaw, R-Fla., the original sponsor of the provision, has told
AICPA leaders he'll try to get the proposal reinstated if they can devise a
way to make the workload compression plan revenue neutral.  Padwe, however,
takes a fatalist's view on Shaw's chances.

"We would love to see it come back," Padwe said, "but as a practical matter,
they say when something has fallen out of a bill it's hard to get it back in."

Although the AICPA's outside economist projected that the workload compression
proposal wouldn't drain tax dollars from the system, the Joint Tax Committee's
prognosticators came up with the $355 million mark.  The reason?  According to
the terms of the current provision, the quarterly estimated tax payments would
be made at the 34 percent level.  If a taxpayer owns all the shares of an S
corporation and is in the 31 percent bracket, why would he want to make the
payments?  On the other hand, if the same taxpayer were in the 39.6 percent
bracket, he would be more than happy to pay the 34 percent.

"He'd say, 'I'm getting the use of that money until next April,'" Padwe said.

That's what ends up costing the government those millions.  (The AICPA is now
proposing to increase the tax to 35 percent.)

Padwe still hasn't given up hope.  This year the 104th Congress is still in
control, so the AICPA doesn't need to find another champion for the bill.
Unfortunately a presidential election year isn't the best time to find a tax
bill, which is the typical vehicle to attach this provision to.

"It's not a bill you'd expect to stand alone," Padwe said.  "It's going to be
hard to find 500 congressmen to say, 'This is the most exciting thing I've
ever seen.  Quick, let's pass it.'"





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Congress passes tort reform bill with veto override


WASHINGTON -- Much to the relief of the American Institute of CPAs, Congress
voted to overturn President Clinton's veto of securities litigation reform.

The president had vetoed the legislation, which shields independent
accountants from abusive liability damage awards.  The veto shocked bill
supporters, including the AICPA.

The bill sailed through Congress last month as the House and Senate raced to
adjourn the 1995 legislative session.  Final passage of the bill - a top
lobbying priority for the Big Six accounting firms during each of the past two
Congresses - was "testament to the widely held belief that the tide of
frivolous securities litigation in this country must be stopped," AICPA
officials said.

A key provision of the bill for the accounting profession places new
restrictions on the ability of plaintiffs to use the "joint and several"
standard of liability for extracting huge damage awards from CPAs when other
defendants in the case are unable to pay their portion of the damages.

Instead, the legislation establishes a system of "proportionate liability"
under which accountants and other peripheral defendants will be expected to
pay only their fair share of a judgment.

That proportionate liability shield isn't completely bullet-proof, however.
Small investors will continue to be allowed to sue based on the "joint and
several" liability standard, and accountants who knowingly participate in a
securities fraud will remain subject to full "joint and several" liability.

Additionally, even in the proportionate liability cases, CPAs would be
required to pay up to 150 percent of their proportionate share of damages when
another defendant is insolvent.

At the same time, the legislation also contains a number of provisions to
ensure that accountants and other business advisers are held accountable in
cases where they knowingly permit their clients to engage in securities fraud.

The final version passed by Congress amends portions of the U.S.  Supreme
Court's controversial 1994 Central Bank decision to restore Securities and
Exchange Commission authority to bring "aiding and abetting" cases against
CPAs for knowingly violating federal securities law.

A separate provision of the bill codifies a key recommendation by
investigators of the savings and loan crisis that would require outside
auditors to disclose suspected client fraud to the appropriate enforcement
agency.

For his part, AICPA President Barry Melancon called the final bill "a fair
balance between the rights of truly defrauded investors and those start-up
companies and outside professionals who have become victims of a small group
of entrepreneurial lawyers abusing the legal system."

Passage of the legislation drew a sharply different reaction from critics of
litigation reform.

Consumer Federation of America Chairman Howard Metzenbaum attacked
congressional supporters of the bill for "carrying the ball for some very
special interests who only have a selfish financial interest to protect.

"The securities industry, accountants and corporate insiders are far less in
need of protection than is the small investor in the marketplace," he said.

In contrast, congressional advocates of the litigation reform measure
contended that the legislation would have increased investor control of class
action securities suits "so that settlements benefit the plaintiffs and not
just the plaintiffs' attorneys."

According to representatives of Sen.  Christopher Dodd, D-Conn., the bill's
chief sponsor, under the current system "investors generally receive only 7 to
14 cents per dollar of loss, and only after the plaintiffs attorneys take
their fee off the top."

To address this problem, the bill eliminates the "lodestar" approach to
calculating fees, under which "attorneys get to skim right off the top of a
settlement award," they said.  Instead, lawyers will be allowed to pocket only
"a reasonable percentage of the award they obtain for their clients."

In addition, the legislation includes provisions to:

* create a uniform pleading standard by adopting guidelines established by the
U.S.  Second Circuit Court of Appeals; * restrict the use of "professional
plaintiffs" in class action securities lawsuits; * require more complete
disclosure of settlement arrangements to enable plaintiffs in class action
suits to make informed decisions about attorney's fees; and * encourage more
meaningful corporate financial projections by establishing a new SEC-supported
"safe harbor" for forward looking financial statements.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

TAX PRACTICE:  Former Navy CPO sails into friendly tax prep waters


RICHMOND, VA.  - Rob Stepp went from looking for submarines to searching for
tax deductions.

The former Navy chief petty officer bought one Jackson Hewitt Tax Services
franchise and purchased the rights to open four more offices in the Richmond
area five years ago.  He's also planning to open a kiosk at his local Wal-Mart
this tax season and to add two more storefronts by next tax season.

After a decade in the Navy as a sonar technician, Stepp found that his
enthusiasm for accounting hadn't waned.

"All my life, I've loved numbers," Stepp said.  "Math was my favorite subject
in school.  I never used a calculator."

Stepp was still in the Navy, stationed in Virginia Beach, Va., when he was
inducted into the Jackson Hewitt system.  Because he received computer
training in the military, a friend in town asked if Stepp could help iron out
a few technology bugs at her tax practice.  His assignment was supposed to
last a few days, but ended up growing into a part-time job.

Stepp caught tax preparation fever, which led him and his wife, Helen, to
acquire the existing Richmond office and open four new locations in nearby
neighborhoods.

"We wanted these surrounding territories because they had no competition for
years," Stepp said.  "There were only H&R Block, CPAs and accountants.  The
average taxpayer doesn't need a CPA or accountant to do his taxes."

But the Navy didn't equip Stepp with the practical skills needed to run a
business.

"You get into the military and you've got a sure paycheck," Stepp noted.  "You
won't get laid off.  The biggest thing you have to do is show up."

The hardest part was hiring a staff, Stepp recalled.  Finding qualified
candidates and going through the interview process was a chore.  And
determining a salary scale was a nightmare.

"If they had experience working at H&R Block, it wasn't fair to pay them
beginners' wages," Stepp said.  "In the military you don't have that.  You're
paid according to your rank."

The first months were tough.  At the time, some of Stepp's more than 60
employees had a lot of experience, some had "just basic training" and some had
tax knowledge, but no computer training.

"It was quite a year," Stepp said of his May 1991 to early 1992 adventure.
"I'm glad it's over."

In retrospect, Stepp said he should have taken more time to expand his
business, which now employs 90 workers in tax season and eight after May 15.
Stepp's offices handled 5,800 clients during the 1995 tax season.

His advice to first-time business owners:  Find someone experienced who can
work as an assistant.  He also suggests that novice business owners advertise
in their local newspaper.

Stepp credits his practice's success - he won Jackson Hewitt's annual customer
service award - to the cheerful atmosphere in his offices.

"We hire happy, upbeat receptionists," he said.  "If you get a bad reception,
you can forget about seeing that client."

In the interest of customer satisfaction, Stepp and his staff spent last
summer calling all their clients to ask if they had any problems with the
practice's service during the 1995 tax season.  Nationwide, taxpayers suffered
through refund delays because of fraud checks involving the earned income tax
credit and Social Security numbers.

Those who said they had a problem were asked for suggestions on how the
service could be improved.  The clients also received a certificate for the
free preparation of one tax return.

"People were angry at all tax preparers," Stepp said about the 1995 tax
season.  "Once they found out that we didn't know that the Internal Revenue
Service kept these procedures under wraps, they were OK.  Their biggest
complaint is, 'I want a bigger refund.'" Even the Navy couldn't help customers
with that one.

Dealing with customers also was new territory for Stepp to explore when he
left the Navy.  And while he succeeded in civilian life, Stepp concedes that
it's not always easy for those leaving the military to find a fulfilling
second career.

"The real work is difficult to handle," Stepp said.  "In the Navy, someone was
always there to tell you what to do."


Editorial:Flunking the test

The CPA exam needs reform

The night before accounting school grads take the CPA exam, they should pray
for one of two things:  acute accounting knowledge or the luck to take the
test with a pack of boneheads.

Either way, they'll do fine.  That's because the American Institute of CPAs,
which administers the Uniform CPA Examination, uses a quota system to rate CPA
candidates.  First, those scoring 75 percent correctly on the test are
automatically in the CPA club.  But, if those scoring 75 and above are not
equal to 30 percent of the test takers, grades often in the 60s are simply
rounded up to 75 to meet the 30 percent quota.

It sounds like a strange way to introduce a new crop of young adults into a
profession that prides itself on precision and integrity.  The exact mechanics
of it all even escapes the comprehension of two out of three state regulators
surveyed by the National Association of State Boards of Accountancy.

But the results of the May 1995 exam have sent the issue to the front and
center for many state regulators.  In last spring's exam, grades were adjusted
to make 62 the pass point on two sections of the test, but no adjustments were
made for candidates who scored less than 75 on two others.  By one estimate,
6,000 of the 61,650 candidates who might have passed the test were flunked so
the AICPA could make its 30 percent target.

The South Dakota board complained that it is only a matter of time before a
legal challenge is made to this procedure.  The board is right.  It would be
tough to explain to a candidate that he or she flunked just because he or she
is smarter than only 69 percent of those taking the test.

It's time that NASBA and the AICPA put an end to the quota system.  Both
groups should work together to create a new system involving, first, a test
that reliably measures proficiency year after year, and second, a definitive
passing score that requires no curving to meet an arbitrary, monopoly-imposed
quota.

Every candidate must be assured of a fair test.


LETTERS FROM EXAM CANDIDATES:

Exam results 'tough to swallow'

Thank you for the shocking revelation about the CPA exam ("Fight over CPA exam
tests the testers," Nov.  20-Dec.  10, 1995).  I was greatly disturbed and
deeply saddened after reading your report, because I could have been one of
the 6,000 candidates who otherwise would have passed the test with grade
adjustment.  I scored 67 on the May 1995 Financial Accounting Section - my
last paper to pass, on which, according to your report, 66 was the passing
point after grade adjustment.

Despite the fact that I hit 68 a few times in other papers, I never questioned
the grading system.  I forced myself to admit that somebody did better than I,
therefore, I did not deserve to pass and had to study harder.

The May 1995 result was very tough to swallow, even more so after I read your
article last night.  I feel most sorry for my wife and two children, for all
the sacrifices, understanding and encouragement they put in for me.

David P.  Sin Scarborough, Ontario


I was a November 1995 candidate for the Uniform CPA Examination.

This was my ninth time taking the exam due to the fact that I have been out of
college for more than 10 years.  However, through studying for and by retaking
the exam, my scores have shown a certain degree of improvement toward the 75
percent passing score.

My reason for contacting you is that I have become very concerned about the
grading process which is used to determine the actual percentage that is
deemed passing or failing on the exam and how that percentage is determined.

Most CPA review course admininstrators tell their students that a 67 through
69 score is graded upward to a passing 75 percent, yet, on the May 1995 exam,
I received a score of 69 on the Business Law section.

In a recent special report in Accounting Today, (Fight over CPA exam tests the
testers," Nov.  20-Dec.  10, 1995) the following points were brought to my
attention as a CPA exam candidate:

* It is stated that "if less than 30 percent of the candidates score 75
percent, the failing grades are curved upward to assure that at least 30
percent pass."  * A 65 might be a passing grade in one year but not in the
next.  * On the 1993 exam, candidates answering only 65 percent of the
questions correctly on the Accounting Theory exam were given grades which were
curved upward to a passing 75 percent.  * On the 1992 exam, a 52 score was
curved upward to a passing 75 percent.  * On the May 1995 exam the grades were
adjusted to a make the passing grades 62 on the Accounting and Reporting
sections and 66 on the Business Law and Auditing Sections.  Thirty-five
percent were allowed to pass on this exam.

With reference to this article, on the May 1992 exam, I scored over 52 on
three sections of the exam.

I would like to know what criteria is used to determine which candidates are
to be included in the 30 or 35 percent passing rate and how the subjects in
which they are allowed to pass are determined.

I have become very concerned about the grading procedures due to the fact that
my grades have only increased by a very small margin in six of the nine times
in which I have taken the exam.  In at least three instances, my grades were
almost exactly the same.  I was a little concerned at this point.

After receiving my scores for the May 1995 exam, and also after reading the
article, I became very disturbed that only a percentage of candidates are
allowed to pass the exam, even if a 69 through 74 score is obtained.  I am
sure this is also very disturbing to other candidates who have scored in this
range.

What is even more alarming is that no one knows how, in any given year, the
pass point is determined.  Personally, it makes me feel as though I am
shooting in the dark, yet never hitting anything.

As important as this exam is to accountants and to entry into the profession,
I feel that as a CPA candidate and, certainly, one who has studied in order to
master this area of learning, there needs to be a better understanding of the
grading system which is used to determine our career paths.

Marlene Parham-Murphy Chicago


Editor's Note:  A copy of this letter was sent ot the National Association of
State Boards of Accountancy.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Study finds employers liable for $95B error on non-exempt employees


WASHINGTON - A new study suggests that the potential annual private sector
overtime liability for misclassification of exempt status under the Fair Labor
Standards Act is $1.8 billion per week, or $95 billion annually.

The Employment Policy Foundation's study is based on Census Bureau wage and
hour data and assumes that all white collar employees now classified as exempt
were in fact non-exempt.

Kenneth L.  Deavers, the author of the study and the conservative group's
chief economist, notes that such an outcome might be considered to be extreme,
"but was seriously considered by the Minimum Wage Study Commission in its 1981
report."

In a more immediate and consequential sense, the study shows that potential
employer liability for overtime pay could be substantial, the group said.

Because employers found to have misclassified non-exempt employees as exempt
are liable for two years back pay under the FLSA, the liability for back pay
could be $1.9 billion for each 1 percent of the white collar workforce found
to be non-exempt.  And, if the violations were found to be willful, the back
pay liability extends to three years and the award is doubled.

Deavers describes the existing Department of Labor definitions and tests for
determining exempt status as "so arcane and subjective they lend themselves to
employer misunderstanding and possible administrative manipulation."

Deavers goes on to say that "if firms incorrectly categorize employees as
exempt, or in some other way disqualify employees from exemption, they are
liable for back pay for overtime and, in some cases, punitive damages.  It is
these potential costs that motivate firms to push for clear-cut rules
determining exempt status under the FLSA."

"The definitions used to determine who is an exempt employee have not changed
for nearly 50 years, despite the revolutionary changes in the workplace,"
according to Edward Potter, the group's president.  "Under the present system
of subjective definitions, an employer never knows whether it has properly
classified employees until after an administrative review lawsuit.  Clearly,
the FLSA exemption should reflect the characteristics of modern-day work:
increasingly knowledge based, requiring independent judgment on the part of
the workers."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

AICPA, AT&T cite businesses


DETROIT - The American Institute of CPAs and AT&T Capital have awarded $50,000
in grants to three local entrepreneurs to help finance their businesses.

The Partners for Growth grants were given to a new basketball facility for
inner-city teenagers, the owner of a bookstore and coffee house dedicated to
increasing cultural awareness within the African-American community, and to
the president of a minority-owned environmental chemistry consulting firm.

Partners for Growth, which began in 1994 as a pilot program in Houston and
Philadelphia, provides financial assistance to new businesses that demonstrate
a positive social impact.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Expect the unexpected:  Trends to watch


Hang on.  1996 is going to be bumpy ride.  Start with a late-to-press tax code
and finish with a presidential election.  In between, add management-by-chaos
at the American Institute of CPAs and wild card court decisions on CPA
regulation.  And 1996 is sure to be wild and unpredictable.

But that hasn't deterred Accounting Today's fearless prognosticators.  Here
then are the top trends to watch in 1996:

Inroads by non-CPAs:  Four of the top 10 fastest-growing tax and accounting
firms are hardly your traditional, CPA-owned businesses.  They include
franchises like Jackson Hewitt or conglomerates like American Express.  Even
CPA insiders say the days of CPA-owned monopolies are numbered.

But beyond direct threats, look for new competition from unexpected sources:
Baby Bells are offering start-up business services.  Consumers and small
business are buying new business and accounting software at a blistering pace.
Bankers are end-running accountants with consumer-like matrices for business
loans and on-line record keeping services.

CPE gets a makeover:  Some leaders of the profession are openly questioning
the value and purpose of mandated continuing professional education.  But more
important, computer-based training using multimedia programs, on-line chat
sessions and just-in-time delivery could radically reshape how CPAs choose,
use and pay for CPE.  Some of the products that will point the way are
scheduled for 1996.

Tax system overhaul:  If the flat tax started to loom seriously for the first
time in 1995, then the 1996 presidential election year seems sure to keep it
alive.  No matter who's elected, the next president will have run on a
platform of tax reform.

CPA advertising:  With the American Institute of CPA's $10 million ad
campaign, even tradition-bound, rank-and-file local CPA firms are testing the
media waters for the first time.

AICPA/state society coordination:  Under attack to consolidate services and
cut duplicative costs, AICPA chief executive Barry Melancon is leading a drive
for the profession's trade groups to end hostile rivalries.  Look for advances
in CPE and health insurance.

Value billing:  With clients becoming increasingly cost conscious and
technology reshaping the underlying economics of traditional hourly billing,
tax and accounting practitioners are increasingly turning to alternative
pricing policies, for instance:  Tax prep priced by the form, consulting
engagements priced by the percentage of savings, standard accounting services
priced as part of a bundle of products.  Hot books on the subject:  Last
year's "Innovative Billing and Collection Methods That Work" by Charles and
Joseph Larson, published by Irwin Professional Publishing; this year's
"Breaking the Paradigm" by August Aquila, from the AICPA.

New work place solutions:  In this new era of diminished expectations, a new
generation of professional is striking a fresh balance between career and
personal fulfillment.  Large firms like Ernst & Young are 'hoteling' staffers
- providing home office workspace only when needed.  Midsized firm Clifton
Gunderson is offering partner-level flextime.  Local firms are going virtual -
like CPA Janet Caswell in Bloomfield, Mich., who sent her staffers to work at
home with laptops, e-mail systems and an 800 phone number.

Trade show power shift:  The AICPA and state societies have long held a lock
on the pace-setting conferences in the CPA business.  But declining attendance
revenue and increasing vendor competition are adding a new element of
commercialization to the conference schedule.  As the accounting profession
gets increasingly technology-driven, watch for technology vendors to take more
active and visible roles.  For instance:  This year the AICPA will launch the
Practitioner's Symposium, consolidating three old conferences and making
vendors an integral part.  The National Society of Public Accountants is
considering a technology show.  Microsoft is investigating a number of ways of
establishing its own conference presence.  And Tom Davis, a CPA consultant and
Accounting Today software reviewer, is planning a software show for Amelia
Island, Ga.  The SoftEx show, long aimed at big companies, will be adding a
small-business focus this year.

Consulting takes the driver's seat:  After a year of tremendous double-digit
percentage gains in management advisory services, consulting has clearly
emerged as the driving force at the Big Six.  Ernst & Young could be garnering
half its fees from consulting by 1999.

Financial planning:  With tax work becoming more of a commodity and
marginalized, an increasing number of tax professionals are turning to
personal financial planning.  Membership in the AICPA's financial planning
division has surged with the recognition of the rival certified financial
planner designation.  The number of registered advisers is booming.  And with
a flat tax, planning could be all that's left.

Outsourcing:  Re-engineering and rightsizing are driving staff and
administrative functions into the waiting arms of accountants and business
advisors.  Over the next three years, outsourced assignments could jump from
26 percent of the world's 300 largest corporations to 42 percent, according to
Arthur Andersen, one of the most aggressive information technology providers.
Even the level of controversial internal audit outsourcing could more than
double.

CPA firm diversification:  KPMG Peat Marwick's creation of Baymark, a captive
investment bank, was just the tip of the iceberg as firms grapple for new
sources of income.  Ernst & Young is aiming to become a major player in
hospital administration.

Related trend - Expansion goes vertical:  Firms are acquiring skills and
practices in strategically important niches.  Among smaller firms, for
example, Yergen & Meyer in Portland, Ore., has acquired TGS, a local boutique
firm with Pacific Rim connections.

IRS hunkers down:  With much of the momentum for a flat tax fueled by simple
hatred at the IRS, the agency can be expected to pull in its horns.  Without
the taxpayer compliance measurement project, for example, watch for the IRS to
pick new audit targets using computerized statistical techniques.

Related trend - Go ELF yourself:  By going on-line as much as possible, the
IRS could soon be circumventing established electronic filing services.

Non-financial performance measures:  With the traditional audit in decline,
expect a slew of ideas for providing new assurance services.  KPMG Peat
Marwick is rolling out its Business Measurement Process to augment the audit.
The AICPA has a committee developing more.

Related trend 1 - CPAs create new system of product development:  But even
more important, the profession could be forging a totally new system of
creating CPA-only services.  Instead of writing cookbooks detailing every step
of the new process, standard-setters might only mandate results, leaving the
methodologies to innovators in the CPA marketplace.

Related trend 2 - Plain-paper financial statements:  Whether the AICPA
approves so-called assembly statements or not, clearly many CPAs believe
small-business clients are clamoring for simplified reports.  Watch for CPAs
to find products to compete with low-end or non-CPA competitors.

Windows sets the standard:  Although the accounting market may lag behind the
rest of the world, it is inevitable that Microsoft's Windows will become the
standard software platform.  The expenses of rewriting DOS software could
drive many smaller software vendors out of the business.

Related trend - Intuit, armed with TurboTax, becomes a standard of its own in
electronic commerce.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Quotables, 1995


"An accused mass murderer has more rights than a taxpayer fingered by the IRS.
Jeffrey Dahmer was considered innocent until proven guilty, but Mom and Pop
small business owners ...  are not afforded this protection."

- Rep.  James Traficant, D-Ohio,leader of the charge for new "taxpayer rights"
legislation to a House Ways and Means subcommittee.



"It's been a brutal year.  We have had 10 times the number of threats.  It's a
kill-the-messenger mentality."

- John Hewitt, president of Jackson Hewitt, a Virginia Beach, Va.-based tax
preparation chain, on the delayed refunds during the filing season from hell.



"Looking for logic in the IRS code is kind of like looking for love in a
singles bar.  You may find a little bit of it somewhere, but it's unlikely."

- Paula Cozzi Goedert, tax attorney with Chicago's Jenner & Block, on the IRS
crackdown on unreported income for nonprofits.



"There's no such thing as an economic reality audit.  They don't exist."

- IRS deputy commissioner Michael Dolan, responding to the National Society of
Public Accountant's concerns.



Buckley simply "decided he didn't want to do it anymore.  He just wasn't
having fun."

- H&R Block spokesman on chief executive Harry Buckley's retirement.



"Sometimes the attitude is, 'Well, we're Peat Marwick, and this is the way
we've always done it.' Then you have to answer, 'Well, who bought who, baby?'

- Curt Mingle, senior executive partner of Clifton Gunderson & Co., at an
AICPA conference, referring to a Big Six mentality that would occasionally
crop up in the three offices Clifton had acquired from Peat.



"During my confirmation hearing, I was surprised at how few people knew how we
went about our business."

- IRS Commissioner Margaret Milner Richardson, when warning a new Congress not
to make laws that are impossible to administer.



The taxpayer compliance program "is my definition of mixed emotions.  I feel
bad for the client, but the fees are pretty good."

- Jeffrey Raymon, member of the AICPA small business taxation committee, on
the since-killed TCMP audits.



"You know how they say it ain't over till the fat lady sings?  Well, the fat
lady hasn't even gotten on stage yet."

- Real estate consultant and CPA Stephen Roulac, on his pending charges of
fraud and request for punitive damages in a suit against Deloitte & Touche
claiming breach of fiduciary duty and breach of contract.  Roulac had already
been awarded $1.25 million in damages.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

THE BEST OF FOOTNOTES 1995


BARRY WHO?  - "Barry Melancon, please," said the caller to the American
Institute of CPA's New York office.

"Who?"  asked the receptionist.  "I'm sorry, I don't have that name in the
directory."

"But he's the new president of the AICPA," the caller said.

"Oh, you mean Me-lahn-KON?  He won't really be here until, like, July."

"Ok, thank you.  I guess I'll try him in Louisiana."


TV NEWS SHREDS CPAS BECAUSE CPAS DIDN'T - A bevy of Chicago accountants were
caught red-faced on the 11 o'clock news for failing to shred many confidential
client documents before trashing them.

A local television station news crew from WMAQ unearthed all sorts of
interesting records by going through the dumpsters of major CPA firms and
financial institutions.

Unused checkbooks, bank statements and tax returns were just a few of the
items dug up.


WE WOULDN'T TOUCH THAT WITH A 10-FOOT POLL - San Diego CPAs felt the bite of
American Express Tax & Business Services after sending a survey to members of
the local chapter of the California Society of CPAs.

The survey asked if CPAs thought American Express reps were "snakes in the
grass who have no business being a part of our meetings."  AmEx didn't take
too kindly to being compared to reptiles.  "To be referred to as snakes seems
mean-spirited at best and defamatory at worst," wrote AmEx counsel Sarah
McKenzie to San Diego chapter president Doug Obenshain.  Obenshain apologized,
but that wasn't good enough for McKenzie, who requested he either retract the
comments or publish his letter of apology in the next chapter newsletter.


I JUST WANNA SHOP - All it took was a Hindu monk and a good accountant to
straighten out the Yin and Yang of singer Gino Vanelli's life.

Vanelli became an overnight sensation in 1978 when his hit record "I Just
Wanna Stop" sold a million copies, making him a multimillionaire.

But apparently a million dollars doesn't go as far as it used to, and Vanelli
quickly racked up quite a debt, supporting friends and relatives and buying
new homes.

Vanelli began a spiritual journey, seeking direction from a world of
philosophies.  He spoke with Benedictine monks in Big Sur, Calif., Inca
priests in Peru and Zen priests in Japan, finally meeting a Hindu monk near
Malibu, Calif.

The monk closed his eyes, opened them and gazed far into the sky.  After a
moment of silence he said the words that would bring about Vanelli's financial
salvation:  "What you really need is a good accountant."


LIFE IS LIKE A BOX OF LAWSUITS - Paramount Pictures Corp.  has resolved its
financial differences with "Forrest Gump" author Winston Groom.

The studio had claimed it hasn't cleared any "net profits" for the blockbuster
movie, and gave Groom only $250,000 for his work.  The movie reportedly
grossed $341 million in the United States.

The settlement came soon after Groom retained attorney Pierce O'Donnel, the
same lawyer who represented writer Art Buchwald in a similar dispute against
Paramount regarding the Eddie Murphy movie "Coming to America."

In addition, Paramount agreed to buy the sequel.  This time Groom got an
undisclosed seven-figure sum.


FROM THE HOME OFFICE - Concerned about his viewers' finances, CBS "Late Show"
host David Letterman offered a few signs that you've hired a bad accountant.
Among them were:

* You hear him on the phone saying, "Have I ever let you down, Leona?"  * His
"short form" looks suspiciously like a cocktail napkin.  * He used to be some
kind of financial big shot in Orange County.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Rogue AAA 'Club' demands change


SARASOTA, FLA.  - A small but influential group within the American Accounting
Association has officially challenged the governance of the organization,
claiming unfair representation and poor management.

Informally calling themselves "The Reform Club," the disgruntled college and
university faculty have gained enough support to propose three
near-revolutionary bylaw changes and bring them to a vote before the
membership of less than 10,000.

Although even the reformers doubt they'll win, the battle is rocking an
otherwise staid association of college and university faculty.  It is also
posing a first challenge to new executive director Craig Polhemus.  He took
over from Paul Gerhardt, who retired after two decades of service last summer.

The proposals would open up the executive committee to a broader nominating
process, encourage the proliferation of sections within the organization, and
allow members to receive one of the section journals as part of membership
dues.

Critics of The Reform Club reject the charge that the organization is
undemocratic or that its highest echelons are closed to small-school faculty.
They criticize the club's proposals as vague, with the potential to fragment
the association.

Describing the AAA's executive committee as dominated by 10 or 12 doctoral
degree-granting schools, Paul Williams, a professor at North Carolina State
University, said the panel has ignored member needs.

"Most members are at schools like N.C.  State, and the AAA is not responsive
to the types of problems we encounter," Williams says.  "Our primary job is to
teach and only in the last couple of years have we had a teaching section.


'The Reform Club' agenda

1.  Open ruling executive committee to nominations.  2.  Foster new and
smaller special-interest sections.  3.  Impose market discipline on journal
publishing.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Get real, AICPA tells flat taxers


by Sandy Hock


CORONADO, CALIF.  - As an American Institute of CPAs committee prepares to
release a 225-page report on alternative income tax systems, the committee's
chair challenged those touting reform to get real.

"You're dealing with theoretical rhetoric and missing the realities that we
accountants tend to revel in," said Byrle M.  Abbin, chair of the AICPA's
consumption tax task force.

Economists from all sides "are so far apart that I don't trust either end of
the spectrum," Abbin, a retired partner from Arthur Andersen & Co., told the
420 conferees at the AICPA Fall Tax Division meeting here last month.

Abbin's committee report, scheduled to be released this week, is not intended
to be a policy statement on each reform proposal.  Abbin said, however, that
the AICPA doubts that substituting a flat tax, the most talked about tax
reform proposition, would "appreciably simplify" the system for many
taxpayers.

Since 70 percent of individual filers use the standard deductions, Abbin wrote
in the back-up material provided for the conference, the loss of itemized
deductions does not change their situation.

Further, whether standard or itemized deductions are used, any individual with
taxable income of less than $100,000 can get his or her tax liability from
Form 1040 instructions.

"For them, the effect is the same as having one flat rate, at least with
regard to the complexity of calculating the tax," Abbin wrote.

And the flat tax was just one of the areas touched on when Abbin moderated an
alternative tax panel discussion that featured a member of former Republican
Congressman Jack Kemp's Tax Reform Commission and a Democrat offering the
party's response to the commission's work.

Speaking for the Kemp commission, Loretta H.  Adams, a San Diego business
owner, said the current level of tax complexity "is more than just a hassle
and drag on the economy."  In fact, Adams said U.S.  companies spent $127
billion and individuals spent another $65 billion complying with tax laws.
Losing that $192 billion to tax compliance and preparation is the equivalent
of "taking General Motors' output and dumping it in the ocean."

After attending public hearings in eight cities and hearing from 125
witnesses, the Kemp panel came away with one message:  The current tax system
should be replaced.  The commission drew up six principles tax reform should
promote:  simplicity, stability, neutrality, visibility, economic growth and
fairness; taxes shouldn't be hidden.

While Adams said the Kemp committee will release its report early this year,
John Buckley, the minority chief tax counsel for the House Ways and Means
Committee, is already speculating that the commission will back a flat tax.

"It may be the flat tax as proposed by [Rep.  Dick] Armey would be what is
recommended," Buckley said.  "If it is, I think I can say the Democrats will
oppose it."

In short, Armey, a Texas Republican, calls for a flat tax rate of from 17 to
20 percent.  It's known as the proposal that will allow taxpayers to file
their returns on a postcard.

Buckley argued that calling the Armey plan a flat tax is "misleading."  For
individuals, the flat income tax would be levied on wages and retirement
distributions.  Dividends, on the other hand, would be exempt.

"There would be a substantial shift of tax burden down the income scale,"
Buckley maintained.

A flat tax would repeal the earned income tax credit, which would contribute
to increasing taxes on the lowest 20 percent of working Americans, he added.

Self-employed individuals would not be entitled to a standard deduction so
they would be paying the 17 to 20 percent rate "from dollar one," Buckley
said.  And since the Armey plan would allow employers to deduct wages, but not
employees' fringe benefits, it would give companies an incentive to drop
health insurance in favor of salary increases.

In addressing the other tax proposals bandied about, such as the national
retail sales tax plan endorsed by Sen.  Richard G.  Lugar, R-Ind., Buckley was
equally lukewarm.

"Retail taxes are a small part of the economy," he said.  And only three
states have tried to tax services, which is a large segment of the economy, he
added.

Abbin gave a thumbnail sketch of each of the major tax proposals.  He
explained that the plan furthest along in the thought process is the unlimited
savings allowance proposed by Sens.  Sam Nunn, D-Ga., and Pete Domenici,
R-N.M.  That bipartisan plan favors savings and taxes consumption.  Armey's
proposal is a five-page bill that extracts certain segments of the Internal
Revenue Code, Abbin said.

"It leaves a lot of questions," he added.

And all that is concrete about the plans of Rep.  Bill Archer, R-Texas, to
dismantle the Internal Revenue Service and overhaul the tax system are
interviews with the press.

But he did offer some opinions about the proposals.  Here are a few snippets:

National retail sales tax:  "They'd have to control cascading [taxes on top of
taxes].  ...  [The plan's backers] want a killing off of the IRS.  I call them
the tax militia.  They think Republicans who favor the flat tax or
Nunn/Domenici are ultra-liberal."

Flat tax:  "The key element is for international trade.  Everything made in
the United States is taxed, even if it is exported.  If there's no taxation on
operations outside the United States the whole nature of international tax
planning goes out the window."

USA plan:  "Exports will have border relief, but exports will be taxed."

Value-added tax:  "A credit invoice system will never happen here.
Politicians don't like that obvious nature."  In other words, taxpayers would
see how much their government costs them.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Geo.  S.  Olive acquires local health care consulting firm


INDIANAPOLIS - In a move that doubles its fees in the health care niche and
establishes a consulting arm, regional firm Geo.  S.  Olive & Co.  has
acquired local boutique Kimmerling, Myers & Co.

Now the largest health care practice in the state, GSO is poised for even
further expansion in the niche, managing partner John Harris said.

"Our effort is to become part of the health care industry, not just to serve
it," Harris said, adding that the firm will become more involved with trade
associations and seminars, and will even develop some products - such as
benchmarking statistics - useful to the industry.  "Our goal is to become the
largest health care consulting firm in the Midwest."

GSO's $2 million health care practice had consisted mainly of compliance work,
while the $2 million Kimmerling, Myers is virtually all consulting.  GSO,
which ended fiscal year May 1995 at $43 million, expects to jump to $50
million by May 1996, Harris said.

"They were servicing clients we didn't have access to," Harris said.  "We
didn't have the consulting experience."

"GSO had physician clients, while Kimmerling, Myers served facility clients,"
said Jeff Kimmerling, managing partner of Kimmerling, Myers.  "It made sense
to put our work together.  We expect to double the health care practice in two
years."

GSO's health care practice will operate out of Kimmerling, Myer's Indianapolis
office under the name Olive Health Care Consulting.  The division will be
headed by Kimmerling, who joins GSO as a partner along with James Myers,
Michael Merkel and Michael Craig.  KM's 20 staff members also joins GSO.

With 10 offices throughout Indiana and Illinois, GSO now has 70 partners and
more than 600 staff.  The few people comprising GSO's existing health care
practice will move into the Olive Health Care Consulting office, Harris said.
Ten new hires have been made to supplement that office, Harris added.


PRACTICE MANAGEMENT:  AICPA woos college students with interactive CD-ROM

NEW YORK - It may not stir quite as much interest as a keg party, but the
American Institute of CPAs has created a funky-yet-informative CD-ROM aimed at
encouraging college students to become CPAs.

The second phase of the AICPA's two-level campaign to encourage new recruits
to the profession, "Room Zoom:  The CPA SourceDisc," offers students a variety
of windows into a CPA's world.  The interactive CD contains about 20 minutes
of video, audio and still photos, plus a large body of text and plenty of
graphics.

"We needed the proper medium," said John Daidone, AICPA manager of recruiting
programs.  "CD-ROM offers the best approach to illustrate the CPA profession
as being technically proficient."

The AICPA has produced 5,000 CDs which will be sent to the state societies,
the recruiting contacts at larger firms and several colleges and universities
across the nation, Daidone said.  The state societies are encouraged to
distribute the CDs directly to local colleges as well.  Additional copies of
the CD will cost $5 each, with discounts if more than 10 are ordered.  The
AICPA spent $300,000 on the production and distribution of the CDs and the
accompanying posters.

The CD opens with a young resident of a home office welcoming her "guest."
The user is told to make herself at home while the host runs out for a minute.
As the user moves the mouse across the screen, different cartoon-like bubbles
appear, displaying one of the gateways that provide more information.  For
instance, when moving the mouse to the bookshelf, the user is offered the
option of investigating library resources.  Choose the safe and learn about
salaries; a calendar leads to "a day in the life."  Other gateways include
"career opportunities," "ladder of success," "human resources," "tools of the
trade" and "organizations."

The career opportunities gateway features CPAs in various segments of the
profession offering insights on their career successes.  Human resources sheds
light on key issues such as balancing personal and professional life and
career opportunities for women and minorities.  The library features
information on the Uniform CPA Examination and a directory of more than 800
institutions across the United States that offer accounting programs.

The AICPA stepped up its recruiting efforts after a 1990 poll found students
unimpressed with the role of accountants.  "That's why we made this effort,"
Daidone said.  "In general we found that a lot of negative stereotypes about
accountants came out in the survey.  They thought accountants were boring
number crunchers who worked alone."

The first phase of the recruitment effort was aimed at high school and early
college students.  A video produced in 1993 introduced viewers to the
accounting profession.

"The first phase of the program, 'Accounting:  One degree with 360 degrees of
possibilities,' was designed to attract students to the study of accounting,"
Daidone said.  "In this second phase we're taking it up one more level and
trying to attract students to become CPAs."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

IRS tells how workers can declare 'independence'


by Ken Rankin


WASHINGTON - Responding to criticism that some Internal Revenue Service
regions are conducting a witch hunt against businesses that classify workers
as independent contractors, top tax service officials are preparing new
instructions to discourage such heavy handed enforcement tactics.

According to IRS Commissioner Margaret Milner Richardson, new training
materials under development for IRS examiners will "emphasize the principle
that using independent contractors can be a legitimate business practice that
will not be challenged by the service."

A new headquarters policy embodied in the training materials will require
faster resolution of worker classification disputes and uniform standards for
defining independent contractors throughout the country.

Testifying before Congress late last year, Richardson said she hoped to have
the new worker classification materials finalized in time to permit retraining
of all IRS examiners by the end of this month.

The new training aids are the latest in a series of moves by the IRS to defuse
mounting criticism from accountants and small businesses that the agency's
crackdown on the use of independent contractors is improper and abusive.

Adding to the concerns are the stiff penalties for businesses charged with
violating the current standards.

Employers accused of incorrectly classifying W-2 workers as independent
contractors can be required to pay 100 percent of both the employer's and the
employee's share of Social Security and Medicare payroll taxes, plus all of
the federal income taxes that would have been withheld had the contractor been
classified as a salaried employee.

If the IRS declares the classification error to be intentional - a finding the
agency is not required to prove - the business can be hit with an additional
100 percent penalty, plus interest for previous years.

Delegates to this summer's White House Conference on Small Business identified
reform of IRS independent contractor ground rules as their No.  1 priority,
and during subsequent House hearings on the problem, CPAs from across the
country called for legislation to set simpler rules governing worker
classification.

Shaken by the backlash against the agency's current enforcement strategy, IRS
officials placed much of the blame on overzealous field examiners.

To ensure uniform treatment of all businesses under investigation for
independent contractor violations, the IRS adopted new procedures requiring
regional and local personnel to secure approval from the national office in
Washington before undertaking any large worker classification projects.

The program will be based on the following series of principles which
Richardson said would govern future IRS policy in worker classification cases:

* Worker classification issues should be resolved as quickly and as early in
the administrative process as possible.  * Worker classification issues should
be resolved uniformly throughout the country.  * Resolution of worker
classification issues should take into account a taxpayer's past compliance
with section 530, as well as the common law standard (governing worker
classification).  * The IRS compliance programs should encourage correct
classification and correct reporting of payments to workers.  *
Reclassification of workers who have legitimately been treated as independent
contractors must be avoided.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

Audit & Accounting:  Change Of Auditors


US 1 SHIFTS FROM DELOITTE TO COOPERS:  Deloitte & Touche was dismissed as
independent accountant for US 1 Industries after helping the client correct a
series of internal control problems ranging from unrecorded transactions to
inadequate computerized accounting systems.

Over a year ago, Deloitte informed officials at the Gary, Ind.  company that
US 1's management was "unable to close the accounting records and produce
reliable financial statements within the time frames required for public
companies."

"Significant transactions had occurred that had not been recorded on the books
and records of the company, including sales of property, repossession of
equipment, and contingencies related to broken lease commitments and other
contractual agreements," the client told the Securities and Exchange
Commission.

In addition, "supporting documentation for a significant number of sales, cost
of sales, cash receipts and other general ledger journal entries could not be
located."

Although accountants at Deloitte concluded that the company had adequately
addressed each of these issues, US 1 elected to replace that firm with Coopers
& Lybrand.

CANADIAN ACCOUNTANTS SOUR ON WINCANTON FOLLOWING QUESTIONABLE DEALS:  Canadian
accountants at KPMG Peat Marwick Thorne resigned as auditor for Reno,
Nev.-based Wincanton Corp.  after informing the client that they were
"unwilling to be associated with the financial statements prepared by
management."

KPMG's concerns were stirred by a series of recent transactions, including the
sale of stock in the company's Tradesman Industries subsidiary to Work
Recovery Inc.  for shares of that corporation valued at some $2.5 million.

The accountants also raised questions about a $9.6 million consulting fee paid
to Work Recovery in connection with the sale of cargo bed and tailgate systems
technology to that company.

In disassociating themselves from the client's financial statements, the
Vancouver-based accountants said they couldn't obtain sufficient appropriate
audit evidence on the propriety of these transactions.


Form 8-K filings

All For a Dollar (Springfield, Mass.), from Coopers & Lybrand.

American Bancshares Inc.  (Bradenton, Fla.), from Varnadore, Tyler &
Hawthorne, P.A.  to Coopers & Lybrand.

Avant!  Corp.  (Sunnyvale, Calif.), from Coopers & Lybrand to KPMG Peat
Marwick.

Assisted Living Concepts Inc.  (Portland, Ore.), from Price Waterhouse to KPMG
Peat Marwick.

Chicago Miniature Lamp Inc.  (Canton, Mass.), from Arthur Andersen to Ernst &
Young.

Electro-Kinetic Systems Inc.  (Pennsauken, N.J.), from Axelrod & Co.

Four Seasons Fund II L.P.  (Manakin-Sabot, Va.), from Deloitte & Touche to
Arthur Andersen.

Franklin Ophthalmic Instruments Co., Inc.  (Romeoville, Ill.), from Marinelli
& Scott to BDO Seidman.

Gaming World International Ltd.  (Ellwood City, Pa.), from Grant Thornton to
S.R.  Snodgrass, A.C.

Global Telemedia International, Inc.  (Atlanta), from Kaufman, Rossin & Co.
to Tauber & Balser, P.C.

Innovative Shipping Systems Inc.  (Sarasota, Fla.), from Natherson & Co., P.A.
to Bobbitt, Pittenger & Co., P.A.

Interactive Technologies Corp., Inc.  (Melbourne, Fla.), from Lumsden & Co.
to Turner, Stone & Co.

Just Toys Inc.  (New York), from Richard A.  Eisner & Co.  to Ernst & Young.

Laser Photonics Inc.  (Orlando, Fla.), from Coopers & Lybrand to Corbin &
Wertz.

Lucor Inc.  (Boca Raton, Fla.), from Goldstein Lewin & Co.  to KPMG Peat
Marwick.

Magnivision Corp.  (Wall, N.J.), from Lawson, Rescinio, Schibell & Assoc.,
P.C.

Medmarco, Inc.  (Salt Lake City), from Bradshaw, Smith & Co.  to Arthur
Andersen.

Microelectronic Packaging Inc.  (San Diego), from Price Waterhouse to BDO
Seidman.

Micro One Direct Information Services Inc.  (Beaverton, Ore.), from Price
Waterhouse to Deloitte & Touche.

MSB Bancorp, Inc.  (Goshen, N.Y.), from Nugent & Haeussler, P.C.  to KPMG Peat
Marwick.

The New World Power Corp.  (Lime Rock, Conn.), from KPMG Peat Marwick to Price
Waterhouse.

Nth Canada Inc.  (Mississauga, Ontario, Canada), from Madgett, Roberts,
Marlow, Hurren & Partners to Ernst & Young.

NuOasis Gaming Inc.  (Irvine, Calif.), from C.  Williams & Associates, P.C.
to Raimondo, Petit & Glassman.

N-Viro International Corp.  (Toledo, Ohio), from Ernst & Young.

OncoRx Inc.  (New Haven, Conn.), from Richard A.  Eisner to Ernst & Young.

Porter McLeod National Retail Inc.  (Denver), from Lehman, Butterwick & Co.,
P.C.  to Ehrhardt Keefe Steiner & Hottman, P.C.

Sentech EAS Corp.  (formerly Lorry, Bay & Co.)  (Deerfield Beach, Fla.), from
Sobel & Co.  to Spear, Safer, Harmon & Co., P.A.

Seventh Generation Inc.  (Colchester, Vt.), from KPMG Peat Marwick to Coopers
& Lybrand.

The Singing Machine Co.  Inc.  (Pompano Beach, Fla.), from Ernst & Young to
Millward & Co.

Vicom Inc.  (Eden Prairie, Minn.), from Misukanis & Dodge to Lurie, Besikof,
Lapidus & Co.

Wahlco Environmental Systems, Inc.  (Santa Ana, Calif.), from Ernst & Young to
Arthur Andersen.

Wincanton Corp.  (Reno, Nev.), from KPMG Peat Marwick Thorne

US 1 Industries Inc.  (Gary, Ind.), from Deloitte & Touche to Coopers &
Lybrand.

Source:  Securities and Exchange Commission


Big Six Scoreboard

Reported Auditor Changes at Public Companies in the Last 12 Weeks

Client Gains Client Losses

Arthur Andersen 1 10

Coopers & Lybrand 5 5

Deloitte & Touche 7 24

Ernst & Young 10 14

KPMGPeat Marwick 6 2

Price Waterhouse 3 5

Others 17 19

Total 49 79

Note:  Form 8-K filings as reported in Accounting Today from Oct.  9, 1995 to
present.


PRACTICE MANAGEMENT FORUM:  Looking ahead to the year 2001:  A sales odyssey

WANTED SALES MANAGER FOR BIG 4 FIRM

Local office of Big Four firm seeks experienced sales manager for midsized
office.  Must have CPA and at least three years sales management experience at
a large CPA firm.  Responsibilities will include oversight and development of
experienced staff of three client-relators as well as penetration of
non-client accounts.  Send resume to Box 1234.

This ad was spotted in the Feb.  9, 2001, edition of The Wall Street Journal.

Surprised?  You shouldn't be.  Impossible?  Don't bet on it.  Unlikely
prediction?  Hardly.  Some local offices of Big Six and regional firms are
already employing salespeople.

Our profession has never been more competitive, and the new millennium will
have a great deal of change in store for accountants.

Here are some more predictions:

* Non-CPA firms will continue to encroach upon our "turf."

Did you know that four of the 10 fastest growing accounting firms in the
United States are not CPA firms?  Most people don't - including your partners.

American Express just won its federal suit against the state of Florida,
permitting non-CPA firms to employ CPAs.

As other states look to this case, reviews and audits may fall to non-CPAs.
After all, why shouldn't non-CPAs perform these same services?  If they pass
the peer review process, wouldn't this open up a monopoly to more competition,
and wouldn't the consumer ultimately benefit from lower costs?  Accounting
could be next in the line of industries the government has already
deregulated, like telephone companies and airlines.

I hope it happens.  Just as we are driving much better cars today than 20
years ago because of the competition from the Japanese, clients will receive a
much higher level of service when CPAs compete in a marketplace against real
business people, not just other accountants.

* Big companies will increase efforts to attract the best clients of their
smaller rivals.

Competition will increase not only from below - non-CPAs - but also from
above.  Many big firms have stagnant revenues and will increase their emphasis
on obtaining regional and local firms' "A" clients.  This trend has developed
steadily in some markets for the last five years, and will continue to grow.

* Competition will increase as CPAs leave stagnant firms to take more control
over their careers.

Sharp managers and young partners realize they are often held back by partners
who won't let go of the management reins and allow the firm to prosper and
change.

These rainmakers are already leaving firms in droves, taking some of their
clients.  This trend will continue as these hotshots realize many of them are
buying into firms that have been drained of assets by greedy partners facing
retirement, with no desire to invest in technology, training or client
relationships.

These changes will affect our profession in numerous ways by the turn of the
century.  For instance:

* A formalized sales management function will control the development of
business.

Firms will hire salespeople.  CPAs will be highly valued, and recruited
specifically for sales.  Some will drop out of the technical side as they see
the road to partnership open only to those who bring in business.  Many firms
will see hiring salespeople as a panacea for stalled growth, since their
partners don't want to be involved in the selling process.

* The technical aspect of our profession will be relegated to the "back room."

As our profession becomes more competitive, business development, rather than
the quality of technical work, will be recognized as the life blood of the
professional firm.

Firms will focus on garnering new business.  Firms that don't shift emphasis
will merge or perish.

* Dramatic decreases in fee structures will hit the profession across all
service lines.

As the increased emphasis on marketing prompts clients to become more aware of
alternatives, fee competition will escalate.  Fees will be cut in all areas of
service, not just in audit and accounting.

* Only people with existing books of business will be promoted to full
partnership.

Technicians will no longer be able to share in the fruits of full partnership
as firms finally realize that it is far easier to acquire technical ability
than entrepreneurial talent.  Just as industrial companies raid competitors
for successful salespeople, CPA firms will vie for rainmakers.

* The profession's image of trust and respectability will be tarnished as
clients equate CPAs with other sales-types that they deal with.

CPA salespeople will fall into the same grab bag for dollars as other
salespeople.  Clients will view them with the same disdain as printing and
insurance salespeople.

* CPA firms will use consulting as the main inroad to new clients.

Even small accounting firms will offer free consulting work just to get their
foot in the door.

* The most successful firms will not employ salespeople, but will have
developed a solid core of practicing entrepreneurs.

Some firms will have decided early on to succeed in a much more competitive
environment without resorting to a separate force of salespeople.  Realizing
that marketing and selling is just as important as technical skill, these
firms will have invested in growing the business development skills of their
most likely producers.  Their reputation as trusted business advisors will
remain intact.

So where do marketing people fit in?

Marketing directors still play a powerful role, whether establishing a
formalized sales function or creating an internal culture of entrepreneurship.

In either case, somebody still has to manage the marketing aspects, enhance
the sales process and help bring in the actual opportunities to sell.  Merely
hiring salespeople will not work without a comprehensive, integrated marketing
plan so that all are pursuing the optimal targeted clients and markets.

In some cases, the marketing director will also assume the role of sales
manager, as many firms will be too small or too cheap to hire someone separate
to manage that function.

In firms that decide to shun the salesperson route by becoming
entrepreneurial, marketing directors will have to take on the role of internal
sales manager.

What can you do now?

CPAs who turn their backs on this undeniable trend towards increased
competition will watch their firms disintegrate.

There are, however, certain preemptive tactics your firm can employ to avoid
the oncoming onslaught:

* Establish a beachhead in the marketplace that is difficult to penetrate.

Chrysler is a great example of what can happen in a changing marketplace.  For
years, Chrysler and their Detroit rivals ignored the increased competition
from the Japanese.  Fat and sassy, they believed people would continue to buy
cars the way they always had.  Caught off-guard by a dramatically changed
marketplace that demanded small, well-made, fuel-efficient cars, they lost a
significant piece of market share that they've never made up.  Chrysler almost
went out of business.

In order to survive, Chrysler had to get smart.  In the early '80s, they
introduced a new vehicle - the minivan - and created a new marketplace.  As
their competitors jumped on the bandwagon, they pressed forward, leading the
way in design and features.  By the time their competitors had established a
position in the market, Chrysler was so entrenched that they still sell more
minivans than ever.

* Make sure your firm has a strategic marketing plan.

Amazingly, even many of those firms with marketing directors have no strategic
marketing plan that delineates where and how they are going to go to market
for the next three to five years.  If you don't know where your business is
going to come from, how can you get it?

* Get your people trained to sell and market.

Personal marketing and selling skills do not come naturally to the vast
majority of CPAs, but many firms expect CPAs to somehow learn these skills by
accident.  Identifying clients and prospects' needs and wants and persuading
people to do business with you are far greater skills than being an auditor or
a tax person.

* Concentrate on client service.

It's time the accounting profession learned to service the clients in the way
they want to be served.  Since this subject still isn't taught in accounting
school, it's up to you to drive the message home internally.  If you don't get
your people up to par in delivering exemplary service, remember that someone
else will.

Establish monthly client service meetings, where the only subject discussed is
how to better serve your clients, helping them be more successful.

* Help your people establish and pursue niches.

Our profession is the last to realize the importance of marketing
specifically, not generically.  It is obvious to the real business person
(i.e., your clients) that there is more value in dealing with someone who is
an expert in their field.

* Help your people set goals for practice development.

Everybody must have their own goal for new business, otherwise how can they
tell if they've been successful?

* Change the compensation and review process.

What's in it for your non-partners?  Practice development must be rewarded
financially and psychologically, or it won't happen.

Only the most successful CPAs embrace change - the great majority have their
noses to their computers, happy to leave things as they are.  It's up to you
to educate your partners on all that is happening in the marketplace.  And
you'll need to keep telling them until they finally get the message.  Stir
things up now and take control of your firm's destiny.  If you don't, your
competition will do it for you.


Allan S.  Boress, CPA, CFE, is author of "The I Hate Selling Book" and a
consultant to professional firms for over 15 years.  He is based in Coral
Springs, Fla.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

SOFTWARE REVIEW:  Budgetary moves add steam to fund accounting


The current balanced budget debate in Washington signals that many services
currently provided by the federal government may soon pass to the states and
the private sector.

This trend will translate into new opportunities for accounting firms, because
the not-for-profit sector will expand rapidly, as states look to
not-for-profits to administer displaced programs.  And new nonprofit
organizations will develop to handle programs no longer conducted by the
government.

Not-for-profits will look to CPAs for the management accounting services
required to implement new control systems and to measure operating results.
To take advantage of these opportunities, accounting firms must become
familiar with the software tools that are available for this complex area.

Fund accounting is not an easy area in which to work.  Issues and concepts in
not-for-profit accounting differ from those found in the profit sector.
Accountability with specific program and grant provisions is critical and
requires extensive departmentalization of information.  Multiple accounting
periods must be considered, as information will be reported not only by fiscal
year, but by program or grant period.

Necessary reports include traditional reports needed by management, as well as
those required by the Financial Accounting Standards Board, grant providers
and other regulatory bodies.

This article evaluates five not-for-profit software systems from Executive
Data Systems, Blackbaud, American FundWare, Micro Information Products and
Kenrick Technologies.  The last year has seen fund accounting software vendors
accelerate their move into Windows.  All the vendors in this review have a
Windows program on the market or will offer one during this year.

The move to Windows has been slow and for good reason.  Many nonprofit
organizations have older equipment and tight budgets which preclude rapid
upgrades to new technology.

But moving to Windows should provide clients with smoother links to other
applications, if for no other reason than vendors most often rewrite their
packages in Microsoft or other standard languages.

For example, MIPS Fund Accounting for Windows utilizes C++, Microsoft's Visual
Basic programming languages and the Microsoft Access database engine.  This
move to Microsoft standards has been seen in general accounting packages and
is accelerating in all desktop applications.

Critical issues to be considered when selecting fund accounting software
include account structure handling, report presentation capabilities,
ease-of-use and non-accounting features such as fund-raising support and
mailing list capabilities.

Flexibility in account number format is important to meet the needs of many
different clients.  Account numbering schemes generally determine the
departmentalization of information.  The more flexible the format, the less
need for changing a client's existing account numbering system.  Also, more
flexibility means easier filtering of data for reporting purposes.

Also important is that all fund accounting packages should meet the
requirements of the Financial Accounting Standards Board's Statements of
Financial Standards 116 and 117.  All the packages reviewed here are compliant
with these standards.

There is more to an accounting system than just accounting information.  In
the profit sector, modules such as accounts receivable, accounts payable and
payroll provide capabilities that may be more critical than the general
ledger.  For a not-for-profit business, you must add modules for fund-raising
and grant information requirement compliance.

Fund accounting concepts and accounting systems are not just complex to the
accountant/consultant.  The staff of a not-for-profit organization may also
find them difficult.

Therefore, ease-of-use should be a primary criterion in the selection process
and should encompass the system's look and feel, data entry conventions,
documentation, on-screen help capabilities and vendor support.

Special system features that will make the accountant's/ consultant's job
easier and more profitable should also be considered.  Reporting features that
prepare financial statements and workpapers in formats that can be used as
part of the compilation, review, or audit process can greatly reduce the time
spent on these engagements.

Also, if the fund accounting vendor offers special programs for the
accountant/consultant for support or reduced pricing, these engagements will
be more profitable.

It is in reselling or consulting that CPAs will make the real money on such
software.

Except for Blackbaud, which uses only direct sales, all the vendors reviewed
here offer reseller programs.  Generally, these programs offer product
discounts and special incentives on promotions and technical support.  Kenrick
offers both reseller and consulting programs, the latter for non-selling
firms, although other vendors also support consultants.

Fund AccountingSoftware Series, Executive Data Systems

Fund Accounting Software Series from Executive Data Systems is a DOS-based
system with a Windows interface for module and process selection.

This approach allows the FASS to be used in organizations with both DOS and
Windows workstations.  The latest 5.5 release of FASS introduces two Windows
components, FASS Access and the Export module, which facilitate data transfer.

FASS Access offers the export of information to Access.  In Access, you can
then perform advanced data queries and prepare on-screen and printed reports.
Access data is easily used with other Windows applications such as
spreadsheets, word processors and report writers.

The Export module also exports information in 20 file formats such as Lotus,
Quattro Pro and Paradox.  This module also includes an Excel compatible
spreadsheet and graphics package.  It features extensive preformatted
financial statement reporting capabilities.  FASS financial statements can be
consolidated by "wild-card" selection or by using user-defined fund groups.

The Multi Fiscal Year Project Reporting module allows the preparation of
financial statements for any range of dates, including multiple fiscal years.
The Custom Report Generator can access FASS accounting and donor information
based on user defined criteria to prepare management reports and graphs, and
to export to other applications.

The FASS Donor Records module maintains an extensive database of the
organization's members, donors, alumni and volunteers for reporting and
mailing purposes.  This module integrates with General Ledger and will track
pledges, dues payments, donations and matching gift data.  More than 30
user-definable data fields can customize the information captured for each
donor.

Transaction detail can be maintained as long as desired.  The system supports
multiple, overlapping fiscal years for grant and project reporting.  Grant and
project reporting is independent of the organization's fiscal year.

Data entry is accelerated through the use of "code tables" for automatic
transaction descriptions, and the user can define transaction entry modes to
save keystrokes.

Executive Data Systems features toll-free support and offers a service to set
up the client's chart of accounts and financial statements.  The cost of this
service varies with the amount of data involved.

Blackbaud Accountingfor Non Profits, Blackbaud

Blackbaud's current offerings include the DOS-based application, Blackbaud Not
For Profit Accounting, Windows versions of its Raiser's Edge fund-raising
system and its Paragon planned giving software.

The company plans to release Windows versions of business applications
beginning in April.  Current purchasers with software maintenance agreements
will receive a Windows upgrade at no charge.

Blackbaud features a table-driven chart of accounts that breaks down each
account by fund, account number, account type, department/cost center,
category and object of expenditure.  A visual chart-of-account organizer that
allows you to see and rearrange the chart of accounts makes setting up and
editing accounts a simple task.

Accounts for new funds can easily be created by copying sample charts of
accounts for similar funds.  General ledger information can be maintained for
two years.  The current year need not be closed to work on subsequent year's
information.  The year-end close can be delayed for up to twelve months while
awaiting final audit adjustments.

The Raiser's Edge supports the organization's gifting development program.
Paragon provides the planned giving professional a tool for easily calculating
and graphing the outcome of planned gifts.  Both products are available in
Windows versions.  The Raiser's Edge also comes in a DOS version.

Windows capabilities are often only marginally advantageous in data entry.
However, The Raiser's Edge and Paragon demonstrate the advantages of the
graphical interface over a text-based application in the area of data review
and editing.  Reviewing and updating information is very easy and intuitive.
Entry of new information is enhanced with pull-down menus and keystroke
shortcuts.

The system has extensive on- screen reporting capabilities featuring very
readable reports.  The system features very flexible report-writing tools.
Reports can be segmented to provide information about projects and grants and
can be either date- or period-driven to support varying reporting periods.
Workpapers can be prepared from system information by saving report
information in a spreadsheet format.

FundWare on Windows, American Fundware

American Fundware offers an extensive suite of applications to meet the
accounting needs of not-for-profit organizations.  Fundware offers 17 modules
on multiple platforms and three Windows specific modules.

Fundware runs on a variety of operating systems including DOS, Windows, Unix
and AIX.  The system can consolidate not-for-profit transactions as well as
any for-profit enterprises the entity may operate.

American Fundware has just released FundWare on Windows, which has the ability
to run multiple sessions simultaneously through the FundWare on Windows
Session Manager.

A File Viewer makes it easier to access the Windows Print Manager utility,
improving printer selection and making it possible to preview reports prior to
printing.

Monarch for FundWare is a version of the Datawatch Monarch Windows data access
and analysis tool specifically designed to run with FundWare.  With Monarch
for FundWare, you can use spooled report file information to view, query,
analyze and export information.

Essentially, Monarch is a report generator in reverse.  Report information is
converted into Monarch data, which can then be "mined" to meet specific
reporting needs using spreadsheets and report generators.

The FundWare Corridor improves FundWare's data connectivity with other
applications by providing open access to the FundWare database.  Information
is presented in Microsoft's Open Database Connectivity standard.  ODBC
compliance allows the data to be accessed by other ODBC-compliant applications
such as Excel, 1-2-3, Access and Crystal Reports.

FundWare allows you to design your own account structure of up to 18 digits,
or you can use a predefined chart of accounts.  Two aliases can be assigned to
each account to easily look up accounts that have different descriptions in
different funds, accounts, grants or projects.  General ledger information can
be retained for an unlimited amount of time.  The system provides up to four
adjustment accounting periods for segregating year-end and audit adjustments
from the normal posting periods.

The Allocation Management System automates transaction allocation and can be
used to extract information for reallocations.  American Fundware does not
have a fund-raising module, but it links to donor packages from PledgeMaker,
Donor Perfect and others.

It also features an allocation management module for handling
multi-fund/department allocation of transactions.  This feature is used to
automatically allocate recurring transactions among multiple accounts, funds
or projects.

The Budget Forecasting module extracts historical information into a separate
database for creating and revising the entity's budget.  This module will
track up to 60 budget revisions and allows the updating of historical
information without changing budget data.

A separate Budget Control module monitors budget compliance and warns when an
account approaches or exceeds its budget.  Report capabilities include macros
to group reports for batch printing.  Masks are employed to filter report
information by fund, grant and project.

The Extended Report Writer prepares reports from any journal and any period
maintained in the system.  This module also maintains an extended database of
information such as population, grant dates and number of clients served.  The
information can be used in combination with other financial data to produce
reports.

MIP NonProfit Seriesfor Windows, Micro Information Products Inc.

MIP's NonProfit Series for Windows, introduced in November, is designed using
non-proprietary tools:  C++, Microsoft's Visual Basic programming language and
the Access database engine.  MIP also released MIP Fund Accounting for DOS,
Version 9.0 at the same time.

The Windows release began with the General Ledger module and will be followed
by Accounts Payable, Budgeting and Payroll modules in the first six months of
this year.  Other modules will continue to be released this year, including
Fund Raising.

MIP offers many ease-of-use features such as Wizards for information setup,
customizable tool bars, and Windows-compliant screens, menus and help.  MIP
also features extensive security capabilities that define security for each
user, module and organization.  Security also can be defined for any menu
level.

The system supports complete GASB and FASB reporting and reports can cover any
time period.  The software features many standard reports that are the
building blocks for customized reports.  Reports are customized by the rows
and columns of information that the user wants included in the report.

The system's design allows the use of data with other applications such as
database tools, spreadsheets and word processors.  For example, it supports
direct query, with proper security, from within Microsoft Excel or Word.

MIP allows an unlimited number of user-definable general ledger account
segments which can be up to 255 characters in length each.  Field size and
data formatting within fields can be user-defined.  An Account Setup Wizard
makes it easy to set up new information and to model new accounts from
existing information.

MIP Fund Accounting does not have its own fund-raising module, but supports
links to Donor Perfect, Donor$ and Softrek fund-raising packages.  Transaction
information can be exported to other applications in ASCII, Delimited ASCII,
 .WKS and DBF formats.

The system features strong context-sensitive help tools.  The complete user
manual can be viewed on screen.  With maintenance, all upgrades are free.

The company guarantees a new release of each product every 18 months.  MIP
guarantees a two-hour response time for customer support calls.

Kenrick Fund Accounting for Windows, Kenrick Technologies

Kenrick Technologies was scheduled to ship Version 2 of its Fund Accounting
for Windows this month.  A true Windows application, the new product expands
upon the company's DOS version 4.1's use of C language source code, thus
benefitting from the original source code's maturity.

Release 2.0 features several new ease-of-use features.  Journal Genies are
used to integrate journal information from a variety of data sources into the
general journal.  Using Genies, information in spreadsheet-prepared workpapers
can be the source of journal transactions.

Another new feature, Two-Way Spreadsheet Journal Entries, allows the software
to furnish information for spreadsheet workpapers.  Kenrick uses Dynamic Data
Exchange linking to exchange information with other Windows applications.

The chart of account structure is divided into components for account code,
department and fund.  There are as many as 17 segments and virtually unlimited
sub-accounts within the account number structure.  The number of digits of the
components of the account number structure can be varied to meet the needs of
each nonprofit entity.  The minimum length is five characters; the maximum,
20.

When new funds or departments are added to the system, the accounts for the
new addition can be mirrored from the existing chart.  Transaction information
can be maintained indefinitely.  Kenrick's approach to grant accounting makes
grant (or project) identifiers a component of the general ledger account
structure.

Grants and projects can also be handled separately from the chart of accounts
by entering grant and project code information at the transaction level.  This
simplifies the setup of short-term projects and grants and allows more
comprehensive reporting on grants and projects.

Reports can be prepared for any accounting period, regardless of the entity's
fiscal accounting period.  The KenQuery feature offers fast searches of system
database information for sorting and printing data.  Custom reporting
capabilities are provided via a dBase style report writer.

One unique feature is Kenrick's 990 tax return support.  The system will
transfer revenue and expense information directly into the Arthur Andersen
A-Plus Tax 990/990PF program.

Kenrick offers very flexible budgeting features.  The Projects and Grants
module allows for unlimited project/grant lives and multiple budgets for any
part of the organization.  This information can be grouped for any date range
at any time.  The system maintains budget data for the last budget period, the
current period and the next period approved budget.

The system offers extensive on-screen help capabilities.  All information
found in the paper manuals is in on-screen help.  The company also offers data
conversion, training and related network support.

Summary

CPAs and consultants are in for a bonanza with not-for-profit organizations.
As more services move from the federal government to the states and private
organizations, the need for tax, financial reporting and consulting services
will rapidly expand.  The addition of Windows versions by many fund accounting
software vendors will also increase the opportunities for CPAs.

DOS users will be interested in moving to the more powerful Windows
applications.  This will offer the opportunity to provide new and profitable
services.

Also, the new Windows applications offer expanded connectivity features.
Consultants will be able to provide on-going services for developing reports
and information systems that link fund accounting software information to
other applications.

Fund Accounting Software

Blackbaud Accounting for Nonprofits Blackbaud Charleston, S.C.  800-443-9441
Pricing:  1 user Network

GL, AP, Payroll

Purchase Order

Student Billing (each) $2,000 $2,500

Payroll Direct Deposit $500 $500


Fund Accounting Software Series,Version 5.5

Executive Data Systems Inc.

Marietta, Ga.

800-272-3374

Pricing:

1 User 2+ users Support/yr.

General ledger $850 $1,275 $225

AR, AP,

Inventory

Management

Invoicing

(each) 600 900 100

Payroll 750 1,125 175


FundWare Version 5.5

American Fundware

Denver

800-551-4458

Pricing:

Module prices range from $695 to $2,395, depending on the platform
requirements.  Average price is $995.

Kenrick Fund Accounting for Windows, Release 2.0

Kenrick Technologies Inc.

St.  Louis

800-659-2022

Pricing:

Single User Pricing:  DOS Windows

General Ledger with

Budgeting $1,295 $1,995

AP, AR, Payroll, each 895 $1,395

Projects and Grants 795 $1,195

PO/Encumbrances 795 $1,195

Multi-user network pricing:  Based on the number of concurrent active users.

MIP NonProfit Series for Windows

Micro Information Products Inc.

Austin, Texas

(800) 647-3863

Pricing:

General Ledger and payroll each, 1 user:  $1,500

AR, AP, budget reporting, embranches/purchase order, each, 1 user:  $1,000

Second concurrent user:  $1,000

Additional users:  $500


Source:Accounting Today





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet
JANUARY 1, 1996

COMING EVENTS


-JANUARY-

1-31:  Financial Literacy for Youth Month; National Endowment for Financial
Education.  Contact:  (303) 220-4847.

5:  1995 District Director's Conference - IRS; Long Island University;
Brooklyn, N.Y.  Contact:  (718) 488-1070.

11-12:  1996 National CPA Health Care Advisers Association; Pencor Marketing &
Publications; Bally's Casino Resort, Las Vegas.  Contact:  (800) 869-0491.

11-12:  Management Science in Spreadsheets; University of Chicago Graduate
School of Business; University of Chicago Downtown Center, Chicago.  Contact:
(312) 464-8765.

14-16:  IAFP Broker-Dealer Conference; IAFP; San Antonio.  Contact:  (800)
945-IAFP.

15:  1996 Manufacturing Services Association; Pencor Marketing & Publications;
Flamingo Hilton, Las Vegas.  Contact:  (800) 869-0491.

15:  1996 Not-for-Profit Services Association; Pencor Marketing &
Publications; Flamingo Hilton, Las Vegas.  Contact:  (800) 869-0491.

18-19:  Management Science in Spreadsheets; University of Chicago Graduate
School of Business; Ritz-Carlton, San Francisco.  Contact:  (312) 464-8765.

21-22:  1996 National Litigation Support Services Association; Pencor
Marketing & Publications; Houstonian Hotel, Houston.  Contact:  (800)
869-0491.

22-24:  Direct Marketing to Business Conference; Dun & Bradstreet Information
Services; The New Orleans Marriott, New Orleans.  Contact:  (203) 857-5660.

29:  Asset Allocation; Ibbotson Associates; Wyndham Franklin Plaza,
Philadelphia.  Contact:  (800) 215-2494.

29-30:  Conference on Regulation and Continuing Professional Education; NASBA;
Westin Canal Place Hotel, New Orleans.  Contact:  (212) 490-3868.

29-30:  Consolidated Returns; World Trade Institute; San Francisco.  Contact:
(212) 435-3161.

29-30:  Introduction to International Taxation; World Trade Institute; San
Francisco.  Contact:  (212) 435-3161.

31-Feb.  2:  Intermediate Seminar on International Taxation; World Trade
Institute; San Francisco.  Contact:  (212) 435-3161.

-FEBRUARY-

1:  Management Science in Spreadsheets; University of Chicago Graduate School
of Business; Santa Clara Marriott, Santa Clara, Calif.  Contact:  (312)
464-8765.

1-2:  Reducing European Tax; World Trade Institute; San Francisco.  Contact:
(212) 435-3161.

5-6:  Compensation Planning '96; Tax Management Educational Institute; Le
Meridien Hotel, New Orleans.  Contact:  (202) 728-7902.

7-8:  SOFTEX in Accounting & Finance; Interactive Information Services; Los
Angeles.  Contact:  (415) 842-7373.

15:  Management Science in Spreadsheets; University of Chicago Graduate School
of Business; University of Chicago Downtown Center, Chicago.  Contact:  (312)
464-8765.

15-16:  CERCA Membership Conference; Council for Electronic Revenue
Communication Advancement; Key Bridge Marriott, Arlington, Va.  Contact:
(312) 644-6610, ext.  3232.

22:  Management Science in Spreadsheets; University of Chicago Graduate School
of Business; Airport Marriott, Houston.  Contact:  (312) 464-8765.

26-27:  Tax Aspects of International Acquisitions and Reorganizations; World
Trade Institute; World Trade Center, New York.  Contact:  (212) 435-3160.

-MARCH-

5:  Corporate Derivatives; Ibbotson Associates; University of Chicago Downtown
Conference Center, Chicago.  Contact:  (800) 215-2494.

6:  Defined Contribution; Ibbotson Associates; University of Chicago Downtown
Conference Center, Chicago.  Contact:  (800) 215-2494.

7:  Asset Allocation; Ibbotson Associates; Plaza San Antonio, San Antonio.
Contact:  (800) 215-2494.

7-8:  Management Science in Spreadsheets; University of Chicago Graduate
School of Business; University of Chicago Downtown Center, Chicago.  Contact:
(312) 464-8765.

12:  Asset Allocation; Ibbotson Associates; Marriott East Side, New York.
Contact:  (800) 215-2494.

13:  Advanced Asset Allocation; Ibbotson Associates; Marriott East Side, New
York.  Contact:  (800) 215-2494.

14:  Communicating Asset Allocation Concepts; Ibbotson Associates; Marriott
East Side, New York.  Contact:  (800) 215-2494.

22:  Management Science in Spreadsheets; University of Chicago Graduate School
of Business; Radisson, Salt Lake City.  Contact:  (312) 464-8765.

25:  Mutual Fund Investing; Ibbotson Associates; Park Hyatt, San Francisco.
Contact:  (800) 215-2494.

26:  Asset Allocation; Ibbotson Associates; Park Hyatt, San Francisco.
Contact:  (800) 215-2494.

27:  International/Alternative Investing; Ibbotson Associates; Park Hyatt, San
Francisco.  Contact:  (800) 215-2494.

28-29:  Portfolio Management; Ibbotson Associates; Park Hyatt, San Francisco.
Contact:  (800) 215-2494.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-23</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B021-47</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi10.html 205.156.212.5 19970115003143 text/html 133885
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:29:36 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:47 GMT
Content-length: 133695
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi10.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet <BR>
January 02, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>TODAY'S NEWS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(431 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>COMMUNITY BANKING</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>WEEKLY ADVISER: THE TRIALS AND TRIBULATIONS OF THE FAMILY-RUN BANK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(730 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>EYE ON THE STATES: MASS. TRADE GROUP REVIVES WITH MISSION TO SWAP IDEAS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(582 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>SBA SAYS 1ST NATIONAL LEADS IN NEW ENGLAND</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(184 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>AGRICULTURE: FARM LENDERS HARVESTED A DECENT CROP IN '95</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(772 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CREDIT UNIONS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>COLORADO BANKERS FIGHTING AN EXPANSION IN DENVER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(368 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>SCORECARD: GOOD PERFORMANCE MARRED BY CRISES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1042 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>CREDIT/DEBIT/ATMS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>VISA GUARANTEES CAR RENTALS AT PEAK TIMES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(529 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>MIDWEST PAYMENT SIGNS SUMNER NATIONAL BANK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(120 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>NEW NICHE: WISING UP DIRECT MARKETERS ABOUT WHO JUST WANTS TO BE LET&nbsp;ALONE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(922 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>GENSAR NAMES STRATEGY, SALES EXECS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(159 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>NATIONAL CITY UNIT BUYING 1ST DATA PAYMENT BUSINESS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(336 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>REGIONAL BANKING</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>SKEPTICISM GREETS TV PREDICTION THAT GLENFED WILL BE SOLD IN '96</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(577 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><A HREF = "#14"><LI>LOS ANGELES OFFICIALS URGE FED TO APPROVE FIRST BANK SYSTEM'S BID FOR&nbsp;FIRST INTERSTATE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(523 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>COMMENT: RELATIONSHIP MANAGERS NEED STRICT SALES GOALS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(655 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>STRATEGIES: 1995 IN REVIEW</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>LENDERS ADJUSTING TO A NEW REALITY: TIGHTER BELTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(693 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>LAWMAKERS ASK PATIENCE FOR DEBTORS STRAPPED BY GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(450 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>GE THROWS IN THE TOWEL ON RETAIL ORIGINATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(330 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>THRIFTS JUMPED ON FIXED-RATE BANDWAGON IN '95</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(311 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MORTGAGES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>AFTER ACQUISITION BINGE, NORWEST SEES MARKETING AS THE WAY TO GROW</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(429 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>PNC UNIT WAS A LEADER AMONG LENDERS SEEKING NEW WAYS TO SELL WARES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(445 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>HIGHLIGHTS OF 1995</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(173 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INVESTMENT PRODUCTS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>NASD PROPOSAL ON BROKER-DEALERS IS WELL RECEIVED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(398 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>COMMENT: A LIFE INSURANCE TIME BOMB IN TRUST - AND HOW TO DEFUSE IT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(837 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>TRUST RULES MAY BE EASED FOR MULTISTATE NATIONAL BANKS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(705 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>WASHINGTON</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#26"><A HREF = "#26"><LI>HOPES FOR WIDER POWERS NOW PINNED ON COURTS, REGULATORS-NOT&nbsp;CONGRESS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1331 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>NATIONSBANK WANTS CLASS ACTION DENIED IN FAIR-LENDING LAWSUIT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(432 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>MUSICAL CHAIRS AT OCC; NEW AIDE FOR BEREUTER, HEAVYWEIGHTS AT N.Y. FED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(582 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>COMPANY INDEX</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(318 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FINANCE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>ROYAL BANK OF CANADA TRIMS U.S. OPERATIONS TO ZERO IN ON PROFITS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(604 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>CONSUMER DELINQUENCY SPURRING SHORT SALES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(757 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>TECHNOLOGY/OPERATIONS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>STOCK OF SYSTEMS, PROCESSING FIRMS JUMPED 34% IN '96</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(622 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>DELUXE WILL TAKE RESTRUCTURING CHARGE OF $60M TO $70M</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(312 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MORTGAGE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#34"><LI>SECURITIZATION LEADERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1047 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

TODAY'S NEWS

WASHINGTON:
   NATIONSBANK asked a federal judge to deny class-action status for
a pending fair-lending lawsuit. Page 2
   REGIONAL BANKING:
   SKEPTICS are having a field day with the prediction of a TV
commentator that Glendale Federal will be sold this year. Dan Dorfman said
Glenfed's chairman was rumored to be pushing hard for a deal worth $1.2
billion or more. Page 6
   LOS ANGELES "strongly opposes" Wells' bid for First Interstate, the
mayor and city council president told the Fed in a letter. Page 6
   MORTGAGES:
   HOUSE BANKING Chairman Jim Leach has asked the chairmen of Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac to persuade loan servicers to cut some slack for
furloughed government workers who miss mortgage payments. Page 13
   AS MORTGAGE BANKERS prepare for a new refinancing wave, they are
struggling to digest the enduring effect of the last one - a strict new
emphasis on the bottom line. The signs were everywhere last year.
   Pages 12, 13
   CREDIT UNIONS:
   1995 WAS A BANNER YEAR for credit unions, as capital levels hit
historic highs and delinquency continued a decade-long decline. Too bad
nobody noticed. Instead, the industry made an embarrassing spectacle of
itself. Page 7
   COLORADO BANKERS are going to the courts to block a credit union
expansion. Page 7
   COMMUNITY BANKING:
   FARM LENDERS had a fairly good 1995, but not everywhere or with every
product. Problems in such sectors as the cattle industry could continue,
and Congress is likely to reduce subsidies. Page 10
   THE MASSACHUSETTS Independent Bankers Association is waking up
from a long hibernation, abandoning old lobbying efforts in favor of
helping members boost profits through cooperative efforts.
   Page 10
   INVESTMENT PRODUCTS:
   NATIONAL BANKS with trust departments operating in several states
may soon get a break on the cost of doing business. Page 14
   AFTER THREE MONTHS of fine-tuning, the National Association of
Securities Dealers has issued its final proposal to create a new framework
for bank-affiliated broker-dealers. The proposal now goes to the SEC.
   Page 15
   CREDIT/DEBIT/ATMs:
   VISA has introduced a guaranteed car-rental reservation service
for peak travel times. The goal is to discourage consumers from booking
with multiple renters and then becoming no-shows. Page 17
   FIRST DATA's remittance processing business is being acquired by a
National City subsidiary.
   Page 16
   TECHNOLOGY:
   STOCK PRICES of bank technology firms soared  last year. Gains for
the companies tracked by American Banker averaged 34%.
   Page 18
   ACKNOWLEDGING that its future lies more in electronic banking,
check printer Deluxe Corp. said it would take a $60 million to $70 million
restructuring charge partly related to the closing of printing plants.
   Page 18



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

WEEKLY ADVISER: THE TRIALS AND TRIBULATIONS OF THE FAMILY-RUN BANK

By Paul Nadlers
The family-owned and family-run bank seems like the ultimate in
community banking.
   "I bank at Smith Bank" or "I've been banking with the Jones family all
my life, and so did my father" are typical comments in many communities
where a grandfather or even great-grandfather started a bank and son after
son took up the mantle.
   But all is not sweetness and light in the family bank tradition, even
though it has great deal to offer.
   One problem is that people in town expect the banker to always say yes.
"Your father served my father," is the line. "How can you turn me down
now?"
   I remember talking to a small group in one town where the banker was
bragging about his family tradition. One customer piped up that he too had
a family banking tradition. "I am a third-generation check kiter."
   A more serious question for a family bank, though, is whether the new
generation wants to work at it.
   When I was an undergraduate, a speaker at college told us: "Half of you
in this room are Republicans because your fathers are Republicans. And half
of you are Democrats because your fathers are Republicans."
   Among my proudest achievement as a teacher has been talking students out
of being accountants or lawyers or bankers just because their fathers were.
   "It's awful," parents tell me. "My son became a chef (or whatever)
instead of going into banking."
   "Is he happy?" I ask.
   "Absolutely."
   "Then why are you moaning?" I say. "You should be cheering."
   When it is a family business, however, taking a different path is harder
to do - even if your heart isn't in becoming a bank president.
   And following in your father's footsteps is also not easy. I know.
   My father was one of the most famous bank economists of his day. Every
time I did something right, people would say, "What do you expect from
Marcus Nadler's son, with all the help he has received." And when things
went wrong, the comment would be, "Wow, you let your father down."
   Maybe it's the problem of following your dad that has made so many
second- and third-generation bankers take chances to show their
independence - chances that in a number of cases have seriously damaged
their banks, or killed them.
   But what if you basically inherit a bank presidency and really want the
job? How do you learn to do it well?
   There are three basic training grounds, and each has its drawbacks:
   Your own bank. Being trained there limits the opportunities for growth.
   All too often a young heir apparent is trained by putting him under
Gridley, a greybeard with 40 years' experience. Unfortunately, many
Gridleys actually have one year's experience 40 times. Under them the new
banker learns the adage "never do something the first time."
   Being trained by your dad the CEO has similar pitfalls.
   Money-center banks. Heirs apparent used to have this second route
available - working for the family bank's correspondent bank. The money-
center would be delighted to take the CEO's son aboard for several years
and teach him banking. It knew this would cement the relationship with the
family bank, insuring correspondent business for years ahead.
   But many money-centers are now giving up correspondent business, because
the balances have been reduced sharply now that respondents' required
reserves must be kept with the Fed. As a result, correspondent balances
must come from money that otherwise could be lent or invested.
   Banker schools. There are complaints that they treat all students alike.
   What's wrong with that? The gripe is that those who'll wind up running
their family banks don't get the instruction and insight they'll need -
that instead they learn what a lending officer in a larger regional needs
to know, or a branch manager of a major bank.
   This, some critics say, is why the major banking schools are not drawing
the students they used to. Ignoring their own marketing courses, the
schools fail to segment the markets for their programs.
   Despite these problems, the family-run bank is not dead. But like other
traditions that have made community banking unique, it is becoming less of
a force. And the urge to merge is only one reason.
   Mr. Nadler is a contributing editor of the American Banker and professor
of finance at Rutgers University Graduate School of Management.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

EYE ON THE STATES: MASS. TRADE GROUP REVIVES WITH MISSION TO SWAP IDEAS

By JONATHAN D. EPSTEIN
A Massachusetts bank trade group is waking up from a long hibernation,
abandoning old lobbying efforts in favor of helping its independent bank
members boost their bottom lines through cooperative efforts.
   After several years of inactivity, and hardly any meetings, the
Massachusetts Independent Bankers Association is seeking to draw community
banks together to exchange policies and ideas related to lending, human
resources, and marketing.
   In particular, officials want the association to establish common credit
criteria to make loan participations among members easier, without having
to work with a larger bank that "might look to take the customer away,"
said association president Jim D. Carey, president of Slade's Ferry Bank,
Somerville.
   "We felt that independent commercial banks have a few common interests,"
Mr. Carey said. "There are a few things that we can do together to help our
bottom line."
   By sharing policies and practices relating to employee benefits and
marketing, the banks will help those smaller members who can't afford to
hire full-time staffs or pay advertising agencies to develop campaigns, he
explained.
   Mr. Carey said the wave of consolidation sweeping the industry has only
strengthened the belief among community bankers that they will survive and
prosper because they can better serve customers. But "I think we need to
help each other with the burden of regulation and the management of bottom
lines."
   "It's going to be much more one on one, trying to assist each other and
managing our institutions in the marketplace to preserve our independence
and share our common management concerns and solutions so that we don't end
up fading out of existence," he said.
   In the past, the group, which was formed about 25 years ago and is an
affiliate of the Independent Bankers Association of America, focused its
attention on influencing banking legislation on Beacon Hill in Boston and
on Capitol Hill in Washington. But as the group's members were gobbled up
by mergers, its influence and activity dropped off.
   Last April, in response to a push from IBAA officials to restart the
group, officials from about 13 banks met to discuss the organization's
future.
   Richard D. Driscoll, president of the Massachusetts Bankers Association,
said he was unaware of the Massachusetts Independent Bankers' recent
activities.
   "If there is a need for one more group, they'll get members," he said.
"But if banks don't feel there's a need, they won't join."
   He added that the Massachusetts Bankers has added about 15 new small-
bank members in the last two years. In fact, he said, every commercial bank
in Massachusetts is an active member except Mr. Carey's bank.
   Still, Mr. Carey said the Massachusetts Independent members concluded
that the group should no longer try to provide lobbying or educational
services to its members anymore, because the Massachusetts Bankers
Association and other organizations already filled that need better than
the independent bankers group could.
   "Their expertise is in the legislative efforts and the educational
efforts, and we believe you should render to Caesar what is Caesar's," Mr.
Carey said. "They're every good at what they do, and our thrust is a little
different."
   Mr. Carey said the group has stressed to the Massachusetts Bankers
Association that it's not trying to compete. Already the association
includes 20 banks, with 13 other potential members, all with less than $250
million in assets.
   Mr. Carey said officials haven't ruled out cosponsoring a seminar with a
larger organization, but "that's not our thrust. There are organizations
that do that well."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

SBA SAYS 1ST NATIONAL LEADS IN NEW ENGLAND

HARTFORD, Conn.
The Small Business Administration ranked First
National Bank of New England the largest lender of SBA-guaranteed
commercial loans under its flagship 7(a) program in New England.
   The agency, in releasing its 1995 fiscal year figures, shows First
National Bank of New England as the region's largest 7(a) lender by a wide
margin. First National Bank originated 85 loans during the year, for a
total of $40.7 million. Based on dollar volume, the bank, which has its
corporate headquarters in Hartford, Conn., ranks sixth in the nation. It is
the leader in New England for the second consecutive year.
   "Most of our clients are privately owned manufacturers and distributors
who use the SBA-guaranteed loans to invest in equipment, facilities, or
marketing programs that make them more globally competitive, " said Brian
J. Charlebois, executive vice president and head of commercial banking.
   Only two other New England-based banks ranked in the top 50 on the SBA's
1995 list. The bank's SBA loan volume, for instance, was five times that of
Bank of Boston, which was ranked 43d. First New Hampshire Bank was ranked
23.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

AGRICULTURE: FARM LENDERS HARVESTED A DECENT CROP IN '95

By BARBARA F. BRONSTIEN
Last year was a fairly good one for farm lenders.
   The year "turned out to be generally quite good for American
agriculture," said Marvin Duncan, chairman of the agricultural economics
department at North Dakota State University, Fargo. "Prices are ... high
enough so there will essentially be no government subsidies in the form of
deficiency payments."
   But in agriculture, you take the bad with the good. Farmers and lenders
saw individual areas hit with weather- and disease-related woes and
industry-specific troubles, such as the cattle industry's price dip.
   And so, this year farm bankers will have a keen eye on the
struggling areas such as the cattle industry. And they await with mixed
feelings word on the 1995 farm bill from Washington.
   Cattle producers face additional years of low prices as supply exceeds
demand and producers begin selling off breeder animals to ultimately reduce
supply. However, this liquidation initially will increase the supply even
further.
   "It's going to be a pretty tough time in '96, '97 for the cattle
sector," said Bill Helming, an agricultural consultant in Olathe, Kan.
"We've got the prices below the cost of production already, and we haven't
even started liquidation. That's going to add insult to injury."
   The dairy industry also has not seen price increases in several years,
said Alec Bridges, president and chief executive of $240 million-asset
Sulphur Springs (Tex.) State Bank, who has numerous dairy customers.
   "The performance is not as good as it's been," Mr. Bridges said. "We're
not having any real horror stories. We had tightened our underwriting
standards and made sure that they performed to the point that we could go
with them when things weren't as good."
   On the other hand, grain prices rose this year, a result of a wet spring
and early frost that brought a "short" crop, reducing supply.
   "Most farmers who are producing and selling grain have less grain to
sell, but they're going to have the opportunity to sell it for a higher
price," Mr. Helming said.
   If he were a lender, he said, he'd be encouraging his customers "to take
advantage of these higher prices and sell into it. Farmers typically don't
sell when the market's going up; they sell when the market's low. I know it
doesn't sound logical, but that's the way it's been done for 50 years."
   Mr. Helming said that although the tendency of farmers to sell at the
worst time has improved - more farmers are using better farm marketing
techniques to reduce the risk of price fluctuations - it's still a problem.
   "When the market's going up, they think it's going to go higher," he
said. "When the market's going down, they're reluctant to sell. And by the
time they sell, it's a lot lower."
   The higher prices also made the industry less anxious over the yet-to-
be-determined government farm program, said Larry Knutson, president of
State Bank of Blomkest, Minn., and current president of the Upper Midwest
Agricultural Credit Council.
   "We're cautiously optimistic about next year," Mr. Knutson said.
"Production looks like it's going to be a pretty good year."
   Still, farmers and lenders alike continue to wait for the 1995 Farm Bill
to learn what government policy will be on farm subsidies.
   "There was lots of discussion about the Farm Bill, and we still don't
have it," said Philip M. Burns, president of Farmers and Merchants National
Bank, West Point, Neb., and the current chairman of the American Bankers
Association's agriculture lenders committee.
   Practically speaking, Congress should implement a Farm Bill in January
or February so farmers - and lenders - can organize their 1996 planting,
Mr. Helming said. "There are a lot of decisions to be made in planting as
you get into the spring," he said.
   The consensus is that government subsidies to farmers will be
diminished, whatever the ultimate bill.
   Mr. Helming expects the legislation to take the form of the Freedom to
Farm Act. "That's what bankers ought to plan for, which means their
customers are going to end up being totally dependent on the real-world
supply and-demand forces in the marketplace, as opposed to the safety net
of the government."
   This development has led farm bankers, already a conservative bunch, to
become more cautious, said Mr. Duncan of North Dakota State.
   "More risk is going to be placed on the shoulders of the farmer than in
the past," he said. "They will want to have a full understanding of the
risk management techniques that their customers are going to be pursuing.
The bottom line for the next one to five years is substantially greater
uncertainty in agriculture."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

COLORADO BANKERS FIGHTING AN EXPANSION IN DENVER

By JAMES B. ARNDORFER
Colorado bankers are going to the courts to block a credit union
expansion.
   The Colorado Bankers Association is suing the state banking agency for
permitting $84.4 million-asset Gates Credit Union to expand its membership
base to include the southern metropolitan area of Denver - nearly 300,000
people.
   Craig Umbaugh, a lawyer representing the bank trade group, said the
expansion runs roughshod over state laws that restrict community expansions
to no more than 25,000 or to the regulator's discretion.
   "The Department of Financial Institutions has exceeded the clear
language of the statute," Mr. Umbaugh said. "I think this expansion has
wiped away half the statute."
   The association filed suit last Thursday against the Colorado
Financial Services Board, which has some oversight over the Division of
Financial Services. The five-member board - which includes three credit
union executives - approved the Gates expansion on Nov. 28 despite bankers'
objections at a public hearing.
   "It's not unexpected," said David L. Paul, commissioner of the division.
"They had been fairly forthright with our legal counsel that that's where
they were headed."
   Steve Newell, chairman of the Financial Services Board and president of
Colorado State Employees Credit Union, said the board considered all the
evidence, including that submitted by bankers in Gates' proposed expansion
area, when it approved the expansion.
   "The issue boiled down to whether or not the area of expansion was a
defined community," he said. "Overall, the board felt that the credit union
itself should be able to define what they consider to be a community."
   Gates Credit Union was seeking to expand out of uncertainty over the
future of its membership base, employees of Gates Rubber Co., said Carroll
Beach, president of the Colorado Credit Union League. The company had been
cutting employees for years.
   Bankers object to the size of the expansion, saying it does not
represent a distinct community, as required by statute.
   Donald Childears, president of the Colorado Bankers, said the credit
union's new membership base included several political districts and a
spectrum of income and demographic groups.
   Robert Wilson, a Denver lawyer who represents Gates Credit Union, would
not comment on the bankers' objections.
   "We're still in the process," he said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

SCORECARD: GOOD PERFORMANCE MARRED BY CRISES

By JAMES B. ARNDORFER
1995 was a banner year for credit unions, as capital levels hit
historic highs and delinquency continued a decade-long decline.
   Too bad nobody noticed. Instead, the industry busily set about making a
spectacle of itself for most of the year, beginning with the collapse of
$1.6 billion-asset Capital Corporate Federal Credit Union - Cap Corp - in
January.
   And both the industry and its regulator added to that debacle with flubs
throughout the year.
   Before 1995 was over the industry and the National Credit Union
Administration came under fire during congressional hearings. The Credit
Union National Association and the industry's top regulator were at each
others' throats. The chief executive of the industry's primary liquidity
facility resigned under a cloud and warned of looming problems.
   And to cap the year off, CUNA president Ralph Swoboda was deposed by the
trade group's board and state leagues.
   But in interviews with several industry leaders, the Cap Corp situation
emerged repeatedly as the single most important event of the year.
   It's not hard to see why.
   The largest failure in industry history triggered a series of
congressional hearings in which lawmakers - particularly in the Senate -
browbeat the industry for speculating in collateralized mortgage
obligations and ripped the NCUA for allowing it.
   "The most important thing was the closing of Cap Corp because it brought
credit unions into the light," said Charles O. Zuver, director of
governmental affairs for the Credit Union National Association. "It
generated legislation in the Senate and dissension in the credit union
movement."
   Chastened, the NCUA in April issued a regulation limiting corporate
investments that was so unpopular that the agency withdrew it even before
the comment period expired. The regulator has since been crafting a new
plan with the corporates that has the industry's liquidity centers
significantly more comfortable.
   "We're very encouraged" about the agency's willingness to cooperate,
said Richard M. Johnson, chief executive of Western Corporate Federal
Credit Union, San Dimas, Calif. "We think the regulator is going to be more
comfortable with us because he's taken a hard look at us."
   A rule affecting corporate investments alone would have a powerful
impact on the industry, but now the agency also is looking to tighten the
investment regulations of regular credit unions. Part of the inspiration
was the agency's finding that many institutions failed to understand the
risks of collateralized mortgage obligations - the same instruments that,
indirectly, led to the fall of Cap Corp - in their portfolios.
   Some industry experts have already slammed the proposal as requiring too
much paperwork.
   Mr. Swoboda, the former CUNA president, predicted that the struggle to
set new investment limits for the industry will be the pivotal event of
this year.
   "There'll be a stir over the investment regulations for natural person
credit unions and corporates," he said.
   The NCUA's decision to seize Cap Corp intensified the already hostile
relations between the NCUA and the industry - sparking a dissent on the
NCUA board from board member Robert Swan. Many in the industry -
particularly Cap Corp depositors that lost money - believed the regulator
could have saved the corporate if it had so desired.
   Acrimony was already present between segments of the industry and the
NCUA because of a rule approved in 1994 that would end trade group
management of corporates. The CUNA and the National Association of State
Credit Union Supervisors sued the agency in February in an effort to kill
the rule.
   But in September the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of
Virginia ruled in the agency's favor. CUNA decided to drop its suit, but
state supervisors are pursuing their case against what most observers
consider to be heavy odds.
   At the same time, the agency and some industry figures have said they
think the federal court's decision might provide an opening for better
relations.
   "That's behind us now," said NCUA Chairman Norman E. D'Amours.
"Relations have been improving dramatically toward the latter part of the
year."
   That, however, remains to be seen: Pentagon Federal Credit Union, which
lost $1.1 million in Cap Corp, in October sued the NCUA to try to obtain
documents detailing the agency's reasons for imposing conservatorship on
Cap Corp.
   When credit unions weren't taking shots at the regulator, it seemed they
were fighting among themselves.
   Competition among credit unions became a big issue, with many
institutions protesting the proposed merger of the aggressive Patelco
Credit Union, San Francisco, and First Technology Federal Credit Union,
Beaverton, Ore. The complainants appeared to have the sympathy of Mr.
D'Amours, who has stressed the need for cooperation among credit unions,
and the merger was called off once it became clear NCUA wasn't going to let
it happen.
   And, the industry's largest trade group went through a meltdown during
the year, leading off with a management shakeout at the industry's main
liquidity center, U.S. Central Credit Union, which CUNA controlled.
   Early on, former U.S. Central president James R. Bell and blamed CUNA-
appointed board members for problems suffered by the company. A few months
later the Overland Park, Kan., institution was slapped with a low
performance rating by the NCUA.
   The industry's largest trade group was bruised on other fronts. Facing a
revolt from its affiliated state leagues, the association flip-flopped -
first supporting, then opposing - a Senate bill to strengthen NCUA's
oversight of state-chartered credit unions, a move that irked the bill's
sponsor, Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, R-N.Y.
   After this setback, Mr. Swoboda announced a sweeping review of the
association's structure, and the state leagues began gunning for him, trade
group sources said.
   To make matters worse at the trade group, losses blossomed at the Card
Services division of CUNA Service Group, a CUNA subsidiary.
   The board and other CUNA interests apparently believed that new blood
was the only cure for its problems. In October, it fired Mr. Swoboda, who,
before his departure, sacked some of his lieutenants.
   Even if credit unions continue to thrive this year, some of the ugly
events of 1995 are expected to work themselves to resolution - some
probably tortuously.
   "Credit unions have done very well; the confusion has all been in the
superstructure," said Ken Robinson, president of the National Association
of Federal Credit Unions.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

VISA GUARANTEES CAR RENTALS AT PEAK TIMES

By MICKEY MEECE
At the behest of major car rental companies, Visa U.S.A. has introduced
a guaranteed reservation service for peak travel times.
   Visa said the service was available beginning Monday at participating
renters, including Hertz, Avis, National, and Budget. Cardholders who give
their account numbers at the time of their reservation can be assured that
a car will be awaiting them.
   To attack a growing "no show" problem, the rental companies will offer
guarantees when demand is high, mainly around holiday periods and special
events. The service will be similar to the hotel late-arrival guarantees
that customers can secure with credit card numbers.
   Visa, the first of the major card groups to introduce the car-rental
convenience, said users will no longer have to book cars at a number of
agencies to make sure they get one. By reducing the number of no-shows, the
rental companies should be able to manage their fleets better.
   As a byproduct of the guarantees, renters would penalize no-shows. Visa
no-shows would have to pay as much as a one-day rental fee if they do not
cancel reservations at least eight hours before the scheduled pickup.
   American Express Travel Related Services Co. is developing a similar
service, which a spokesman said could be available in the first quarter. A
no-show penalty of up to two days would kick in if a reservation was not
canceled 48 hours in advance.
   MasterCard International does not have a rental guarantee in the works,
a spokesman for that association said, because "we haven't seen a great
deal of interest in something like this."
   Visa said the service is voluntary. Cardholders can still reserve cars
in the customary manner.
A guarantee ensures that customers whose rental cars cannot be
delivered in an hour will be transported to their destinations, provided
with cars within eight hours, and given a free day's rental.
   Under American Express' proposed plan, if a rental company overbooked
and did not have the customer's vehicle, it would have to secure a
comparable one from another firm. If it could not do so, the rental agency
would provide an alternative vehicle at a rate no higher than the original
car and it would waive the first day's fee.
   American Express and Visa, which are first and second, respectively, in
car rental charge volume, said the rental companies came to them this year
seeking a solution to the no-show problem. No-show rates go as high as 70%
during peak periods.
   Not all rental agencies have committed to the guarantee service. A
spokeswoman for Alamo Car Rental said the company is evaluating it and has
not made a decision.
   Janet Maizner, a spokeswoman for Value Rent a Car, said, "We normally
take a wait-and-see attitude" to any new service that other agencies adopt.
   "Overall, it's a good move for the industry," Ms. Maizner said, adding
that it is hurt by "double and triple booking."
   Visa also is introducing an advance deposit program, allowing customers
to charge a deposit for rentals of up to 14 days. The association plans to
change its rules and procedures to permit the car rental deposits, similar
to an adjustment made in 1989 for hotels.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

MIDWEST PAYMENT SIGNS SUMNER NATIONAL BANK

Beth Piskora
Cincinnati-based Midwest Payment Systems has signed a contract with
National Bank  of Sumner, Ill., to provide electronic funds transfer and
Jeanie network services.
   By joining the Jeanie automated teller machine network, Sumner offers
its customers 24-hour access to more than 1,200 ATMs in Ohio, Kentucky,
Indiana, West Virginia, Pennsylvania, New York, Florida, Tennessee, Rhode
Island, and North Carolina. Sumner has only one ATM of its own.
   In addition, Sumner will be participating in the MasterMoney program,
the MasterCard off-line debit program that enables consumers to use their
Jeanie ATM at more than 12 million MasterCard-accepting merchants
worldwide.
   Midwest Payment Systems is the data processing subsidiary of Fifth Third
Bancorp, a Cincinnati-based banking company with $17.2 billion of assets.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

NEW NICHE: WISING UP DIRECT MARKETERS ABOUT WHO JUST WANTS TO BE LET
ALONE

By LISA FICKENSCHER
Marketers' obsession with buying and building massive customer data
bases has created a seemingly contradictory subspecialty - removing the
names of people who prefer not to be on mailing or telemarketing lists.
   It has become the law for direct marketers of everything from credit
cards to long-distance services to respect consumers' desires to be let
alone. But the advent of several companies in the "list suppression"
business indicates there is profit in it.
   "Honoring a customer's request is just good business," said Dick
Gallagher, president of the Signature Group, a company that offers credit
card enhancements, has added a service called "Do Not Solicit."
   Indeed, businesspeople are coming around to the view that privacy - and
the publicity they get from disseminating privacy protection policies - can
be a valuable commodity.
   "Privacy protection is going to become increasingly a service in America
far beyond list suppression," said Alan F. Westin, editor and publisher of
the newsletter Privacy and American Business.
   A handful of companies, including a list broker working on the World
Wide Web of the Internet, are apprising direct marketers of the names of
people who don't want to be solicited as sales prospects.
   The Signature Group's "Do Not Solicit" list helps companies comply with
the Telephone Consumer Act. A rule that the Federal Trade Commission added
to that legislation in August requires telemarketers to maintain lists of
people who don't want to be called again. The rule went into effect on
Sunday.
   The Schaumburg, Ill.-based Signature Group claims to be the only company
that electronically gathers such information and will compile a list for a
client marketer within 48 hours. That could significantly shorten the
process of removing names from a mailing list, which the group says
averages 45 days in the banking industry.
   Consumers get angry if they're called after asking for their names to be
struck off marketing lists, said Fanette Singer, a spokeswoman for
Signature Group. They want their names removed promptly, she said.
   The Direct Marketing Association has been providing a telephone
suppression service for its members since 1985. But Patricia Faley, vice
president of consumer affairs for the Washington-based trade group, pointed
out that its service is not required by law.
   About 600,000 consumers are on the association's telemarketing
suppression list, and three million are on a mail suppression list that was
begun in 1971. Consumers who appear on those lists are not solicited by a
variety of marketers; in contrast, the Signature Group provides its service
to one client company at a time.
   The Signature Group tracks people who are contacted by companies that,
for example, sell merchandise to bank customers. As the list provider, the
bank is legally responsible for compliance with the telemarketing law, even
though it may not be calling its customers directly.
   Another service, Buyer's Choice, has tapped into a different type of
consumer who is willing to be solicited for products and services but wants
to control who does the soliciting.
   "People are soon going to say, here are the news, the marketing, and the
people I want to reach me, and I don't want anyone else to reach me," said
Mr. Westin.
   Buyer's Choice, a division of the Polk Co. of Detroit, seems to be
responding to Mr. Westin's vision of the future. Polk, a provider of
demographic and lifestyle data, sends out consumer surveys asking people to
check off categories of products and services that interest them and those
that do not.
   Half a million people have completed the surveys. Keith Wardell, vice
president of Polk, expects the list to reach two million in a year.
   Buyers Choice has been gathering consumers' preferences for five years
but only recently have the surveys begun probing what kind of mail people
don't want to receive. About 20 major mailers, including catalogue
companies and travel clubs, are participating in a test of the service,
which Mr. Wardell said will be launched formally in the second quarter.
   Mr. Wardell estimates that people who complete the surveys will receive
about 20 pieces of mail annually from marketers subscribing to Buyer's
Choice, while 100 to 200 pieces of mail will be suppressed.
   The theory behind the service is that most people want to receive some
mail offers. The smallest opt-out category, for example, is women's
apparel, and the least popular offer are money market funds.
   To keep the list accurate, Buyer's Choice sends out its survey every six
months to people who have completed it.
   "Part of our intent is to stay in touch with those consumers," said Mr.
Wardell.
   Aurora, Ohio-based DM Group began compiling a list about four weeks ago
of people who don't want to be bothered by unwanted solicitations and
advertising, but its communications method is electronic mail.
   Robert Hicks, president of the five-year-old company, said he launched
the service because DM Group "came under a lot of heat when it came out
that we were managing E-mail lists."
   DM Group rents lists with about 250,000 names to marketers who want to
reach people via E-mail.
   But interest in the suppression list has been tepid so far, said Mr.
Hicks.
   Still, Mr. Westin believes the service is a significant development
because it recognizes that "E-mail deserves equal treatment with mail and
telephone preference (services), allowing people to opt out."
   "I think the DM Group has the right idea," added Mr. Westin. But he
suggested that companies put a question "up front" at their Web sites
giving surfers the opportunity to opt out of further unsolicited contact.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

GENSAR NAMES STRATEGY, SALES EXECS

Beth Piskora
TAMPA
Gensar Technologies Inc., the point of sale processing
subsidiary of Gensar Holdings Inc., has added two senior vice presidents to
its technology and sales team.
   William J. Kouser Sr. was put in charge of strategic planning and
product development, and John M. Gallagher of national supermarket sales.
   Mr. Kouser joins the technology team after 30 years in systems
development and design for the insurance and banking industries. While at
the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, he developed and implemented a
check processing system. He was also instrumental in the construction of
the on-line consumer financial services system that CoreStates Financial
Corp. uses to track account activity and customer banking relationships.
   Mr. Gallagher spent 25 years at CoreStates in its electronic payments
business. For the past four years he has worked for Buypass Corp., the
point of sale processing subsidiary of Electronic Payment Services Inc.,
the Wilmington, Del.-based company that also operates the MAC electronic
banking network.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

NATIONAL CITY UNIT BUYING 1ST DATA PAYMENT BUSINESS

By BETH PISKORA
National City Processing Co. has agreed to acquire the remittance
processing business of First Data Resources Inc.
   Under terms of the agreement, the Omaha-based card servicing unit will
outsource all of its clients' remittance activities exclusively to National
City. These functions include the opening, extracting, recording, and
posting of credit card payments with paper invoices.
   "This represents a 30% increase on our base of business," said Tony G.
Holcombe, chief executive officer of Louisville, Ky.-based National City
Processing, a subsidiary of $35 billion-asset National City Corp. of
Cleveland.
   "The additional transaction volume will bring us to 500 million
transactions annually" in the remittance processing area, added Mr.
Holcombe.
   Financial terms of the deal were not disclosed. It is expected to close
within 60 days.
   "With the acquisition, NPC will be the largest remittance processing
company in the United States," said David R. Zook, executive vice president
of corporate services for National City Processing.
   "This is an exciting opportunity for us to build upon our existing base
of remittance processing business while further enhancing the service
provided to clients of First Data Resources," he added.
   The agreement includes a long-term arrangement for First Data Resources
to continue to market the remittance business to its clients, with the
National City unit serving as processor.
   "First Data is not a major player in this area and we felt our clients
deserved the service and competitive advantage only a leader such as NPC
could provide," said a spokeswoman for First Data Corp., the Hackensack,
N.J.-based holding company for First Data Resources.
   The spokeswoman said the remittance deal with National City was not
precipitated by First Data's recent merger with First Financial Management
Corp.
   "We were simply trying to find the best solution for our clients, and
National City Processing is a true leader in remittance processing," she
said.
   First Data Resources will continue to offer card embossing, cobranding
and relational data base marketing services, home banking, smart card
services, and processing for credit, debit, and commercial cards.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

SKEPTICISM GREETS TV PREDICTION THAT GLENFED WILL BE SOLD IN '96

By BARTON CROCKETT
Does CNBC commentator Dan Dorfman have the inside word on the next big
California thrift merger?
   He certainly gave that impression on his Dec. 21 "Dorfman Report" when
he singled out $15.9 billion-asset Glendale Federal Bank as a "sure-fire
takeover within the next 12 months."
   Mr. Dorfman said Glenfed chairman Stephen J. Trafton is rumored to be
"aggressively shopping the company at over 30 bucks a share." He also
quoted "takeover forecaster" Steve Kroll, managing director of Monness,
Crespi & Hardt, as saying a takeover of Glenfed is likely at $30 a share,
for a total price of $1.2 billion.
   Potential buyers were said to be California thrifts Great Western
Financial Corp., H.F. Ahmanson & Co., and Golden West Financial Corp.
   Even on the basis of fundamentals, Mr. Dorfman said, Glenfed would be a
good buy. He quoted Mr. Kroll as saying Glenfed was likely to win in 1996 a
$1.5 billion lawsuit against the government over regulatory goodwill - a
victory that would boost earnings $10 to $12 a share. Mr. Kroll reportedly
set a 12-month price target of $23 to $24 in the absence of a buyout or a
victory in the lawsuit.
   The report forced a half-hour halt in trading of Glenfed's stock and
spurred a $1 rise, to $17.87. This was its high for the year, and more than
twice its 52-week low of $8.50 late in 1994. .
   A Glendale Federal spokesman said the bank would not comment on the
"Dorfman Report" item, as a matter of policy. In recent months, Mr. Trafton
has said in interviews that Glenfed is open to a takeover but isn't
counting on one.
   Many stock analysts, thrift executives, and investment bankers were
highly skeptical of Mr. Dorfman's analysis.
   They noted that Mr. Dorfman was hardly unique in predicting that a big
California thrift is likely to be acquired in the next year. Most analysts
expect a wave of takeovers to commence as soon as buyers are convinced that
the California economy has rebounded and that California thrifts' balance
sheets are on solid ground.
   "The possibility of Glenfed being a takeover candidate is certainly not
brain surgery," said Gary Gordon, an analyst with PaineWebber Inc. But he
and other sources said that the $30 price seems too
high unless Glenfed wins the goodwill lawsuit, which is far from certain.
   These observers also said they see no signs that a big merger involving
Glenfed is in the works. It is more likely, they said, that Mr. Trafton
will focus on improving the company's performance over the next year in
order to get a higher price in a subsequent takeover.
   "Our read is that Trafton is looking to aggressively add value to the
Glendale franchise and then sell," said Gregory A. Mitchell, senior vice
president of Hovde Financial Inc., an
investment banking firm. There is "no question" that Mr. Trafton will wait
at least a year to sell Glenfed, Mr. Mitchell added.
   "It doesn't feel like anything's imminent," said a senior thrift
executive with a big Glenfed rival, who asked not to be named.
   Many observers said they see much to recommend in-market mergers of
California thrifts, including a combination of Glenfed with any number of
other Southern California institutions. But they said they doubted
any of the three thrifts Mr. Trafton mentioned would be willing to pay the
kind of premium he'd be seeking in a takeover, or that Mr. Dorfman said
would be likely.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

LOS ANGELES OFFICIALS URGE FED TO APPROVE FIRST BANK SYSTEM'S BID FOR
FIRST INTERSTATE

By BARTON CROCKETT
Richard J. Riordan is standing up for First Interstate again.
   The mayor of Los Angeles has teamed up with the president of his city
council to urge the Federal Reserve Board to reject Wells Fargo & Co.'s
application to acquire First Interstate Bancorp.
   The city "strongly opposes" Wells' bid for control of Los Angeles-based
First Interstate, Mr. Riordan and Council President John Ferraro wrote in a
letter dated Dec. 18.
   The letter, filed during the public comment period that ended late last
month, escalates the unusual level of political involvement in the battle
over First Interstate.
   Local politicians are typically silent about bank mergers, or else focus
their energies on trying to minimize office closings and layoffs.
   But Mr. Riordan and other prominent California politicians are openly
supporting the deal that First Interstate prefers - a merger with First
Bank System Inc. of Minneapolis.
   Speaking at an outdoor rally in November, Mr. Riordan professed "love"
for the chairmen of First Interstate and First Bank and said, "We look
forward to working with you for many, many years to come."
   The letter to the Fed details Mr. Riordan's reasons for opposing Wells'
bid while putting California's largest city in the position of trying to
influence federal policymakers.
   The Los Angeles officials said consumer banking services in California
would "be irreparably harmed" if San Francisco-based Wells bought First
Interstate. They said Wells' plans to close hundreds of traditional
branches and rely more on supermarket branches, automated teller machines,
and personal computers would benefit the well-to-do at the expense of the
poor.
   Lower-income communities "are chronically underserved by most retail
businesses, including supermarkets and banks," the letter said. "The
residents of these communities cannot afford expensive home computers and
often feel uncomfortable accessing ATMs in high-crime areas."
   The writers also warned that competition would suffer, as it was
"clearly diminished by the 1992 merger of BankAmerica Corp. and Security
Pacific Corp."
   "The proposed Wells Fargo/First Interstate consolidation
would have a similar impact," the city officials said.
   Raising concerns about broader economic impacts, Mr. Riordan and Mr.
Ferraro said Southern California would sustain "the vast majority" of the
7,000 to 10,000 job losses from a such a merger - an especially cruel blow
to Los Angeles County, where the 9% unemployment rate is already well above
the national average.
   Real estate markets would also suffer, they argued. First Interstate
owns or leases nearly 1.3 million square feet in four major buildings
downtown, an area where vacancy rates are high, at 20%. Office closures
"could completely destabilize (the Los Angeles) real estate market,
resulting in huge financial losses to owners and lenders throughout the
country," the letter said.
   Mr. Riordan and Mr. Ferraro also claimed that First Interstate would be
a better corporate citizen as part of First Bank than as part of Wells.
   "We have no doubt that Wells Fargo is prepared to make new commitments
to Los Angeles as part of its pending application," they said. "But we are
convinced that these commitments will inevitably fall well short of the
service and community involvement that Los Angeles enjoys today from First
Interstate Bank."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

COMMENT: RELATIONSHIP MANAGERS NEED STRICT SALES GOALS

By CHARLES B. WENDEL
The title "corporate lender" has begun to disappear from the commercial
banking nomenclature in favor of the term "relationship manager."
   The relationship manager has significantly broader responsibility than
finding, underwriting, and monitoring loans. Ideally, he or she is a
coordinator of the sales process who evaluates customer needs, matches them
with the bank's products and services, identifies the most likely selling
opportunities, and brings in product specialists as needed.
   Unfortunately, this is largely a fantasy. It is still a distant goal
many banks have for relationship managers. Scratch the typical relationship
manager and what you find underneath is a traditional lender. The
relationship manager may sell cash management and other deposit services,
but it is rare to see the sale of products from other groups in the
organization.
   We estimate that among their best small and middle-market customers,
banks capture only a 5% to 10% "wallet share" of financial services
business. For example, no more that 60% of small-business owners who
maintain a commercial deposit account have their personal account at the
same bank.
   The gap between the intent of the relationship manager's job and its
reality needs to be addressed quickly and decisively. Among the reasons:
Many companies view lending as a commodity and not the basis for
differentiating one bank from another. But to achieve growth targets, banks
must emphasize wallet share over market share in many markets.
   Few senior managers would argue against the importance of building
customer relationships. Yet few banks are on the right path. There are four
major reasons:
   *Wrong messages. In a recent speech at a Robert Morris Associates
conference, Norwest Bank regional banking executive Scott Kisting
underscored the importance of communicating effectively with staff about
noncredit products. He said banks need to "celebrate" these sales to the
same extent they congratulate bankers for new loans.
   *Wrong or meaningless measurements. A banker at a well-respected
regional company told a story that is all too typical: He and his boss
would agree on annual goals for credit and noncredit product sales, but
during the year performance is never measured against those goals. And 12
months later, a new set of goals is agreed on, with the manager believing
that he is fulfilling his supervisory role.
   *Wrong products. Banks have not challenged themselves enough in
evaluating noncredit offerings from the customer's perspective. Are their
proprietary 401(k) investment options really as good as those offered by
nonbank competitors? Have cash management or custody products been
leapfrogged by others? Too many product developers are playing a game of
wishful thinking when it comes to product assessment.
   *Wrong people. Even after reengineering and downsizing, many banks
remain dominated by traditional "good old boys," not aggressive and
sophisticated financial consultants and salespeople. Upgrading relationship
manager staffing, either by improved training or replacing personnel,
remains critical to meeting market demands and exploiting opportunities.
   Ironically, within the small-business segment it is a nonbank that best
emphasizes the capturing of entire relationships. Merrill Lynch & Co.
focuses on meeting customer needs as opposed to a product demand, and its
people are rewarded for cutting across the organization to meet those
needs, whether personal, commercial and credit, investment, or risk-control
related. Through superior customer service, they are also skimming the
cream off the market.
   Bank managements must get beyond their delusions about relationship
managers by giving them a clear focus and setting priorities. In the near
term, a small centralized marketing unit can provide the expertise that
individual relationship managers may not possess. Management must rethink,
reduce, and in certain instances eliminate the relationship manager's
responsibility for maintenance, monitoring, and underwriting.
   Performance goals must be viewed as commitments. A higher level of
incentive compensation will widen the gap between the total compensation of
excellent and merely adequate performers. The alternative is to risk
becoming a provider of commodities and increasingly irrelevant to the
customer.
   Mr. Wendel is president of Financial Institutions Consulting, New York.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

LENDERS ADJUSTING TO A NEW REALITY: TIGHTER BELTS

By SNIGDHA PRAKASH
As mortgage bankers prepare for a new refinancing wave, they are
struggling to digest the enduring effect of the last one - a strict new
emphasis on the bottom line.
   The signs were everywhere last year.
   In December, PNC Mortgage, Vernon Hills, Ill., announced it would no
longer buy loans from wholesale brokers, which wrote up to 20% of all PNC's
loans. The company said it was paying too much for low-quality loans, and
preferred to focus on writing loans through its own loan officers.
   Earlier in 1995, GE Capital Mortgage discontinued its retail lending
program, through which mostly small lenders had written GE loans. The
program had never generated large volumes, and reportedly did not make
enough profit to satisfy a more cost-conscious approach at GE.
   Some players chose to exit the mortgage business altogether. Notably,
Prudential Life Insurance Co.'s mortgage unit was put up for sale, and
Wells Fargo hired Norwest Mortgage Inc. to write its home loans.
   Industry executives say that a host of factors conspired to create a new
emphasis on cost cutting in a hitherto more relaxed business.
   The mortgage industry, which expanded to write a record $1 trillion of
loans in 1993, continues to be too large for current volumes - estimated at
$654 billion last year, and $765 billion this year. Fierce competition has
driven down prices, forcing a new focus on costs.
   And the influx of new capital, primarily from commercial banks, is
changing the economics of the industry. The largest lenders can afford to
buy, and constantly improve, expensive computer systems to originate and
service ever larger volumes of loans. At these companies, the costs of
originating and servicing each loan is consistently going down, and
everyone must strive to keep up.
   "The name of the game is keeping your costs down on everything, every
little operation - the cost of borrowing money, the cost of distribution to
the public," said David Loeb, chairman of Countrywide Credit Industries,
Pasadena, Calif.
   Within that context, Mr. Loeb and other executives said PNC's decision
to abandon the wholesale purchase of loans from mortgage brokers makes
eminent sense.
   "There's no money in wholesale lending. The brokers get everything and
then some," Mr. Loeb said. Countrywide is building up its direct business
with consumers, in order to decrease its reliance on third parties, he
said.
   Fees to mortgage brokers have climbed in the last few years, as lenders
jockey for volume by offering lucrative deals to brokers. Brokers these
days get not only all the origination fees but also a portion of the
servicing release premium, noted Saiyid T. Naqvi, chief executive of PNC
Mortgage.
   In addition, loans made by brokers tend to be refinanced more quickly,
he said. When rates go down, brokers are quick to resolicit their
customers. These and other factors led PNC to abandon the wholesale
business, Mr. Naqvi said.
   PNC's exit from wholesale lending is the latest sign that the mortgage
business is rationalizing, said Luke Hayden of Chemical Residential
Mortgage. In other words, players are adjusting their strategies to match
the real costs and profits of the mortgage business.
   So do the largest lenders, such as Countrywide, Chemical, and Norwest,
plan to follow PNC's lead?
   Not anytime soon. To exit wholesale lending or any other channel means
that you give up a whole segment of the market to your competitors, said
Mark Korell, group president of lender and investor services at Norwest
Mortgage Inc., Des Moines. That's something that a really large lender just
cannot afford to do.
   Still, Mr. Korell warned that if brokers charged too much, the pressure
to cut back on wholesale lending would mount.
   "Brokers have to compete with other forms of production, don't they? If
they take too much out of the equation, they're not going to be able to
stay in business," he said.
   "The moral of the story here is that the mortgage banking industry, like
every other industry, over time will act in a rational way," Mr. Korell
said. "Capital is movable. Not too many people are going to stay in a
business where they can't make adequate returns to their shareholders."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

LAWMAKERS ASK PATIENCE FOR DEBTORS STRAPPED BY GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN

By KAREN TALLEY and HEATHER TIMMONS
Two key lawmakers have asked the federal housing agencies to persuade
loan servicers to cut some slack for furloughed government workers who miss
mortgage payments.
   In identical letters sent Dec. 28 to the chairmen of Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac, House Banking Committee Chairman Jim Leach urged that the
workers be "protected from unintended consequences of the budget impasse."
   The same day, Rep. Rick Lazio, chairman of the banking panel's housing
subcommittee, urged Housing and Urban Development Secretary Henry Cisneros
to extend forbearance to borrowers whose mortgages are held in Ginnie Mae
pools.
   The lawmakers were responding to the second government shutdown in six
weeks. Tens of thousands of government workers have been left without
paychecks because Congress and the Clinton administration are logjammed
over the budget.
   Observers don't expect the budget impasse to drive up delinquency rates
dramatically. Even so, federal employees run the risk of missing payments,
forcing lenders to decide what actions, if any, to take.
   Lawmakers "send out similar letters for natural disasters, so I guess
they put this in the same category," said Brian Chappelle, staff vice
president for the Mortgage Bankers Association of America.
   In his letters, Rep. Leach asked Fannie and Freddie - formally the
Federal National Mortgage Association and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corp. - to advise companies that collect and process mortgage loan payments
of options for dealing with delinquent borrowers.
   Specifically, he said, the agencies should instruct servicers to
consider borrowers' attitudes toward the debt and the reasons for missed
payments before declaring accounts in default.
   John Gibbons, a senior vice president at Freddie Mac, said that when it
received Rep. Leach's letter it was already notifying servicers that relief
is warranted under existing guidelines.
   A spokeswoman said Fannie Mae would decide this week how to proceed with
Rep. Leach's request. "We are very sympathetic to the situation and will
address the request," she said.
   Representatives from Ginnie Mae - a unit of HUD that is formally known
as the Government National Mortgage Association - could not be reached;
they are on furlough as part of the government shutdown.
   Lenders, meanwhile, said they have already snapped into action. GE
Capital Mortgage got hold of the lawmakers' letters on Dec. 28. It
immediately undertook a case-by-case review of defaults by federal
employees, a spokeswoman said.
   Capstead Mortgage Corp. said it is prepared to extend forbearance to
customers who ask for extra time to make payments, said Bill Ruduff,
executive vice president of servicing.
   Some banks have begun broader programs to help federal workers through
thin times. United Jersey Bank, for instance, is offering unsecured
personal loans to people furloughed from the Social Security
Administration.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

GE THROWS IN THE TOWEL ON RETAIL ORIGINATIONS

By JULIANA RATNER
One of the most striking developments on the mortgage scene in 1995 was
the decision by GE Capital Mortgage Services to stop originating
residential loans directly to consumers.
   For years, the Raleigh, N.C., company's hallmark had been its presence
in virtually every aspect of the home loan business - insuring mortgages,
servicing them, originating mortgages through correspondent lenders, and
marketing loans directly to the public.
   Its retreat in August was seen as an acknowledgement that GE Capital,
despite its prowess in wholesale originations, had not grabbed enough
business to be a force in the retail business. In the first half of 1995,
retail loans accounted for only 7% of the company's originations, which
totaled just under $1 billion.
   "There are certain lines of business in which a company either has to
become a major player or leave," said Rolland Johannsen, president of
Furash & Co., a Washington-based consulting firm.
   Mr. Johannsen said that, unlike banks, finance companies such as GE
Capital don't have to worry that customers will leave if they can't choose
from a wide array of financial services. In short, GE Capital has the
luxury of picking the services it offers.
   "Because they don't have to consider mortgage originations in terms of a
customer relationship, it becomes a straight decision on how they will
allocate capital," Mr. Johannsen said.
   To be sure, GE Capital still casts a big shadow in the mortgage
industry. The company continues to originate home loans through brokers and
smaller lenders, and to sell mortgage insurance products. Also, it services
a portfolio of loans that totaled $110 billion last June 30, second only to
Norwest Mortgage.
   A spokesman for GE Capital declined to comment for this report.
   Industry observers said it's unlikely that many companies will follow GE
Capital's lead.
   "For most companies retail is the appropriate road because they control
their own destiny in a very cyclical business," said David Lereah, chief
economist at the Mortgage Bankers Association of America.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

THRIFTS JUMPED ON FIXED-RATE BANDWAGON IN '95

By SNIGDHA PRAKASH
Sobered by the last refinancing boom, the nation's largest thrifts
decided in 1995 to plunge into the fixed-rate market.
   For more than a decade, most thrifts have stuck to making adjustable-
rate mortgages to hold in their portfolios -  a strategy aimed at earning
interest income while guarding against swings in market rates.
   But last year they decided they couldn't afford to sit out future fixed-
rate lending booms, and began to offer 30-year fixed-rate mortgages. As at
mortgage banks, the loans were intended for sale to the secondary market.
   "We're trying real hard to be competitive in those product lines, and to
get the word out to our realtors that they can come to us for things other
than just (cost-of-funds index) ARMs," said Fredric  J. Forster,
president of Home Savings of America, Irwindale, Calif.
   Mr. Forster said the thrift, which derives interest income from a $53
billion portfolio, wants fee income to bolster its bottom line. Income
derived from servicing mortgages - including those sold to other investors
- was seen as a natural fit.
   Beyond that, thrifts were keen to retain their market share and keep
their loan officers busy during periods when falling rates draw consumers
to fixed-rate loans. But as 1995 progressed, thrifts continued to lag
behind the overall market in fixed-rate originations.
   Sam Lyons, senior vice president at Great Western Bank, Chatsworth,
Calif., pointed to the "heart-wrenching discipline" of mortgage banking.
Mortgage bankers originate every loan knowing that it has to be sold into
the secondary market, he said.
   "It's kind of like salmon swimming upstream - they know where they are
going and what the goal is," Mr. Lyons said. By contrast, the focus at
thrifts is divided between originating loans to hold in portfolio and to
sell in the secondary market, making it more difficult to generate large
fixed-rate volumes.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

AFTER ACQUISITION BINGE, NORWEST SEES MARKETING AS THE WAY TO GROW

By KAREN TALLEY
1995 was the year Norwest Mortgage broke into the most exclusive club
in mortgage banking, becoming one of just four companies with a servicing
portfolio topping $100 billion.
   Acquisitions have fueled most of the Des Moines company's growth,
helping it to more than double its servicing assets in two years.
   The Norwest Corp. unit plans to continue expanding this year. But now it
expects much of the growth to come from its own marketing efforts.
   Norwest Corp.'s chairman, Richard M. Kovacevich, contends that banks can
grow most efficiently by mining their customer bases for sales
opportunities.
   "The most effective way to gain revenue and profits is to cross-sell to
customers," he said.
   Norwest's focus on internal growth is likely to spread this year. Big
banking companies that bought mortgage businesses in the merger and
acquisition frenzy of the past two years are finishing the job of absorbing
these operations. The next step is to deliver on the cross-marketing
potential.
   For Norwest Corp., that means offering credit cards, consumer loans, and
private banking services to the mortgage unit's 1.2 million customers - and
offering mortgages across equally diverse product lines.
   Mr. Kovacevich said the mortgage unit's involvement is key to the cross-
selling blitz. Norwest customers - from mutual fund investors to checking
account users - often need mortgages, he said.
   And mortgage loans are the kinds of profitable products that Norwest
needs to stay ahead of competitors, Mr. Kovacevich said. "The war we are in
will be won on the field of revenue."
   Norwest Mortgage's president, Mark Oman, says it will take tremendous
cooperation among operating units for referrals to begin flowing. "The key
to success is how well the group works together as a team," he said.
   Observers agree. "Cross selling is still in its early stages," said Stan
Ross, managing partner at E&Y Kenneth Leventhal Real Estate Group, Los
Angeles. "So far there has been limited success."
   Much depends on whether banks can reach a lot of prospects without
sacrificing the personal touch that keeps customers coming back, he
continued.
   "You look at their approach," said Mr. Ross. "Did they use a personal
approach or a mailer? Bankers have to be very proactive in making sure the
customer understands the service."
   Because Norwest has a broad network of mortgage offices, it has a strong
shot at making its aspirations a reality, said Moshe A. Orenbuch, banking
analyst with Bernstein Research.
   With its hundreds of mortgage offices, Norwest could create "a
nationwide financial services network" that offers a range of retail
products, Mr. Orenbuch said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

PNC UNIT WAS A LEADER AMONG LENDERS SEEKING NEW WAYS TO SELL WARES

By KAREN TALLEY
Finding new ways to deliver an old product - the mortgage loan - was a
big theme in 1995, and perhaps no company exemplified it better than PNC
Mortgage.
   In February, the PNC Bank Corp. unit teamed with Coldwell Banker Corp.
in a joint venture to market mortgages directly to homebuyers in real
estate agents' offices. The move gives PNC access to customers in 2,400
Coldwell Banker offices nationwide.
   Seven months later, PNC cut its ties with the 200 outside brokers that
had formed the backbone of its wholesale program, citing too much time and
expense in return for too little profit.
   Both strategies are too new to have proved their worth. But they typify
the creative approaches mortgage lenders are experimenting with these days.
   PNC isn't alone in testing new techniques. In September, for example,
Wells Fargo & Co. stopped extending mortgage loans to its customers,
handing this task off to Norwest Corp.'s mortgage unit.
   Changes like these don't always proceed smoothly. For PNC, the decision
to revamp distribution channels was swiftly followed by a shake-up in its
executive ranks. In November, the company unexpectedly promoted its
president, Saiyid Naqvi, to chief executive, replacing Walter C. Klein Jr.
   PNC said Mr. Klein resigned to pursue other opportunities. But industry
observers said he was eased out after PNC Bancorp decided its mortgage
group didn't need two top executives.
   Mr. Naqvi clearly has high hopes for the Coldwell Banker venture, dubbed
Home Mortgage Network. In an interview last year, he said he expects the
venture to originate about $3 billion of loans annually. PNC Mortgage's
originations totaled $2.3 billion in the first six months of 1995.
   The decision to scrap the wholesaling effort, meanwhile, got positive
reviews from observers.
   PNC is better off, because margins are "very thin" on the wholesale
side, said James M. Schutz, senior bank analyst at Chicago Corp. The
company, he added, already "has a great distribution network" through its
own loan officers and PNC bank branches.
   Industry observers agree that independent brokers are harder to keep
tabs on than in-house sales representatives. Brokers may also lack the kind
of loyalty that would compel them to present very good credits to their
wholesalers, some observers said.
   "It's incumbent upon brokers not to foul the system up by throwing in
bad-quality loans," said Walter W. Vail, executive vice president at
Graystone Mortgage Corp., Boston.
   Still, he said, PNC's decision to drop its broker network probably won't
be widely followed.
   "For every one that drops out another five get in the wholesale
business," Mr. Vail said. "The only way larger institutions will get to
smaller guys in communities is through brokers."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

HIGHLIGHTS OF 1995

January
   Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac post record 1994 profits, despite a sharp
drop in residential lending.
   February
   PNC Mortgage unveils plan to offer mortgages through 2,400 Coldwell
Banker realty offices.
   March
   NationsBank buys a $25 billion servicing portfolio from KeyCorp, the
biggest mortgage deal to close in 1995.
   Prudential's residential mortgage unit becomes the largest put on the
block to date.
   April
   Citicorp slashes 100 jobs in mortgage securities, reflecting sluggish
volume on Wall Street.
   Spring
   Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae introduce automated underwriting systems,
drawing mixed reviews from lenders.
   June
   Countrywide links with Intel Corp. to connect homebuyers and loan
officers via video conferences.
   September
   Underscoring how tough the terrain is for lenders, once-mighty Lomas
Financial puts itself on the auction block.
   Serious mortgage delinquencies take their biggest jump in nine years.
   November
   Freddie Mac raises the maximum size of loans it will buy to $207,000.
Fannie Mae keeps its limit at $203,150.
   November/December
   The budget impasse forces lenders to struggle through two furloughs of
federal workers who process their paperwork.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

NASD PROPOSAL ON BROKER-DEALERS IS WELL RECEIVED

By WILLIAM PLASENCIA
After three months of fine-tuning, the National Association of
Securities Dealers has issued its final proposal to create a new framework
for bank-affiliated broker-dealers.
   The proposal now goes to the Securities and Exchange Commission for
further review. Final approval is expected by midyear, industry lawyers
said.
   "These rules are intended to eliminate any confusion between uninsured
securities products of broker-dealers and insured deposit products of
financial institutions," said John E. Pinto, executive vice president of
regulation at the NASD. The association, based in Washington, sets
professional standards for the brokerage industry.
   The plan contained few surprises, apart from its size. It came in at
1,235 pages.
   "I think the meat of it will be in the first 65 pages," said Sarah A.
Miller, senior government relations counsel for the American Bankers
Association. She said the NASD, which took its first crack at the rule in
November 1994, had addressed most of the banking industry's concerns.
   The initial draft drew bankers' wrath, with many saying it conflicted
with or duplicated existing rules of bank regulators.
   Mr. Pinto said the association had "honestly taken into account the
comments made by our members. We've tried to insure consistency with the
guidelines that have already been issued by bank regulators."
   The proposal, issued last Thursday, did leave intact certain provisions
that banks had lobbied hard to change.
   For example, the NASD kept a provision that prohibits brokerages from
directly compensating bank employees for referrals. And the agency still
requires that bank customers give written permission before information
about their finances can be shared with brokers.
   Under the proposal, banks would be able to share customers' names,
addresses, and telephone numbers, as well as credit reports, with
affiliated brokerages. Bankers had argued that such information sharing is
crucial to their cross-marketing efforts.
   Ms. Miller said the NASD still needs to clarify some points. For
instance, the proposal limits investment sales in areas "where retail
deposits are taken," but does not explain exactly what this means, she
said.
   But for the most part, bank brokerage executives could find little to
complain about.
   "It almost appears that everything we took exception to was stricken,"
said Joel Calvo, president of PNC Brokerage Corp., Pittsburgh.
   For instance, Mr. Calvo said he was pleased that the NASD dropped a
requirement for brokers to give a lengthy explanation of how Securities
Investor Protection Corp. insurance works.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

COMMENT: A LIFE INSURANCE TIME BOMB IN TRUST - AND HOW TO DEFUSE IT

By TED S. BERNSTEIN
Trust departments are confronting substantial liability associated with
the life insurance policies held by trusts under their management.
   However, few banks recognize the potential liability they face. The
stakes are huge, with a potential price tag of tens or even hundreds of
millions of dollars.
   At issue is the estimated $1 trillion in face value of life insurance
policies held by irrevocable trusts.
   Most of these policies were purchased to generate funds to satisfy
federal estate tax liabilities. However, insufficient management of the
policies and today's volatile insurance and financial markets have put the
value of many policies at risk.
   In addition, trust departments are solely responsible for managing
assets in the best interests of the trust and its beneficiaries. If the
policies under a trust department's control fall short, it will be
difficult for banks and trusts to escape liability when beneficiaries
contend that insurance policies were managed inefficiently.
   Already, Crown Life Insurance Co. and New York Life Insurance have paid
$50 million and $65 million respectively to settle lawsuits claiming
vanishing premium fraud. In the suits, disgruntled policyholders contended
that the insurers had promised that premium payments would end after a
specific period. But when policies failed to perform as expected, insurers
demanded additional premiums to keep policies in force. These consumer
issues undoubtedly will spill over into trust management, and banks could
be the focus of policyholders' wrath.
   It is important to understand that trust officers at most banks and
trusts lack the training to review or manage life insurance policies. In
addition, over the past 15 years the life insurance industry has introduced
a variety of products that make purchase decisions more complex.
   Many trust officers try to minimize their liability by holding insurance
policies from carriers with excellent credit ratings. However, it's just
not that simple. The lawsuits being filed today are not claiming damages
due to carrier failures; the basis for these lawsuits is policy
performance.
   Three scenarios most likely to expose banks and trusts to liability
include:
   *Failing to analyze the difference between vanishing premiums and level
premiums.
   *Holding inappropriate or obsolete life insurance policies.
   *Failing to purchase enough life insurance for the premiums paid.
   Beneficiaries and their attorneys could evaluate these issues to
determine whether a policy has performed in accordance with its objectives.
   One situation commonly overlooked by trust departments is adverse health
ratings applied when a policy was first issued.
   Assume that in 1988 an overweight nonsmoking male purchased a $5
million, 15-year level term policy owned by an irrevocable trust. Because
he was overweight, the annual premium payment of $15,000 was 33% higher
than the standard rate.
   Now, seven years later, the insured - no longer overweight - would pay
$10,000 annually for the same death benefit. Or he could maintain his
premium at $15,000 but purchase $1.75 million in additional coverage.
   When the insured dies and the trust begins distributing its funds, the
beneficiaries review the policy and discover that the trust could have
purchased $1.75 million in additional life insurance without increasing
premiums. They decide to sue the bank or trust for mismanagement.
   However, the beneficiaries do not seek $5,000 - the difference in annual
premiums. They seek $1.75 million in damages - the difference in death
benefit.
   Considering that some banks manage as many as 4,000 trusts, the
potential liability is staggering. This example represents one of the many
potential issues banks and trusts confront.
   However, today's prudent-investor laws provide these institutions with
the ability to limit their exposure and liability - particularly if they
obtain the necessary expertise to review the policies of each trust.
   Banks and trusts can significantly reduce their exposure to liability
through several steps.
   Establish corporate policy. Banks should determine whether to absorb the
cost of a policy review or pass the cost along to the trust. And if the
risk associated with life insurance policies is too great to manage, they
should get out of the irrevocable trust business.
   Determine how often policies will be reviewed. Most banks review
policies at least every two years.
   Select an experienced insurance consultant or firm to assess the life
insurance policies held by trusts. To keep the consultant's recommendations
impartial, banks and trusts should prohibit consultants from selling life
insurance policies to the trusts they evaluate.
   Demand more service from insurance companies. Have them provide the
ratings they receive from every service that evaluates them. Also, ask for
information about the junk bonds and troubled real estate held in the
company's portfolio as a percentage of its net worth.
   Policy reviews can generate significant client good will. By conducting
the reviews, banks and trusts help policyholders fully understand their
specific policies, often for the first time.
   The reviews also allow trust departments to demonstrate their active
management of trust assets. Finally, reviews help banks and trusts reduce
their exposure to liability.
   It's a "win-win" situation for all parties involved.
   Mr. Bernstein is president of Trustee Consulting Corp., a Chicago-based
firm that advises on personal trust issues.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

TRUST RULES MAY BE EASED FOR MULTISTATE NATIONAL BANKS

By KATHARINE FRASER
National banks with trust departments operating in several states may
soon get a break on the cost of doing business.
   The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency has issued a proposal that
would allow banks to account for all trust operations at their headquarters
rather than having to maintain separate books in each state they do
business in.
   Trust bankers see the OCC proposal - outlined in a Dec. 21 letter - as a
welcome reprieve. Currently, national banks with trust operations in two or
more states must maintain staffs in each state that do nothing but prepare
for state examinations.
   "It's a lot easier to run a business under a single regulatory roof,"
said David J. Kundert, chairman and chief executive officer of  Banc One
Corp.'s investment management and trust group.
   Mr. Kundert believes that a relaxation of regulatory demands could help
Banc One compete with nonbank investment managers that do not have to
adhere to the same regulations as national banks.
   "You need to level the playing field to compete with those kind of
firms," Mr. Kundert said.
   First Bank System Inc., Minneapolis, is also supportive of the proposal,
according to a bank spokeswoman.
   The OCC proposal, if enacted, would represent the first major revision
of the agency's 32-year-old rule defining how fiduciary businesses can be
conducted by national banks whose trust businesses are also subject to
state regulations. The proposal comes on the heels of an OCC interpretive
letter issued on Dec. 8 that allows national banks to offer trust services
outside their home states without having to set up new branches.
   "Much about the national banks fiduciary business has changed since
(1963) including ... the structures and operational methods that banks use
to deliver those services," reads the OCC notice.
   While the OCC proposal would allow for accounting and business
administration to be streamlined, that does not mean that banks could use a
cookie cutter to deliver trust services to clients in different states.
   The agency writes that case-by-case determinations would be made whether
or not state laws regarding the conduct of trust relationships can be
preempted by federal oversight.
   "They have clearly opened the door to banks doing their administration
on a uniform basis out of the headquarters state," said John P.C. Duncan, a
partner at Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue, which counsels banks on interstate
issues.
   But, Mr. Duncan observes that the OCC is making a distinction between
streamlining bean-counts and implementing any standardized investment
policies.
   All 50 states have different "prudent investor" rules that govern what
types of investments are acceptable and how they should be disclosed.
   The OCC is inviting comment on how to minimize the differences among
investment laws so national banks can operate on a uniform basis.
   "We're dealing in a national environment now, and it's important that
banks and customers both know what law applies," Mr. Duncan said.
   State consumer interests and regulators have until Feb. 20 to submit
comments to the OCC.
   In the meantime, the affected banks are offering their support to the
proposed regulation.
   Banc One is a classic example of a banking company that stands to gain
much from this OCC proposal. The institution would like to whittle down its
far-flung banking operations to a single charter someday.
   Banc One has 60 affiliate banks in 11 states, compared with 88 three
years ago. In each state, there are three or four separately chartered
business units that all have to be accounted for.
   Other trust executives at banks with similar situations would welcome
any opportunity to centralize the business.
   "The current approach is encumbered by a variety of different
regulations," said Daniel E. Klimas, KeyCorp's executive vice president for
private banking and investing. "This new proposal may offer us a more
economical way of offering those services," he added.
   Though Mr. Klimas said he is supportive of the OCC proposal, he expects
an onslaught of litigation from state regulators before anything is
resolved.
   Like Banc One, KeyCorp sees a clear benefit to consolidating the
reporting of its segmented trust departments.
   "We are supportive of anything that allows us to look at ourselves and
run a business on a national basis instead of several independently," Mr.
Klimas said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

HOPES FOR WIDER POWERS NOW PINNED ON COURTS, REGULATORS-NOT
CONGRESS

By JUSTIN FOX
When 1995 began, a new Republican majority on Capitol Hill seemed
poised to release banks from the shackles that had kept them a step or two
behind the rest of the financial services industry.
   No such luck.
   Instead, the good news for bankers came from the courts and the
regulators. The Supreme Court affirmed banks' right to sell annuities. The
Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. cut premium rates to all-time lows. All the
banking regulatory agencies trumpeted regulation-cutting reforms.
   The only major banking legislation Congress approved was a Savings
Association Insurance Fund rescue that will - if President Clinton signs it
- cost banks and thrifts more than $20 billion.
   Should the industry look to Congress for answers in 1996? Probably not.
   Bank lobbyists say there is no predicting what lawmakers might do,
particularly if plans to follow the thrift fund fix with a merger of the
bank and thrift charters gain momentum.
   But the stalemate persists in the House of Representatives between
supporters of broader bank powers and insurance agents who want to protect
their turf. What's more, with elections looming, Congress is likely to
effectively shut down by summer.
   The courts and banking agencies, meanwhile, will keep on judging and
regulating. And they could take actions this year that have a big impact on
the business of banking.
   First up is the Supreme Court, which on Jan. 16 will hear oral arguments
in Barnett v. Gallagher, the attempt by Barnett Banks Inc. to overturn
Florida laws that keep it from selling insurance.
   Last January, the court ruled in banks' favor in a case challenging
North Carolina-based NationsBank's right to sell annuities, and many in the
industry expect a similarly favorable Barnett decision before midyear.
   Bank lawyers think the court also will decide to hear another important
banking case - dealing with credit card issuers' right to charge late fees
to out-of-state customers.
   A win in the Barnett case would let banks use current federal law to
launch insurance marketing efforts from branches in towns with fewer than
5,000 people.
   It also would likely embolden Comptroller of the Currency Eugene A.
Ludwig. The comptroller laid off proposals to expand bank powers last year
after receiving a series of stinging letters on insurance and other issues
from House Banking Committee Chairman Jim Leach.
   If the Supreme Court acts and Congress does not, the door will be opened
for Mr. Ludwig to revive his plans to let bank subsidiaries move into lines
of business now generally off-limits to banks.
   But if the Supreme Court hands banks a victory, insurance agents are not
likely to sit idly by. "It could whip them into a frenzy," said Kenneth
Guenther, executive vice president of the Independent Bankers Association
of America.
   All this points to rough sailing for Rep. Leach's bid to break down some
of the Glass-Steagall Act barriers that keep commercial banks out of the
securities business. In September, insurance agents' pressure led House
leaders to combine Rep. Leach's bill with a regulatory relief measure and a
moratorium on the Comptroller's ability to grant banks new insurance
powers, making for a legislative stew unpalatable to most banking groups.

   Rep. Leach will keep fighting for passage of his bill, Mr. Guenther
said, but others believe it is more likely that regulatory relief - along
the lines of the bill approved in September by the Senate Banking
Committee, which doesn't touch the controversial Community Reinvestment Act
- will be decoupled from Glass-Steagall and enacted on its own.
   Then there's the charter merger. In return for being forced to chip in
almost $600 million a year for 22 years to help pay the interest on bonds
from the savings and loan bailout, commercial banks have clamored for an
end to the federal thrift charter.
   Thrifts now possess insurance, affiliation, and branching powers that
banks don't, and some in the industry see the charter merger as a back-door
way to improve the bank charter. But any major changes would run up against
the same forces that have halted Glass-Steagall reform, while an attempt to
force savings institutions into the existing bank charter would be fiercely
opposed by many thrifts.
   Thrifts also want to make sure the industry isn't forced to pay billions
in back taxes on their so-called bad-debt deductions as part of a charter
merger - although agreements by House and Senate tax writers late last year
put such fears largely to rest.
   "We do not want to see our people hurt because of this," said Randall
McFarlane, director of governmental relations for America's Community
Bankers, the leading thrift trade group.
   Thus, while Sen. Alfonse M. D'Amato of New York, chairman of the Banking
Committee, has promised action on the charter merger by Easter, chances are
good that the issue won't be resolved this year.
   More likely to be dealt with in 1996 is a Federal Home Loan Bank System
modernization bill, which foundered in 1995 because of disputes over
dividing the 12 Home Loan Banks' payments on thrift bailout bonds.
   If Glass-Steagall reform indeed goes nowhere in 1996, bank groups plan
to start pushing regulatory buttons - urging the Federal Reserve Board to
let bank holding companies' section 20 subsidiaries get more of their
income from securities activities that banks themselves cannot engage in.
   Currently, such business - which includes underwriting municipal bonds,
dealing in consumer receivables, and underwriting corporate debt and equity
- can't provide more than 10% of the income of a bank holding company
subsidiary. Bank lawyers say the Fed has the legal leeway to raise that
limit as high as 49%.
   The Fed already has a proposal in the works to make the limit more
flexible. In a December speech, Fed governor Susan M. Phillips said the
board definitely will consider raising the limit if Congress fails to act.
   The Fed and the other banking agencies are also in the midst of
campaigns to rewrite their rules to reduce confusion and regulatory burden,
and make the examination process more "banker-friendly."
   The Comptroller's office has been most aggressive, mixing regulatory
relief with new powers for national banks. James D. McLaughlin, director of
agency relations for the American Bankers Association, said he doesn't
expect other regulators to go that far, but does see real reductions in
paperwork and other hassles on the horizon for bankers.
   The agencies also promised that the new community reinvestment rules
they approved in April will make life easier for banks and thrifts. Exams
under the new rules start this month, giving banks a chance to judge
whether their regulators were right.
   Also sure to show up in 1996 exams - particularly those by the Federal
Reserve and the Comptroller's office - is an increased emphasis on risk
management, something regulators talked about often in 1995.
   Then there are the deposit insurance premiums. Throughout 1995, banks
pushed the FDIC to cut them further and faster as the once-depleted Bank
Insurance Fund returned to health. But the industry had nothing more to
complain about after Nov. 14, when the FDIC cut most banks' premiums to the
legal minimum of $2,000 a year.
   In 1996, bank premiums can't go down any more. In fact, they will almost
certainly go up about 2 basis points as part of the thrift fund rescue.
   As of last week, however, the budget reconciliation bill that includes
the thrift fund plan was still caught in the tug-of-war between President
Clinton and Congress.
   The savings fund proposal, which would let the FDIC drop thrifts'
premiums to bank levels, is not the subject of any tension between the
President and Congress. But if the budget legislation were to collapse
completely and the thrift fund legislation were considered separately, 1996
would witness a Capitol Hill battle royal between thrift executives who
want their fund fixed and bankers who don't want to help pay for it, Mr.
Guenther said.
   No one is predicting that this is will happen. But then again, as 1995
showed, predictions can be wrong.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

NATIONSBANK WANTS CLASS ACTION DENIED IN FAIR-LENDING LAWSUIT

By JARET SEIBERG
Trying to limit its potential liability, NationsBank Corp. asked a
federal judge last week to deny class-action status for a pending
fair-lending lawsuit.
   The bank charged the Washington Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights and
Urban Affairs with missing the deadline to seek class-action certification.
   "By failing to move for class certification by Dec. 20, 1995, which was
90 days from the date on which the class complaint was filed, plaintiffs
directly violated (the) local rule," the bank said in Dec. 26 memorandum
filed with the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia.
"Accordingly, plaintiffs' class-action allegations should be stricken in
their entirety."
   John Relman, director of the fair-housing project at the Washington
Lawyers Committee, said the group hasn't missed the deadline. He declined
to elaborate, saying he will explain the group's position in a future court
filing.

   Class-action status is crucial to the lawyers committee's case, which
alleges that NationsBank discriminated against borrowers. The bank would
have much more to lose fighting a class action in court.
   Without class status, the case involves only 13 plaintiffs and nine loan
applications; even if NationsBank lost, the damage award would be limited.
But with class-action status, the lawyer's committee could seek
compensation for all similarly affected consumers. That could raise the
bank's tab dramatically.
   The bank also argued that the lawyers committee has had since its
December 1994 press conference announcing its fair-lending initiative to
search for clients. It said the group has employed a toll-free number,
meetings with community groups, and a "carefully orchestrated" media
campaign.
   Still, NationsBank noted that just 11 plaintiffs joined the lawsuit,
which was filed Sept. 21. Two months of publicity persuaded only one more
person to join the case, NationsBank told the court.
   "If the plaintiffs believe they have meritorious individual claims, they
should be required to litigate them as such," the bank said. "NationsBank
should be subjected to no further prejudicial adverse publicity tied to
grandiose promises of class-action litigation that the plaintiffs' counsel
have been unable to fulfill."
   NationsBank said this is not the first time the lawyers committee failed
to file its papers on time. It said in the memorandum that a federal judge
"sternly admonished" the group for failing to file a timely class action
request in a 1982 employment discrimination case.
   According to the memorandum, the judge allowed the committee to file the
request late. But he warned them not to let it happen again.
   "Plaintiffs chose to bring this as a class action and it is time for
them to fish or cut bait," the judge said.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

MUSICAL CHAIRS AT OCC; NEW AIDE FOR BEREUTER, HEAVYWEIGHTS AT N.Y. FED

Mark P. Jacobsen was named senior adviser to Comptroller of the
Currency Eugene A. Ludwig last week. After joining the agency in January
1994, Mr. Jacobsen was special assistant to the chief counsel. Before that
he had
been an associate with the law firm of Covington & Burling, where Mr.
Ludwig was a partner.
   Mr. Jacobsen replaces Ballard Gilmore, who is now director of licensing
operations in the agency's bank organization department.
   Meanwhile, John Hartzell has left his post as deputy comptroller for
international banking for, of all things, an international bank.
   Mr. Hartzell, who left last month, will soon join the New York office of
Dresdner Bank, which is based in Frankfurt. His new title will be director
of economic and group strategy. The Comptroller's office has not chosen a
replacement.
                              ***
   Rep. Doug Bereuter, R-Neb., has hired Alan Brubaker as his new banking
aide. Mr. Brubaker, 28, most recently worked as a loan officer with a
Maryland mortgage company, but has Capitol Hill experience. From 1989 to
1991 he was a staff member with the House Republican Conference.
   Rep. Bereuter is sponsor of the House's regulatory-relief bill, which
would cut bank paperwork and red tape. The legislation is stalled because
of banks' opposition to restrictions on their insurance powers.
   Mr. Brubaker replaces Joe Pigg, who left in October to be a Washington
lobbyist for New York City.
                              ***
   Investment banker John C. Whitehead, insurance executive Thomas W.
Jones, and balanced-budget crusader Peter G. Peterson have been named to
the board of directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
   Mr. Whitehead, a former State Department deputy secretary and former co-
chairman of Goldman, Sachs & Co., now heads AEA Investors Inc. He will be
chairman of the New York Fed board.
   Tapped as deputy chairman was Mr. Jones, who is vice chairman,
president, and chief operating officer of Teachers Insurance and Annuity
Association-College Retirement Equities Fund.
   Mr. Peterson is a former secretary of commerce and former CEO of Lehman
Brothers, Kuhn, Loeb Inc. He now heads the Blackstone Group, an investment
firm, but is perhaps best known for founding the Concord Coalition, a
nonprofit group pushing for a balanced federal budget.
   The Federal Reserve Board appointed the three men; the other six members
of the New York Fed board are elected by Fed member banks.
                              ***
   Gail L. Patelunas is the new acting director of the division of
resolutions at the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. She takes the place
vacated by Robert H. Hartheimer, who resigned as of Dec. 31 to join the
Alexandria, Va., investment banking firm of Friedman, Billings, Ramsey &
Co.
   Since 1994, Ms. Patelunas has been associate director of the division,
which is responsible for the resolution of failing FDIC-insured banks and
thrifts. Before that she was assistant director of resolutions, and before
joining the FDIC in 1990 she worked at the Federal Reserve Board, Kidder,
Peabody & Co., and KPMG Peat Marwick.
                              ***
   Lynn Reaser is the new chairman of the American Bankers Association's
economic advisory committee. She replaces Alan Gayle who just completed a
two-year term.
   Ms. Reaser is senior vice president and chief economist at First
Interstate Bancorp in Los Angeles.
   In her ABA post she will oversee the committee's forecasts of economic
indicators and national and regional economic issues. The panel's next
semiannual economic forecast and monetary policy recommendation will be
announced Jan. 24.
   The committee's new vice chairman is Joel L. Naroff, chief economist at
First Fidelity Bancorp. in Philadelphia.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

COMPANY INDEX


[TABLE]
   A
   AEA Investors, 2
   America's Community Bankers, 1
   American Bankers Assn, 1,2,15
   American Express, 17
   B
   Banc One, 14
   Bank of Boston, 10
   Blackstone Group, 2
   Boatmen's, 1
   Broadway & Seymour, 18
   C
   Capstead, 13
   Chicago Corp, 12
   Coldwell Banker, 12
   Colorado Bankers Assn, 7
   Concord EFS, 18
   Continuum, 18
   Countrywide Credit Industries, 12
   Credit Union National Assn, 7
   D
   Deluxe Corp, 18
   Direct Marketing Assn, 1
   DM Group, 1
   Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette, 1
   Dresdner, 2
   E
   E&Y Kenneth Leventhal Real Estate, 12
   F
   Fair Isaac, 18
   Farmers & Merchants (NE), 10
   Federal Home Loan Mortgage, 13
   Federal National Mortgage Assn, 13
   Fifth Third, 17
   Financial Institutions Consulting, 6
   First Bank System, 6,14
   First Data, 16
   First Fidelity, 2
   First Interstate, 2,6
   First National (New England), 10
   First Technology Federal CU, 7
   G
   Gates Credit Union (CO), 7
   GE Capital, 13
   General Electric, 12,13
   General Motors Acceptance, 1
   Gensar Holdings, 16
   George K Baum & Co, 18
   Glendale Federal, 6
   Graystone Mortgage, 12
   Great Western, 13
   H
   Hogan Systems, 18
   Home Savings, 13
   Hovde Financial, 6
   I
   Independent Bankers Assn of America, 1
   J
   Jack Henry & Associates, 18
   Jones Day Reavis & Pogue, 14
   M
   Massachusetts Bankers Assn, 10
   Massachusetts Independent Bankers Assn, 10
   MasterCard, 17
   Merrill Lynch, 6
   Monness Crespi & Hardt, 6
   Mortgage Bankers Assn, 13
   N
   Natl Assn of Securities Dealers, 15
   Natl City, 16
   NationsBank, 2
   Norwest, 12,13
   O
   Olympic Financial, 1
   P
   PaineWebber, 6
   Patelco CU, 7
   Pentagon Federal CU, 7
   PNC, 12
   Polk, 1
   Prudential, 12
   R
   RCSB Finanical, 1
   Rodman & Renshaw, 1
   Royal Bank of Canada, 24
   S
   Signature Group, 1
   State Bank of Blomkest (MN), 10
   Sulphur Springs State (TX), 10
   Sumner National, 17
   T
   TIAA-CREF, 2
   Trustee Consulting, 14
   U
   U S Central CU, 7
   United Jersey, 13
   V
   Value Rent a Car, 17
   W
   Wells Fargo, 6
   Western Corporate Federal CU, 7
===



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

ROYAL BANK OF CANADA TRIMS U.S. OPERATIONS TO ZERO IN ON PROFITS

By DANIEL DUNAIEF
Less is more for the U.S. businesses of Canada's biggest bank,  Royal
Bank of Canada.
   In the last three years, U.S. senior vice president and general manager
David L. Robertson has reduced the bank's corporate client base to about
685 from 1,500.
   At the same time, he has reduced the bank's staff to 217 from 415, even
as the bank has added an asset-backed securities business, a syndication
distribution business, and a structured finance team.
   And Mr. Robertson is not done. He plans to reduce the number of
corporate clients even further in 1996, to 600, focusing on multinational
companies that present the greatest opportunities for the bank.
   In conjunction with its investment banking affiliate Dominion
Securities, Royal Bank has been building its expertise in various capital
markets arenas, hoping to develop a critical mass of business to justify
doing business with each customer.
   "We want to be able to deliver at least three or four main products to
each of our clients," said the 53-year-old Mr. Robertson.
   The bank also hopes to find companies that have subsidiaries in Canada,
where it can provide a branch network and services ranging from payroll to
cash management.
   The strategy has worked so far, with fewer customers accounting for more
revenues.
   Mr. Robertson estimated that revenues from U.S.-based banking had
reached 10% to 12% of gross revenues, up from about 8% three years ago when
he took over the U.S. operations.
   Some of that increased profitability can be attributed to  growth in
specific business lines.
   "We've more than trebled the amount of foreign exchange and capital
markets derivatives that we deliver to the remaining clients," said Mr.
Robertson.
   The key products Royal Bank is looking to deliver include trade finance,
syndicated loans and standby lines of credit, foreign exchange, capital
markets derivatives, and equity derivatives.
   To that end, Dominion Securities last year added 20 former Kidder
Peabody equity derivatives traders to its staff.
   Additionally, this fall the bank raised its profile among U.S. investors
by listing its stock on the New York Stock Exchange.
   Mr. Robertson said the listing was "a first step," as the bank continues
to view the United States as an area for expansion in such areas as retail
banking, fund management, and regional investment banking.
   While the New York Stock Exchange listing presents an opportunity for an
acquisition, it's not something the bank considers practical right now.
"You see what everyone wants to pay to buy banks these days?" Mr. Robertson
asked.
   Down the road, Mr. Robertson said, the United States presents an ideal
area for expansion, especially as laws like the Depression-era Glass-
Steagall Act and the Bank Holding Company Act change.
   "If you look at North America and at the North American Free Trade
Agreement, (a strategic acquisition) would be a natural expansion for us,"
he said.
   The Royal Bank executive said that a focused strategy is the right
approach in a foreign marketplace.
   Indeed, Mr. Robertson, who has been with the bank for 36 years, has done
three stints outside Canada, including one in London, and articulated the
need for targeted competition.
   "You can't compete with Natwest or Barclays on the ground in England and
really make any money," said Mr. Robertson. "When you're outside the
country, you have to try to deliver certain things you can do profitably."
   The Royal Bank favors profitability over size.
   With about a $6 billion-asset base in the United States, the bank has
the smallest amount of American assets among Canadian banks.
   "We're not chasing assets," said Mr. Robertson. "We concentrate on
products, and if it results in assets, that's fine."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

CONSUMER DELINQUENCY SPURRING SHORT SALES

By JAMES C. ALLEN and STEPHEN KLEEGE
Sharp divisions are developing on Wall Street over the recent upticks
in consumer loan delinquencies.
   Short-sellers are betting on further damage to consumer finance
companies, while some stock analysts are touting buying opportunities in
the stocks.
   A case in point is Olympic Financial Ltd., a Minneapolis-based auto
lender that won a "buy" affirmation from Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette last
week - after the short interest in its shares had soared 65% in a month.
   The skepticism about consumer lenders helped push up short interest in
bank-related shares traded on the National Association of Securities
Dealers' system by 9.5% in the month ended Dec. 15. The rise in bank short
interest came amid a general decline in short interest in stocks traded on
the over-the-counter system. (See tables on pages 22 and 24.)
   Short interest is the outstanding volume of shares sold short - that is,
borrowed and promptly sold. Short-sellers are betting that the stock price
will fall, so their short positions can be covered profitably with cheaper
shares.
   Earlier, the New York Stock Exchange and American Stock Exchange
reported a slight decline in bank-related short interest. The basket of
bank stocks traded on the Nasdaq includes numerous small, retail-oriented
banks and thrifts that could be seen as vulnerable to rising delinquencies.
   Short interest in Olympic Financial - which provides auto finance mostly
to "prime," or creditworthy, consumers - rose by nearly 1.8 million shares,
to more than 4.6 million shares. It was the largest short position in the
bank-related group.
   RCSB Financial, a Rochester, N.Y., thrift holding company, had the
largest short position relative to its daily trading volume. Its short
position of 2.3 million shares represents 21.1 days of average trading.
   RCSB had the fourth-largest short position in total among the Nasdaq
bank-related issues, behind Olympic and Boatmen's Bancshares, the St. Louis
based regional bank, with 2.7 million shares sold short.
   The second-biggest increase was in the Money Store, the well-known home
equity lender. The Money Store's short position increased by 848,852 shares
to 1.5 million shares - the 10th-largest total.
   Olympic Financial's shares were trading at $16 last week, off from more
than $30 in September. Short-sellers apparently believe Olympic could fall
even further because of what analyst Andrew Jeffrey of Rodman & Renshaw
calls its "loss deferral strategy."
   "I think the assumptions they have used are unrealistic, given the type
of paper they are buying," said Mr. Jeffrey, who specializes in companies
that make auto loans to less creditworthy consumers.
   Olympic's chairman and chief executive Jeffrey Mack insists the
company's loss assumptions are based on historical performance: Loan losses
are currently running at an annualized rate of 65 to 75 basis points, or
130 basis points to 140 basis points over the average two-year life of a
loan, he said.
   He said the company is setting aside nearly 172 basis points to cover
any variance that economic swings cause for the portfolio.
   "On top of that, we have set up what we call general reserves, which are
other allocated reserves in the millions of dollars, to add further
protection," he said.
   But that is not enough, Mr. Jeffrey said. He said General Motors
Acceptance Corp., also a prime lender, has experienced cumulative losses of
200 basis points during previous economic downturns.
   Another disconcerting factor for Mr. Jeffrey is the manner in which
Olympic disposes of its repossessed automobiles. Instead of auctioning the
autos as its competitors do, Olympic puts the cars on a used-car lot and
sells them on consignment, he said.
   By doing so, he said the company is increasing its future losses because
it is making greater concessions in order to get the asset sold.
   But some observers said the pessimists are misguided.
   Thomas Brown, a banking analyst at Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, said
that short-sellers tend to be paranoid and that they are "wrong in assuming
this is a giant conspiracy."
   The rating agencies, third-party guarantors, and Olympic's accountants
have all signed off on the company's assumptions regarding such things as
prepayment speeds and loan-loss reserves, Mr. Brown said.
   "In my experience it's typical of the way short-sellers have tried to
jump on financial stocks," he said. "It makes a good story until you
examine it."
   Mr. Brown said even if losses exceed the level of reserves the company
has set aside, it is unlikely that shareholders will see a significant
reduction in current earnings to cover any losses.
   If he's right, a lot of short-sellers will be licking their wounds next
year.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

STOCK OF SYSTEMS, PROCESSING FIRMS JUMPED 34% IN '96

By BRIAN TRACEY
Like in the rest of the U.S. equities market, 1995 was a terrific year
for bank technology stocks.
   The publicly traded financial systems and processing-services firms
tracked by American Banker saw their stock prices rise an average of 34%
last year.
   That hefty increase was statistically in line with the Standard & Poor's
index of 500 stocks and the Dow Jones industrial average, which both rose
by about one-third in 1995.
   But what was even more interesting was that only 6 of the 30 listed
financial systems stocks lost value over the 12-month period, while 13
outperformed the average gain. The number of advancing stocks far exceeded
1994 performance levels, when just 13 out of 28 firms experienced gains.
   Wall Street analysts said the bull market in 1995 was led mainly by the
technology sector, as more consumers and companies sought to leverage the
latest advances in computer and telecommunications systems.
   Banks and their technology vendors seem to be at the nexus of this
trend, observers said. Financial institutions increasingly see technology
as vital to their future competitive positioning, as well as providing the
means to link up with their most profitable customers.
   Payment systems and information processing firms are "the growth stocks
of the next century," said Richard K. Weingarten, an analyst at Montgomery
Securities in San Francisco. "They're the new Cokes and Pepsis and
Gillettes of the world."
   Like 1994, payment services and financial application software companies
offered the best returns on investment. Leading the pack was bank software
developer Jack Henry & Associates, which saw its stock appreciate a
whopping 156% in 1995.
   Kevin J. Dyches, an analyst with George K. Baum & Co. in Kansas City,
said Jack Henry's big gain was mainly attributable to the company's June
acquisition of the community banking software business of Broadway &
Seymour Inc.
   "Through that acquisition, Jack Henry increased their customer base by
33%," Mr. Dyches said. "At that time, their market value was about $150
million, and they bought a company that was one-third their size for $12
million." He also noted that the acquisition was profitable in the first
quarter after Monett, Mo.-based Jack Henry acquired the business.
   Mr. Dyches added that Jack Henry was generating internal revenue growth
through sales of its Silverlake core accounting system, designed for
midsize banks with between $100 million and $10 billion in assets.
   The second-biggest percentage gain among financial systems firms was
Concord EFS Inc., a provider of payments systems services to retailers.
Then Memphis-based firm's stock rose 146% during 1995.
   Two years ago, Concord's stock dipped after some weak-performing
quarters, but since then "they've gained back the confidence of the
market," Mr. Weingarten said. "They had the strongest internal growth of
any company in the payment services group."
   He added that Concord's specialty is provident credit and debit point of
sale systems to supermarkets, "which is the fastest growing part of the
payments processing business."
   Hogan Systems Inc., another bank software firm, gave its stockholders a
tidy profit for the year: its common stock rose 110%. After months of
speculation, Dallas-based Hogan agreed last month to be acquired by
Continuum Co., an Austin, Tex.-based developer of systems for the insurance
industry, in stock swap currently valued at about $200 million.
   It's also interesting to note that two of the best-performing stocks in
1994, Charlotte, N.C.-based Broadway & Seymour and San Rafael, Calif.-based
Fair, Isaac & Co. lost ground in 1995.
   The common stock value of Fair, Isaac, a developer of credit scoring
systems, dropped 9%. for the year.
   Broadway & Seymour, after peaking at $31 a share last summer, has
skidded back to about $16 a share after the company announced it would take
a fourth-quarter restructuring charge.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

DELUXE WILL TAKE RESTRUCTURING CHARGE OF $60M TO $70M

By BRIAN TRACEY
Check printing firm Deluxe Corp., acknowledging that its future success
lies more in electronic banking, said last week it would take $60 million
to $70 million restructuring charge.
   Executives at St. Paul-based Deluxe said last week that the fourth-
quarter charge to earnings would cover expenses related to the closing of
several check printing facilities and other writeoffs in several business
units.
   The company has seen its profit margins shrink in its core check
printing business in recent years as the banking industry has consolidated.
In addition, electronic payments are expected to slowly begin replacing
paper checks as consumers increasingly use bank cards.
   "Our earnings declines over the last three years have clearly been a
disappointment to our shareholders and employees, and it is now time to
begin reversing that trend," said J. A. "Gus" Blanchard, Deluxe's president
and chief executive officer, who added that the restructuring should
generate $100 million to $125 million in annual expense savings by the end
of 1997.
   Mr. Blanchard said that as part of its new strategy, the company plans
to enhance its electronic banking and other types of information services
for financial institutions, mainly through its Deluxe Data unit, a leading
third-party processor of automated teller machine transactions.
   "Through our Deluxe Data subsidiary, we already provide a variety of
transaction processing and settlement capabilities as well as applications
for linking various back-office functions," Mr. Blanchard  said. "Our new
plan calls for strengthening our existing offerings as well as broadening
our total value proposition, with the objective being to permit our client
financial institutions to connect their customers to any banking
application ... by whatever electronic means the customer chooses."
   Deluxe officials also said they plan to beef up their product offerings
in the payment protection arena, as banks have been forced to eat billions
of dollars in fraudulent transactions in recent years.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet
January 02, 1996

SECURITIZATION LEADERS


[TABLE]
Aggregate for all three government-sponsored enterprises
   Overall issuance
                                   Volume in
   Rank                             millions    %
          1 Countrywide Funding     $24,537   10.50%
          2 Norwest Mortgage          19,599     8.4
          3 Prudential Home Mtg.       7,723     3.3
          4 Fleet Mortgage Group       6,314     2.7
          5 Chase Manhattan Mtg.       5,343     2.3
          6 Chemical Residential       4,780     2.1
          7 Resource Bancshares        4,519     1.9
          8 North American Mtg.        4,372     1.9
          9 BancBoston Mortgage        3,411     1.5
         10 Standard Fed'l Bank        3,186     1.4
   Single-family fixed
                                   Volume in
   Rank                             millions     %
          1 Countrywide Funding     $16,283    9.40%
          2 Norwest Mortgage          12,554     7.2
          3 Fleet Mortgage Group       6,085     3.5
          4 Prudential Home Mtg.       6,016     3.5
          5 Chase Manhattan Mtg.       4,635     2.7
          6 Resource Bancshares        4,060     2.3
          7 Chemical Residential       4,058     2.3
          8 North American Mtg.        3,680     2.1
          9 Standard Fed'l Bank        2,903     1.7
         10 BancBoston Mortgage        2,594     1.5
   ARM issuance
                                    Volume in
   Rank                             millions    %
          1 Countrywide Funding      $7,202   15.00%
          2 Norwest Mortgage           6,406    13.4
          3 World Savings and Loan     2,326     4.9
          4 American Savings Bank      1,727     3.6
          5 Prudential Home Mtg.       1,112     2.3
          6 Home Savings of America    1,012     2.1
          7 BancBoston Mortgage          808     1.7
          8 Chemical Residential         679     1.4
          9 North American Mtg.          663     1.4
         10 Union Fed'l Indianapolis     658     1.4
   Multifamily issuance
                                    Volume in
   Rank                             millions     %
          1 GMAC Commercial Mtg.       $269    6.30%
          2 WMF/Huntoon, Paige           191     5.9
          3 American Mtg.                170     5.3
            and Investment
          4 Patrician Financial Co.      169     5.2
          5 Berkshire Mortgage Co.       162       5
          6 Green Park Financial         157     4.9
          7 AMI Capital Inc.             156     4.8
          8 Eichler, Fayne & Assoc.      107     3.3
          9 Mellon Mortgage Co.          104     3.2
         10 Bright Mortgage Co.           98       3
                            ***
   Fannie Mae
          Overall issuance
                                 Volume in
   Rank                          millions     %
          1 Countrywide Funding  $11,525   12.40%
          2 Norwest Mortgage        4,683       5
          3 Fleet Mortgage Group    2,939     3.2
          4 American Savings Bank   2,370     2.6
          5 World Savings and Loa   2,326     2.5
          6 North American Mtg.     2,315     2.5
          7 Chase Manhattan Mtg.    2,104     2.3
          8 GMAC Mtg. Corp. Pa.     1,439     1.6
          9 Chemical Residential    1,384     1.5
         10 Standard Fed'l Bank     1,322     1.4
   30-year-fixed issuance
                                  Volume in
   Rank                           millions     %
          1 Countrywide Funding   $8,542   14.50%
          2 Norwest Mortgage        3,251     5.5
          3 Fleet Mortgage Group    2,427     4.1
          4 North American Mtg.     1,955     3.3
          5 Chase Manhattan Mtg.    1,354     2.3
          6 Standard Fed. Bank        939     1.6
          7 GMAC Mortgage Pa.         892     1.5
          8 Chemical Residential      825     1.4
          9 Prudential Home Mtg.      770     1.3
         10 BancBoston Mortgage       707     1.2
   15- to 20-year fixed
                                  Volume in
   Rank                           millions     %
          1 Countrywide Funding    $1,170    8.80%
          2 Norwest Mortgage          568     4.3
          3 Fleet Mortgage Group      511     3.8
          4 Chase Manhattan Mtg.      371     2.8
          5 Standard Fed. Bank        339     2.5
          6 Chemical Residential      285     2.1
          7 Samuel T. Isaac & Ass     278     2.1
          8 Barnett Mortgage Co.      241     1.8
          9 North American Mtg.       232     1.7
         10 Republic Bank             159     1.2
   ARM issuance
                                 Volume in
   Rank                           millions    %
          1 World Savings and Loa $2,326   15.80%
          2 American Savings Bank   1,727    11.8
          3 Countrywide Funding     1,180       8
          4 Home Savings            1,012     6.9
            of America
          5 Citizens Bank of Mass     441       3
          6 First Nationwide Mort     425     2.9
          7 Bank of Hawaii            410     2.8
          8 NVR Mtg. Finance          364     2.5
          9 Coast Federal Bank        318     2.2
         10 San Francisco Fed'l S     300       2
                                 ***
   Freddie Mac
   Overall issuance
                               Volume in
   Rank                        millions      %
     1 Norwest Mortgage         $3,592    4.80%
     2 Countrywide Funding        3,392     4.5
     3 Prudential Home Mtg.       3,154     4.2
     4 Resource Bancshares        2,836     3.8
     5 Chase Manhattan Mtg.       1,989     2.7
     6 First Security Savings     1,766     2.4
     7 Standard Fed'l Bank        1,755     2.3
     8 PHH Mortgage Services      1,564     2.1
     9 Washington Mutual          1,288     1.7
    10 Chemical Residential       1,209     1.6
   30-year-fixed issuance
                               Volume in
   Rank                        millions     %
     1 Norwest Mortgage         $3,055    6.40%
     2 Resource Bancshares        2,381       5
     3 Countrywide Funding        1,938     4.1
     4 Prudential Home Mtg.       1,846     3.9
     5 Chase Manhattan Mtg.       1,732     3.6
     6 First Security Savings     1,339     2.8
     7 PHH Mortgage Svcs.         1,115     2.3
     8 Chemical Residential       1,108     2.3
     9 Standard Fed'l Bank        1,024     2.2
    10 Fleet Mortgage Group         995     2.1
   15- to 20-year fixed
                                 Volume in
   Rank                          millions   %
     1 Washington Mutual          $542    4.80%
     2 Standard Fed'l Bank          521     4.6
     3 Prudential Home Mtg.         484     4.2
     4 Norwest Mortgage             473     4.1
     5 Resource Bancshares          449     3.9
     6 Banc One Mortgage            352     3.1
     7 Branch Banking and Trust     309     2.7
     8 Countrywide Funding          227       2
     9 First Security Savings       222     1.9
    10 Chase Manhattan Mtg.         220     1.9
   ARM issuance
                                Volume in
   Rank                         millions    %
     1 Countrywide Funding        $823    6.70%
     2 Washington Mutual            629     5.1
     3 Old Kent Bank                244       2
     4 Prudential Home Mtg.         229     1.9
     5 Standard Fed'l Bank          165     1.3
     6 PHH Mortgage Services        102     0.8
     7 Sterling Savings              95     0.8
     8 First Security Idaho          83     0.7
     9 First Security Utah           81     0.7
    10 Bank South Mortgage           76     0.6
                                 ***
   Ginnie Mac
   Overall issuance
                                 Volume in
   Rank                          millions      %
     1 Norwest Mortgage         $11,323   17.40%
     2 Countrywide Funding         9,620    14.8
     3 Prudential Home Mtg.        3,638     5.6
     4 BancBoston Mortgage         2,318     3.6
     5 Chemical Residential        2,187     3.4
     6 Fleet Mortgage Group        2,172     3.3
     7 Resource Bancshares         1,645     2.5
     8 Principal Residential       1,416     2.2
     9 North American Mtg.         1,399     2.1
    10 NationsBanc Mtg.            1,335     2.1
   Single-family fixed
                                Volume in
   Rank                          millions    %
     1 Norwest Mortgage          $5,206   12.60%
     2 Countrywide Funding         4,406    10.6
     3 Prudential Home Mtg.        2,797     6.8
     4 Fleet Mortgage Group        1,945     4.7
     5 Chemical Residential        1,762     4.3
     6 BancBoston Mortgage         1,530     3.7
     7 Resource Bancshares         1,203     2.9
     8 Principal Residential       1,127     2.7
     9 GE Capital Mortgage         1,053     2.5
    10 NationsBanc Mtg.              998     2.4
   ARM issuance
                                Volume in
   Rank                          millions       %
     1 Countrywide Funding       $18,160   11.40%
     2 Norwest Mortgage           13,600     8.6
     3 Prudential Home Mtg.        6,022     3.8
     4 Chase Manhattan Mtg.        3,927     2.5
     5 Chemical Residential        3,219       2
     6 Resource Bancshares         3,141       2
     7 North American Mtg.         3,062     1.9
     8 Fleet Real Estate Funding   2,869     1.8
     9 American Savings Bank       2,178     1.4
    10 BancBoston Mtg. Corp.       2,120     1.3
   Multifamily issuance
                                 Volume in
   Rank                          millions    %
     1 WMF/Huntoon, Paige           $191     14%
     2 GMAC Commercial Mtg.          171    12.5
     3 Mellon Mortgage Co.            99     7.2
     4 Highland Mortgage Co.          96       7
     5 Greystone Servicing Corp.      95     6.9
     6 TRI Capital Corp.              86     6.3
     7 American Capitol Resource      74     5.4
     8 First Maryland Mtg.            56     4.1
     9 Bank of America                55       4
    10 P/R Mtg. and Investment        51     3.7
===



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-24</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B021-93</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi108.html 205.156.212.5 19970115003327 text/html 96698
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:30:32 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:51 GMT
Content-length: 96509
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi108.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>TRENDWATCH:  BANKS FEAR RE-FINANCING OF SMALL BUSINESSES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(534 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>CENTRAL BANKS RELY ON REGIONAL CO-OPERATION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(920 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FEATURE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>HONG KONG FIRST TO GO RTGS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1503 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>INDONESIAN BANKS STILL VULNERABLE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(931 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>DBS BANK STREAMLINES FOR THE FUTURE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(762 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>BANKS PUSH ON WITH DIRECT TRADING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1030 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>INTERNATIONAL DEBIT MAKES ITS DEBUT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1861 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>MASTERCARD INTERNATIONAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(220 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>VISA INTERNATIONAL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(166 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>THE MASTERCARD-VERIFONE ALLIANCE PROGRAMME</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(146 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>CLIENT/SERVER - THE NEW COMPUTING PARADIGM?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1049 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>SOVEREIGN RISK: BANK DEPOSITS V. BONDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(4023 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS BRIEF</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>MITSUBISHI BANK'S PROFITS RISE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(101 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>BANK OF TOKYO'S INTERIM RESULTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(56 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>HANA BANK COMPLETES ISSUE OF FLOATING RATE NOTES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(104 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>CITYTRUST SHARE OFFER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(148 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>METROPOLITAN BANK & TRUST INTERIM RESULTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(79 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>FAR EAST BANK AND TRUST FORECASTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(112 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>GOVERNMENT UPS STAKE IN LAND BANK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(90 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>PHILIPPINE NATIONAL BANK PRIVATISATION OFFERING UNDERSUBSCRIBED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(100 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>FLOATING RATE CD ISSUE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(75 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>UNITED WORLD CHINESE BANK PROFITS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(82 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>TAIWAN'S BIG THREE GOVERNMENT BANKS ANNOUNCE LOWER PROFITS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(141 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

TRENDWATCH:  BANKS FEAR RE-FINANCING OF SMALL BUSINESSES

THE YOUNG Thai banker was despondent. "The board thinks that anyone
seeking re-financing is potentially a bad debt case," he said,
recounting how the bank's board turned down a package he put together
to re-finance the business of a small property company.

"The company was paying 17 percent to a finance company for a 700
million baht ($16 million) project. They have had a five-year track
record of on-time payment," the banker said.

There was also a strong fee-based component. He had proposed a 400
million baht facility at 15 percent per annum, with a 1 percent
up-front fee and a 40 million baht revolving facility at half a
percentage maintenance fee per month.

The banker reckoned the deal was turned down because of his bank's
strongly conservative culture. A lack of competitiveness in the Thai
banking industry preclude large and established banks from moving
aggressively to capture new businesses away from other banks.

Around the region, sustained economic growth averaging 10 percent in
much of Asia has been creating a strong cohort of well-run small
businesses in growth industries.

A senior Malaysian banker told Asian Banker, "typically, a small
business that is begun with little more than the wits of the
entrepreneur would turn to factoring to manage its cash flow. A low end
financial institution may also be interested."

A Filipino banker admitted: "Often, it's a case of us not understanding
their business. In the Philippines, we'd rather lend to the
co-operatives who, in turn, lend to these small businesses." But even
with a strong track record, they continue to be viewed suspiciously by
bankers.

Finance companies in Malaysia and Thailand charge up to 4 percent over
published prime rates. When Filipino banks do lend directly to small
businesses, the rates are exorbitant, at 7 percent-8 percent over
prime.

The problem is that by the time these small businesses reach a stage of
maturity to warrant the interest of banks, the competition would have
become very tough. Competition at a mature stage is not only between
banks, but with non-bank financial institutions, the venture
capitalists, merchant banks and even other corporations.

Malaysia appears to have the most progressive environment of
competitive re-financing in the region. "Nobody advertises it aloud,"
the Malaysian banker said,"but it sometimes goes down to the level of a
bank asking to see the letter-of-offer of the original financier and
simply substituting that with a better offer." He joked that if the
original bank had a good reputation, the competitor would not need to
bother doing its own due diligence.

In Singapore and Hong Kong, government incentives play a critical role
in getting favourable terms for targeted small businesses they want to
promote. Singapore banks charge as low as a quarter percent over prime
for loans under the Local Enterprise Financing Scheme.

While the rates are attractive, such loans come with conditions that
can be restrictive if a company proves to grow very fast. What is
needed is a banking community that is as nimble as the fast-footed
entrepreneurs who are creating the economic miracles in the region.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CENTRAL BANKS RELY ON REGIONAL CO-OPERATION

Given that the world's three largest economies, the US, Japan and
Germany, have never been completely successful at thwarting speculative
assault against their currencies, what chance do five of the region's
central banks stand of doing so?

RECENTLY, five members of the 11-member Executive Meeting of East Asian
and Pacific Central Banks (EMEAP), namely Australia, Hong Kong,
Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia, took the unprecedented step of
signing a series of bilateral "repo" agreements. The Monetary Authority
of Singapore, while deciding not to join its members, also set up
similar arrangements on a bilateral basis with the central banks of
Thailand and Indonesia to ameliorate the volatile influence of global
capital flows on exchange-rates.

The bilateral pacts, although not a carte blanc for central banks to
tap into the reserves of their neighbours, nevertheless allow signatory
countries to borrow from one another to boost their reserves in times
of crisis. This was in reflection of the Mexican peso crisis that led
to speculative assaults on a number of regional currencies.
Technically, it formally contracts the parties to raise US dollars from
one another against US Treasury securities.

Market watchers, however, are not convinced that these agreements will
result in central banks pooling their foreign exchange reserves.
Analysts highlighted the fact that the effectiveness of such measures
against potentially disruptive market speculation has never been put to
the test. It would certainly be sensible to think that no currency
would ever be immune to"attacks".

Economists say that the soundness of macroeconomic fundamentals and
policy prudence remain the ultimate guarantors of exchange system
stability. In its weekly economic update, the Union Bank of Switzerland
noted that even G3 (Japan, Germany and the US) co-ordinated
intervention works best when it aims to support market moves.

In a recent speech calling for greater co-operation between Asia's
central banks, Joseph Yam, chief executive of the Hong Kong Monetary
Authority, said the Mexican episode was a wakening bell to Asian
central bankers. This, he said, has made central bankers wonder: what
has changed for Asian monetary stability? What has remained the same?
What needs to change?

Yam believes that with open capital accounts, and significant foreign
direct and portfolio investments pouring into Asia, Asian currencies
have become susceptible to the global ebb and flow of financial
resources.

Players have also changed. The commercial bankers, who have always had
branches and offices in Asia, understand the region well. On the other
hand, new actors have appeared on centre stage in the last five years.
Securities houses, pension and mutual funds, investment banks and also
hedge funds have appeared in Asian markets.

In the face of these developments, central bankers believe that the
ability of central banks to stabilise exchange rates seems to have
slipped from their grasp. However, Yam noted that the sound
fundamentals in the Asian markets still hold.

What has also remained the same is that, as lenders of last resort,
central banks are in a position to dictate terms when eventually they
are asked to lend domestic currencies directly or indirectly to
speculators shorting their currencies.

In the aftermath of the Mexico crisis, an informal meeting of some of
the region's central banks concluded that it would be useful to
exchange information on market activities, to monitor the markets more
closely, to share knowledge and techniques on overall financial market
supervision, and to immunise the pain tolerance levels of the economy
in case it becomes necessary to inflict pain on the speculators.

At present, most Asian economies are keeping their exchange rates at a
low level in order to ensure export competitiveness. The most obvious
manifestation of this is reflected in the increase in the reserves of
some economies as a result of direct central bank intervention to hold
down their currencies.

Economists point to the fact that in terms of purchasing-power
parities, most Asian currencies, including those of China, India and
Thailand, are still grossly undervalued.

Another factor which impinges on the stability of some of the region's
exchange rates is the fact that most economies in the region are
growing huge current account deficits. However, current account
deficits in Asia mostly reflect foreign capital inflows which fuel
development.

The argument is that if these are mainly short-term portfolio capital,
then it is better to allow reserves to grow, as opposed to allowing an
increase in the exchange rate which may later fall when these
short-term capital flow elsewhere.

In the case of more long-term capital inflow, then a stronger exchange
rate is not such a bad proposition at all. However, the problem of
losing export competition due to a stronger currency will come back to
haunt the governments.

In the aftermath of the peso crisis last year, Indonesian stocks fell
to six-month lows amid concern that speculators were going to target
the rupiah. In the Philippines, the central bank raised rates to defend
the peso.

However, some feel that the move suggests inherent weaknesses in their
currencies. Some say that it only serves to raise more concerns in the
minds of investors, making matters worse not better.

Exchange rate against US$ (% change as at December 21 1995)

Australia           -4.34
China               +1.55
Hong Kong           +0.5
India              -10.4
Indonesia           -3.83
Japan               -1.97
Malaysia            +0.5
New Zealand         +2.14
Philippines         -6.41
Singapore           +3
South Korea         +1.95
Sri Lanka           -7.59
Taiwan              -3.84
Thailand            -0.2

Source: MMS International

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

HONG KONG FIRST TO GO RTGS

Nearly 30 years after banks in the US have been processing payments on
a real time basis, banks in Asia have finally taken the same route

THE HONG Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) is confident that the colony's
high value transaction payment system will be able to go real time by
the end of this year. Almost all banks in Asia still settle their
interbank cheques and other payments mostly on a net overnight basis.
The system to be used by the HKMA will be similar to that used by the
Federal Reserves Board in the US, called FedWire.

While the US FedWire System has been settling payments on an Real Time
Gross Settlements (RTGS) system since 1968 and the Swiss have been
doing it since 1987, the HKMA began looking into this faster and safer
system to deal with rising interbank exposures only in 1993.

"The adoption of RTGS will immediately eliminate most of the legal
risks associated with bilateral or multi-lateral netting," Joseph Yam,
chief executive of HKMA, said at a payments system seminar organised by
the agency in Hong Kong late last year. "Settlement across the books of
the Hong Kong Monetary Authority will eliminate any doubt over credit
risks associated with commercial banks acting as settlement
institutions, however prudently these commercial banks are run."

RTGS enables settlements to be made on a payment-versus-payment basis
(see definitions box), so that there is virtually no exposure between
institutions at any point in the day. Experts believe that this in turn
eliminates what is known in large payment systems circles as "Herstatt
Risk". Coined in reference to the situation that arose from a major
settlement failure in the past, Herstatt Risk arises in foreign
exchange transactions when one counterparty delivers currency in one
time zone and receives value in the other currency in another time
zone. The risk arises out of the possibility that the counterparty who
delivers later may fail to settle.

According to Yam, Hong Kong adopted a "single tier architecture,
instead of the present three tier one, with every bank settling
directly across the books". The HKMA also plans to integrate its
Central Moneymarkets Unit (CMU) service, which is its book entry
securities system, directly with the RTGS system. So daylight
overdrafts incurred by the banks at the clearing account with the HKMA
will be fully collateralised with the Exchange Fund paper on a repo
(sell and buy-back) basis.

Yam believes that Hong Kong will be the first to settle its moneymarket
deals on this basis. "As far as I know, our RTGS system is one of the
first to be engineered with a seamless integration between the
settlement function and the government securities book entry function.
We will be happy to share our technical specifications on this and
other features with other central banks."

In December, it introduced the first of a series of enhancements for
its CMU by making it possible for end-of-day delivery versus payment
(DvP) facility for private sector debt securities lodged and cleared
with the CMU.

In January this year, the CMU announced it is also able to clear
foreign currency debt securities. "So far, the CMU only accepts Hong
Kong dollar debt securities because the CMU service is designed and set
up to promote the Hong Kong dollar debt market," Yam said. "However,
there is no reason why the CMU, which is already linked up with
EuroClear and Cedel, cannot widen its coverage to debt securities
denominated in foreign currency."

The DvP function will be made available to all CMU instruments,
including exchange fund bills and notes, private sector debt
securities, on a real time and end-of-day settlement basis when the
entire RTGS system goes live at the end of 1996.

Hong Kong chose to build its RTGS settlement system on top of its
existing large value fund transfer system called CHATS. The decision to
build on CHATS was taken because it would have taken a long time to
build a new system from scratch and also because it was possible to
build on a system that banks in Hong Kong were already familiar with.
The new RTGS system would have clocked a mere 24 months in installation
time.

Small banks are able to access the HKMA's RTGS using a simple personal
computer. It is also possible for the larger banks to interface their
own complex systems with RTGS through existing AS400 computer systems.

Introducing RTGS was especially tricky in Hong Kong as the colony's 180
licensed banks operate on a three tier clearing structure. The top
layer comprises Hong Kong Bank, which plays the role of the management
bank of the clearing house. Hong Kong Bank also owns and runs the
current CHATS system. The second layer comprises a number of settlement
banks and the third layer comprises the sub-settlement banks. The RTGS
system was implemented by a joint venture company called the Hong Kong
Inter-bank Clearing Limited, which is 50:50 owned by the HKMA and the
Hong Kong Association of Banks.

Hong Kong set the end of 1996 as the target to complete its RTGS system
for two reasons. The first reason being that the Federal Reserve Board
of the United States had already announced that the operating hours of
its own FedWire system was to be extended to 18 hours. As this would
extend the time into Asian trading hours, the HKMA wanted to have a
system that could complete cross-currency transactions on a
payment-versus-payment (PvP) basis.

The second reason was to tie in with the targeted completion of the
China National Automated Payment Systems for the renminbi in 1997. Both
the US dollar and the Chinese renminbi are important currencies, as the
Hong Kong dollar is linked to the US dollar based on a monetary policy
objective and to the renminbi through extensive trade.

RTGS on a global basis?

While daily inter-bank Hong Kong dollar transactions constitute $15
billion, foreign exchange transactions are in the order of $91 billion
a day. Although most Asian transactions are currently with US and
European counter-parties, the growth in intra-Asian trade is expected
to increase regional transactions tremendously.

Between 1990 and 1994, the number of SWIFT messages recording financial
flows around the world increased by 9.1 percent, but total messages for
the Asia Pacific region alone grew more than twice that rate at nearly
14.6 percent.

The question naturally arises if a global RTGS payment system will
arise any time soon. "A robust network of global cross-border payments
can only be built on robust domestic payment systems," Yam said. He
also thinks that some countries are ahead of others in this respect.

Yam believes that RTGS linkages between countries should be developed
on a bilateral, instead of a multi-lateral, basis. It is not possible
to internationalise or harmonise payment systems even among G10
countries because of different agendas in each of them. The legal and
structural constraints will be too many to handle all at once. "It is
in the two economies own direct interests to build a bilateral linkage
with each other, and this could be achieved with much greater ease."

Furthermore, PvP linkages are better achieved either indirectly via
private sector banks or directly with linkages of two RTGS systems
together. A US payment systems expert, Bruce Summers, recently proposed
that central banks can act as"matching agencies" by examining the
payments originated by users of the service and releasing such payments
only when a well-defined set of conditions are met. This method is one
way of reducing Herstatt risks without involving central banks in new
types of credit risks.

How the HKMA's RTGS System will work

HONG KONG'S new RTGS system will adopt a Y-shaped flow as indicated in
the diagram above. All banks will have direct access to the system. The
advantage of this flow method is to keep the system simple and direct.
There is no routing of information or value via any other intermediary.

A bank will send in its full payment instruction (including the value
and information on the customer) to a Central Transaction Processor.
The processor will"strip" the details of the customer. Only the
settlement instruction (i.e the information on the amount, the payee
and recipient banks) on the Settlement Account Processor will be passed
on to the Settlement Account Processor and known by the HKMA.

All payments will have to be settled on an individual and gross basis.
As the system will have no provisions for daylight overdraft, banks
without sufficient clearing balance (or securities for repos) will be
queued in the system until the bank meets the liquidity requirement.
All payments cleared by the HKMA will then be final and irrevocable.

Intra-day liquidity is created by the seamless integration with the
Central MoneyMarket Unit book entry securities clearing and settlement
system. This interface enables banks to develop same day repos.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

INDONESIAN BANKS STILL VULNERABLE

Even as the government works at introducing prudential measures to
strengthen the country's banking industry, Indonesian banks still have
a long way to go, according to a recent report by Standard & Poor's

HIGH NON-PERFORMING assets continue to hang over Indonesia's banking
system. Rating agencies have flagged caution in dealing with the banks
in this country for at least five to seven years. Standard & Poor's
(S&P) notes that Indonesia's banking industry is underpinned by a
potentially more volatile, albeit developing, economy and should
attract more caution than the banking system of other countries.

At this stage of its economic development, Indonesia is overbanked,
said S&P in an assessment report. The industry has 240 commercial banks
with average assets per bank of $500 million. On an international
comparison, this implies an excess number of banks and a lack of
operating efficiency among small to mid-sized banks.

Recent data collated by Asian Banker suggest that in spite of the large
number of banks in Indonesia, the penetration level is still very low.
When viewed in the perspective of the archipelago's 17,000 islands and
190 million population, there are only 1.3 banks per million people and
24.3 branches per million.

This branch penetration level compares very poorly even with its
nearest comparison. The Philippines has a penetration of 41.8 branches
per million population. At the other end of the scale, Hong Kong has
the highest penetration with 261.4 branches per million.

The low branch penetration is matched by the extremely low average
asset size for Indonesian banks, which is a mere $0.66 billion per bank
branch as compared to $54.6 billion in Japan and $10.44 billion for
Thailand. The impression created by this data is that the basis for
concern should not be based on the asset quality of any one small
Indonesian bank but on the knock-on effect that any lack of confidence
would have.

It is exactly this concern that the rating agencies talk about.
Standard & Poor's believes that undercapitalisation of small banks may
have a knock-on effect on mid-sized banks. This is because the smaller
banks in Indonesia are in the practice of obtaining funds from the
larger banks on the inter-bank money markets. This gives the larger
banks an arbitrage in the market because of their stronger financial
position.

Under a World Bank-assisted "Action Plan", the Indonesian Government
helped the state-owned banks to increase their paid-up capitalisation
to Rp1 trillion ($455 million). Private sector banks are also in the
process of building their capital base to meet the new capital adequacy
ratio (CAR) of 8 percent. In addition, private banks with foreign
exchange licences will have to increase their capital to Rp150 billion
and CAR of 12 percent by the year 2001.

Banks in Indonesia, however, play a greater role in the country's
economic development as compared to other countries. Viewed from a
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) perspective, there are 3.6 banks to every
$10 billion GDP. Japanese banks account for only 0.56 banks to every
$10 billion GDP in that country.

While this does imply that Indonesian banks are in a better position to
benefit from the 8 percent-10 percent growth in the GDP in recent
years, the converse is also true. If there is any let up in the growth
of the country's economy, the banking industry will suffer more than
the Japanese banks are experiencing currently.

Bank Indonesia issued a directive in September 1995 that commercial
banks holding foreign-exchange licences have to increase their paid up
capital to Rp150 billion by September 2001. This is expected to cause
smaller banks to merge in order to meet the higher capitalisation
requirements.

Standard & Poor's is also concerned about the banking community's
exposure to finance companies. The number of finance companies has
proliferated in recent years. Finance companies in Indonesia operate
outside the ambit of the central bank and are disallowed from accepting
public deposits. They are funded primarily through bank borrowings. S&P
is concerned that banks lending to finance companies are indirectly
taking on finance companies loan portfolio, which is inherently much
weaker than that of the banking industry.

But Bank Indonesia has been introducing tighter supervision and a
clearer accounting framework to improve the transparency in the
industry. The only concern is that banks generally delay the release of
audited statements.

"Many commercial banks still do not disclose non-performing loans,"
said S&P in an evaluation of the Indonesian banking industry. The
agency is concerned that loans are concentrated towards affiliates and
large borrowers. There is also high exposure to office and condominium
projects. Lippo Bank experienced a crisis situation in late 1995 when
it was unable to manage its own fundings of the large property
development projects undertaken by its own affiliate property
companies.

Equities analysts, however, feel that if the government's strengthening
efforts pay off, several Indonesian banks will ride the strong economic
growth predicted for the country. Analysts predict that loans would
grow by 30 percent-40 percent last year, and that average earnings
would have grown by about 25 percent. Bank Dagang Nasional Indonesia,
Panin Bank and Bank Bali have been identified as being fundamentally
strong.

However, the lack of depth in the capital market makes it difficult for
banks to meet their obligations in a timely and cost efficient manner.
S&P's assessment is that"banks bearing the brunt of problem loans are
not likely to recover, unaided, to full fiscal health for at least five
to seven years".

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

DBS BANK STREAMLINES FOR THE FUTURE

The Development Bank of Singapore recently restructured its top
management in a move that is expected to generate greater
accountability for product lines

THE KEY feature of the recent reorganisation move by the Development
Bank of Singapore (DBS Bank) is the stronger vertical reporting lines.

The two top positions will be taken by Ng Kee Choe and Lau Chan Sin. Ng
will be responsible for the entire institutional banking side of the
business while Lau will be in charge of individual banking, which will
include the retail and private banking businesses.

The heads of the bank's retail and private banking divisions,
respectively Elsie Foh and Tan Mong Tong, will report directly to Lau.
This is expected to give them greater leverage at the top level of the
bank's management to respond to changes more quickly.

Similarly, Ng Kee Choe will have Tan Soo Nan reporting to him on
treasury and investment management activities, and Soh Kim Soon
reporting on international and corporate banking. Oliver Tan, another
senior executive vice president, will take over special projects from
January 1, reporting directly to the chairman, Ngiam Tong Dow.

DBS Bank has been introducing new initiatives in rapid succession
lately. On the retail front, it recently extended opening hours to 5pm
from the traditional 3pm for other banks, as a result of greater
efficiencies in the branch network. This is in addition to the
authorised trading centres and investment centres it set up last year.
In investment banking, the bank achieved distinction in becoming the
region's leader in advisory and underwriting portfolios.

The bank is also already working out an expansion plan across the
region. It has obtained banking licences in Shanghai (China), Sri
Lanka, Thailand (provincial licence in Rayong) and the Philippines. The
notable exception is Malaysia, where DBS Bank is the only Big Four
Singapore bank without a full banking licence in the neighbouring
country. However, it has set up representative offices in Bombay,
Rangoon, and Labuan (an offshore centre in Malaysia).

DBS Bank is particularly active in the securities industries in most of
the regional markets, particularly Hong Kong, Indonesia and Thailand.
DBS has a strong custodian business in its home market as well as in
Malaysia. In December, it set up a custodian joint venture in Thailand
with the Thai Danu Bank. Ng announced the bank's plan to expand its
share custodian services network to South Korea, Indonesia, the
Philippines and India.

Singapore banks have had a strong reputation of being adequately
capitalised. Although profitability has not been one of their strong
points, things have been improving in the last two years.

According to analyst reports, the combined return on equity of the Big
Four banks for the year ended 1994 was 13.3 percent, up from 9.9
percent the previous year.

As the Singapore economy matures and competition for funds becomes more
intense, banks are becoming more cognisant about shareholder value. The
capital surplus position of Singapore banks and the returns from
non-bank activities, such as investment and property holdings, also
puts them in a good position to acquire new businesses.

A DBS Bank spokesperson told Asian Banker that there is no overriding
motive in the restructuring exercise. In typical public relations
parlance, she said the move "is part of our ongoing renewal process".
The bank did not hire any consultants to advise it on the changes in
the top management line up.

This is in contrast with at least two of the other Big Four banks,
which have been using consultants quite extensively. The leading edge
retail banking initiatives in UOB Bank, such as its InvestShops, were
treated as special projects, with consultants from Andersen Consulting
reporting directly to the president.

OCBC Bank, on the other hand, appointed McKinsey & Co as consultants to
develop a new strategic focus for the organisation. One observer told
Asian Banker that as McKinsey specialises in high level strategy
issues, OCBC Bank is being forced to speak to other consultancy
companies to propose new implementation initiatives.

The overall business and organisational direction, strategies and
policies of DBS Bank will now be driven by a"Bank Business Committee".
It will be chaired by chairman Ngiam Tong Dow, with the deputy
presidents and senior executive vice presidents as members. This small
task force approach is expected to help the management to take decisive
and timely measures to respond to new challenges in the market. It will
also keep management meetings short and sweet.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BANKS PUSH ON WITH DIRECT TRADING

Malaysia's stockbroking community did not take too long to realise that
new delivery channels through PALDirect and Southern Bank Link may
threaten their very existence

TONG KOOI Ong, the 35-year-old chief executive officer of Malaysia's
Phileo Allied Group, has much in common with PALDirect, the genius
product of the group's subsidiary, AlliedBank. Both are essentially
brash, new innovations into a market that has yet to wake up to the
realisation that the brave new world has already arrived.

PALDirect was designed primarily to give stock market players direct
control over their trade. Through a dedicated terminal, the bank's
customers are able to place their trades on-line to Phileo Allied, the
bank's broking subsidiary, which then executes it.

As the entire transaction is carried out within the group, PhileoAllied
is able to give AlliedBank a rebate of 25 percent of the 1 percent
brokerage commission that was due to it under securities regulations.
The bank in turn passes on 20 percent to the customer and keeps 5
percent for itself.

Any banker looking at the arrangement would recognise the genius
involved in running a transaction through several organisations, using
technology that enables all parties to be winners - the bank adds value
to its customer services, the stockbroking company gets trade orders,
and the customer benefits from lower overall costs and greater
convenience.

But the Malaysian stockbroking community panicked. The immediate fear
was that if the system was perpetuated, brokers would lose their market
share and remisiers would have become essentially redundant. The Kuala
Lumpur Stock Exchange (KLSE), possibly acting on pressure from the
stockbroking community, issued a directive to PhileoAllied Securities
to stop passing down the commission to AlliedBank.

The KLSE based its directive on the exchange's Rule 6(7) that specifies
that rebates can be only given to approved financial institutions. The
KLSE further interpreted the rule as saying that this rebate can only
be enjoyed by the financial institution and not passed down further to
its customers.

Tong, true to form, went on the offensive. He applied for a court
ruling on the interpretation of the rule against devolving commission
to customers. The financial community was, at best, amused as nobody
had ever taken the stock exchange to court before.

The upshot of the offensive was that Tong was able to call the KLSE's
bluff. The court application was subsequently dropped after an
undisclosed out-of-court agreement and PALDirect continued unaffected.

The issue that arose out of this skirmish is of a more fundamental
interest to the financial community and deserves some thinking through.
Firstly, does PALDirect enable banks to enter the stockbrokers' trade
without a licence? Secondly, do these computers in remote locations
become de facto "branches" of stockbroking houses? This is significant
because of the restriction in many countries against stockbrokers
expanding their branch networks, particularly into remote areas.

Malaysia does have many remisiers - 5,000 licensed remisiers at the
last count a few months ago. This is almost half the number of people
working in the entire banking industry in the labour scarce country.
Remisiers come from a variety of backgrounds - from housewives to
highly-qualified professionals. All are lured by the opportunity to
make much more money in passing share certificates around than through
pursuits that could build much needed skills in other areas of the
country's development.

At the height of the stock market's bull run in the early 1990s, the
lack of Remisiers called for urgent technological innovations, although
none was forthcoming at the time. Small retail customers had to beg
remisiers to take on their trade. All this turned with the market. The
market itself became more sophisticated with unit trusts and other
long-term investment products becoming available and affordable.

Remisiers generally fear that PALDirect is setting a precedent. Already
two other Malaysian banks are said to be interested in developing
similar products. Although the stockbrokers that Asian Banker spoke to
are generally dismissive about PALDirect, there is no reason why they
too cannot go on the offensive.

Southern Bank Securities, a small stockbroking company located in the
unlikely town of Ipoh 200 kilometres north of the capital city of Kuala
Lumpur, has also recently introduced a system similar to PALDirect.
Called Southern Bank Link (SBL), the system sits on any personal
computer running the Windows operating system (as compared to
PALDirect's "dedicated" terminals).

Brokers are far from losing their jobs too soon. Both SBL and PALDirect
still require brokers as, in effect, customers actually place their
orders with them to be executed on-line to the stock exchange.
Remisiers also remain useful where contra trade is involved. In
Singapore, where retail investors can trade using automated teller
machines, transactions have to be settled immediately. This is
unfavourable as compared to trading through a broker where customers
have a settlement period of T+7 days, during which time they can deal
in contra trades.

In the case of PALDirect, the entry level for direct trade is set very
high. Customers are expected to maintain an interest-earning fixed
deposit of RM198,000 ($79,200) to have the PALDirect link-up for free.
Alternatively, they will have to pay RM6138 ($2,455) over 31 months for
the terminal and RM98 every month after that as maintenance fee. SBL
customers on the other hand pay only RM250 per month, although this
broking house does not pass on savings to the customer. These
arrangements could only interest the most liquid and active of retail
investors.

The managers of both products say they hope to attract the"middle to
high level players" on the stock market. This includes fund managers
and sophisticated investors who want greater control over their trade
positions. Although neither was willing to disclose the number of
customers they have signed up, it is believed they are each aiming at
approximately 1,000 customers within a year from their respective
launch dates.

While not all brokers and remisiers are about to lose their jobs, those
who will survive will be the ones that prove that they add greater
value than the machines that threaten their relevance.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

INTERNATIONAL DEBIT MAKES ITS DEBUT

An international consumer debit payment industry is about to take off
in Asia, now that the major card organisations and terminal
manufacturers are introducing major initiatives in the region

UNTIL RECENTLY, when bank customers travelled abroad, the only
effective card-based payment channel had been the use of a credit card
- either at the ATM for cash advances or at point of sale for credit
card sales.

The two card organisations, MasterCard International and VISA
International, are currently at the forefront of major initiatives that
can see the use of international debit cards (the international version
of the domestic ATM card or the electronic funds transfer at point of
sale) take off in Asia, and around the world.

Debit cards provide consumers with an alternative to cash, cheques,
travellers cheques or even converting currencies when they travel.
Officials from both MasterCard and VISA told Asian Banker they are
convinced that international debit cards are not alternatives to credit
cards and will not cannibalise this market.

Andre Sekulic, the senior vice president of MasterCard's debit card
programme in the region, told Asian Banker that studies in the US show
that well over 60 percent of all payments made in the US are still
based on cash.

The banks benefit by being able to add value to their depositors'
lifestyle in a tangible way while earning fees on transactions. The
merchants benefit from the incremental sales generated by impulse
buying. Experts also believe that merchant receipts are higher as a
result.

John Hinds, the executive vice president of Verifone, a transaction
automation company, said the debit system is safer, and transactions
are completed on-line, which is faster than cheque and even cash
transactions where money has to be moved around.

The safety of a debit card transaction is based on the PIN-based
technology introduced by transaction automation companies such as
Verifone. Card users are required to key in their personal
identification numbers (PIN) into a "PIN-pad" before a transaction is
authorised. In most instances, the same PIN is used for ATM-related
transactions.

Market growth

It is likely that the international debit programmes of both card
organisations will depend largely on the link-ups they make with the
major domestic networks services in the region. This is also because
the major networks already have in place, or are building, domestic
debit programmes that would be severely disrupted if international
debit is introduced alongside them.

For example, the Network for Electronic Transfer (NETS) in Singapore
was concerned that non-participating banks would be able to effectively
access these networks if card holders were able to use their
international debit cards within the same country. Because of this, the
banking authorities in Singapore disallowed domestic card holders from
using their international debit cards within the country.

Henry Mundt, MasterCard's director for Global Debit Services, estimates
that by the end of 1995, there would be 750,000 terminals accepting
Maestro cards globally. Out of this number, he expects that 250,000
terminals would be operational in co-operation with networks such as
NETS.

In Taiwan, the Financial Information System Centre (FISC), which
provided the national domestic debit card network, is still
contemplating its involvement in international debit. Silvia Lee,
FISC's executive vice president, said Maestro is obviously something
which it has a keen interest in, except that right now the organisation
is concentrating on its own IC Card-based EFTPOS system.

The IC Card is a smart card-based ATM-cum-debit card which FISC
introduced in 1993. Currently, more than 400,000 of the cards have been
issued by its 19 member banks. The system has a merchant base of some
4,000.

FISC is now in direct competition with the National Credit Card Centre
(NCCC) which previously processed only credit card transactions. The
NCCC has announced that it expects to start international debit
acquiring activities in early 1996 by signing on with Maestro. NCCC
expects to build its debit programme on its existing credit card
merchant base exceeding 60,000 organisations.

The NCCC has applied to be the switching and settlement centre for all
domestic Maestro transactions. At present, Chinatrust Commercial Bank
is the only Maestro acquirer in the country. Sources said that because
of unresolved issues pertaining to interchange and switching functions,
the Ministry of Finance has restricted the other banks from acquiring
merchants. However, the NCCC and FISC have been instructed by the
Ministry of Finance to co-operate on a programme that will allow all
card transactions to be settled domestically.

The other Maestro issuing banks have understandably pushed for the
lifting of the restriction. Observers see the assignment of the
transaction processing function to NCCC as a possible solution to the
question of who should be responsible for the domestic processing of
Maestro transactions.

This will then pave the way for the other institutions to be involved
in merchant acquisition. So far there are an estimated 1,000 merchant
locations that accept the Maestro debit facility in the country. An
estimated 400,000 Maestro cards have been issued.

In China, what have been dubbed as MasterCard and VISA credit cards,
are actually at best deferred debit transactions - that is, customers
pay for their transactions from their salary accounts held with the
bank.

The controversy over the definition is not as significant as the fact
that it means China is potentially the largest debit card market in the
world. The Chinese Government, responding to a World Bank study on the
development of payment systems in the country, has been committed to
developing a nationwide cashless payment system. This commitment is
expressed in the development of the Golden Card project.

In Malaysia, MasterCard launched its Maestro/Cirrus programme through
two organisations in 1993. It hopes to issue 500,000 international
debit cards in the country by the end of 1995. MasterCard's Mundt told
Asian Banker that there are already 5,000 Maestro acceptance locations,
mostly at petrol kiosks, in Malaysia.

The banks currently issuing the Maestro/Cirrus cards are MBf Cards
Services, a non-bank issuer which pegged the card on its existing
Vision bank card, and Standard Chartered Bank.

Maestro went on-line in the Philippines as an extension of the BPI
Express Payment System debit programme. Link-ups are expected with
Jetco, the domestic point of sale debit switch provider in Hong Kong.

Cost issues

Tim Molly, a director with VISA International, said that merchants
accepting Maestro transactions will have to pay acquirers transaction
fees that are similar to fees for credit card transactions.

Mei-may Lek Bors, a debit programme director with MasterCard, told
Asian Banker that debit programmes offer profit opportunities to
acquiring institutions in the form of higher interchange fees, a new
source of merchant revenue, and the overall lower implementation cost.
For issuing members, the profit opportunities arise from interchange
fees, transaction fees and annual membership fees.

In Australia, where direct debit initiatives were driven by the
merchants in the past, it was the banks that paid the merchants to
acquire their transactions. This was called the "negative interchange
fees" and was thought to be the trend that would develop.

However, Jim Culbertson, the VISA country manager for Australia, told
Asian Banker that this situation was unique to Australia and only in
the past when the merchants originally invested in the technology. This
trend is being reversed in Australia as smaller merchants sign up with
banks that have already got the infrastructure in place. As such, it is
the merchants that now have to pay transaction fees to the acquiring
banks.

There are cost benefits also for the customer. MasterCard's Mundt told
Asian Banker in an interview that in 1995 alone, there were 330 million
credit and debit cross-border transactions around the world. Seventy
percent, or 210 million, of those transactions were for cash withdrawal
on ATMs.

Mundt also pointed out that customers would benefit from the lower
exchange rates used for debit products and save between $5 to $10 per
transaction. He is convinced that the market would welcome a cheaper
debit-based service that would enable them to access cash from their
own home accounts.

Transaction equipment manufacturers

Hypercom, which accounts for 90 percent of the credit card verification
devices market, and its competitor VeriFone, which accounted for 60
percent of all new installations exported from the US in 1994, are both
believed to be making major advances in the area of developing common
terminal acceptance for debit as well as credit and smart cards.

Other competitors in the market are Taiwanese-based ADI, France-based
Ingenico and the Australian company KeyCorp. Domestic competitors  such
as Fuzhou's Star Group are also coming on-stream.

Connecting to smart cards

All debit card players in the market have an eye towards building a
smart card capability in their overall cards strategy. Adding a chip on
a debit card is beneficial as it enhances the security of transactions,
whether they are credit or debit and can be loaded with value. These
are also called electronic purses.

There are other benefits of smart cards, such as the ability to store
relationship data with merchants and the bank. This has been
successfully exploited by major retail organisations such as
Takashimaya in Singapore which has issued up to 200,000 cards to date.

This is why transaction automation players such as Verifone are keen to
push terminals in the market that can process smart card as well as
cards with the traditional magnetic strip on them. Verifone has also
set up a joint venture marketing company with the smart card
manufacturer GemPlus, called VeriGem, to promote the move towards a
smart card-based payments system.

Which way now?

MasterCard's Mundt told Asian Banker that MasterCard will not allow
Maestro to be resident on the same card as the MasterCard credit card,
at least not in the foreseeable future. He also said that MasterCard
would not allow duality to participating institutions. This means that
issuers would not be allowed to put MasterCard's Maestro and VISA's
Interlink on the same debit card.

He is convinced that having a credit and a direct debit facility on one
card will cause confusion to users and merchants, particularly in
markets where direct debit facilities are not yet available. Mundt told
Asian Banker that MasterCard may reverse this policy if there is
worldwide availability of account select between credit and debit
transactions at merchant's EFTPOS terminals. This policy is significant
as it is different from the relationship card strategy taken by VISA,
which allows all facilities to be resident on one card.

So which way will the banks and financial institutions go in Asia?
Francois Dutray, the group executive vice president of VISA
International responsible for product development, told Asian Banker
that "we can't make the members do what they don't want to do".

Both organisations will obviously push their international debit cards
as one of the products to member associations. The cards market may
well have enough space for credit and debit products to co-exist side
by side successfully in the near future.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

MASTERCARD INTERNATIONAL

MEI-MAY LEK Bors, director of MasterCard's Debit Card Programme in
Southeast Asia, revealed at a Verifone seminar late last year that
1,444 institutions in 58 countries worldwide have signed up to
participate in the Maestro programme. The programme has gone live in 28
countries and 168 million cards have been issued for use on 536,271
point of sale terminals.

In the Asia Pacific region alone, 80 member institutions have signed up
for Maestro involving 29,392 million committed cards and 8,375 million
live cards. Out of 96,197 point of sale terminals which have been
committed, 25,920 have gone live. Around the region, 51,778 merchants
have committed to the programme out of which 15,552 have gone live.

According to MasterCard, there are 9 million active Maestro cards in
the Asia Pacific region and another 43.5 million cards committed. This
is supported by more than 24,000 terminals in the region and 505,000
terminals worldwide.

According to Henry Mundt, MasterCard's director for Global Debit
Services, in total there are 110 million debit cards in MasterCard's
Maestro and Cirrus programmes around the world. He expects the Asia
Pacific region to be the fastest growing for the organisation
worldwide. The region will commit approximately 16 million live cards
by the end of 1995.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

VISA INTERNATIONAL

ACCORDING TO Eric Trotter a director with VISA International is a
relatively new player in the region's international debit market. VISA
Plus is its ATM access card and VISA Interlink is its debit card for
use at EFTPOS terminals.

The Interlink programme is better developed in Australia than other
countries in the region. Fifty-eight banks have signed up to the
programme in that country. In Asia itself, Singapore is the first
country in the region to introduce the VISA Interlink card.

Elsewhere, Interlink will be introduced in Korea (going live in
November), Malaysia (five members issuing), Thailand (working with Thai
Farmers' Bank and Thai Military Bank to acquire Interlink transactions,
while four out of the top six banks already issue such cards), Hong
Kong (three projects), Singapore (first full issuing and acquiring
project with UOB Bank) and Taiwan (four banks have signed up). He also
mentioned initiatives in New Zealand, Indonesia and the Philippines.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

THE MASTERCARD-VERIFONE ALLIANCE PROGRAMME

IN AUGUST this year, MasterCard and Verifone announced a joint
marketing alliance to promote the acquisition of on-line debit
transaction equipment by banks for use at merchant points of sale.
Under the scheme, discounts and bonuses are given for selected Verifone
systems for deployment in targeted merchants such as fast food
restaurants, supermarkets, pharmacies, petrol kiosks and other retail
outlets. The Verifone terminals being promoted are the Omni 395
Transaction Automation System, a printer roll, and/or Printer 950 and
the PINpad 1000 entry device.

The combination supports credit, debit and smart card transactions, all
on the same system. The Printer 950 also supports Japanese, Chinese and
Korean languages as well as supporting customised printing.

Verifone is also committed to provide training and support services to
support the successful take up of the new technology.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CLIENT/SERVER - THE NEW COMPUTING PARADIGM?

Asian Banker investigates the impact of client/server technology, and
highlights some of the key issues that banks should be looking at

EVERY ORGANISATION, including banks, wants to know, in measurable
terms, that the benefits derived from their investments in information
technology should exceed, if not at least equal, the costs involved.
With new technology the task of justifying such investment becomes even
harder. The task becomes even more tedious when one considers
client/server technology.

Although significant cost savings may be available in automating an
application on a client/server rather than a mainframe system, the cost
savings may not be as pronounced when comparing mid-range systems to
client/servers. Many mid-range systems are priced to compete with
larger multi-workstation LANs (local area networks), and the
development tools and the on-line security features available on
mid-range systems may be more advanced than the client/servers.
Similarly, fully-featured turnkey application software may be generally
available on a mid-range system, while client/server-based application
software may lack the functionality desired by larger financial
institutions.

Organisation-wide application systems are generally less attractive
candidates for downsizing to client/servers than department
applications. Departmental applications tend to have a limited number
of users and less sophisticated database and integration requirements
than organisation-wide systems. Consequently, these systems can be
moved to client/server architecture with less risk and less potential
negative impact on the organisation as a whole.

Moving to a client/server architecture may not be a difficult process.
Data extraction tools, file transfer tools, query languages,
downloading and uploading tools, and PC interface products all
contribute to the cultural change necessary to implement client/server
technology. The next step is providing graphical user interfaces to end
users so data can be represented in a more "user friendly" format -
with charts, graphs and other pictorial representations.

Some productivity gains may be found with client/server technology.
Mainframe development time has long been the Achilles' heel of
mainframe computing - and the most significant reason for considering
platform changes. Lengthy development time equates to high costs, unmet
expectations and dissatisfied end users. Client/server architecture
offers the advantage of quickly addressing minimum systems requirement
and providing tools that can be implemented by the end user with
limited technical support involvement.

Ideally, the use of client/server technology will help an organisation
better utilise the equipment already in place. Most organisations have
significant investments in personal computer-based systems, which are
often used for"resource sharing" - that is, local area networks set up
to share hardware resources, which may be under-utilised in the
client/server context.

Client/server architecture provides the capability for the front-end
portion of major application to be processed on a LAN, while the
back-end portion of the application can reside on the mainframe system.
Each system should be dependent on the other for the transfer and
communication of timely information, and together they should form the
entire application system.

US-based IT magazine Computerworld recently cited a survey by Sentry
Market Research, which found 70 percent of IT shops predicting that
client/server will ultimately be their primary computing model. In
Asia, although no similar survey has been carried out, industry
watchers believe that within the next two to five years, large Asian
banks will start to deploy client/servers in the more mission critical
and higher volume back-office applications.

While most client/server implementations have occurred in selected
applications, organisations are now focused on moving mission critical,
strategic applications towards client/server technology.

As the market moves towards the new paradigm, there are many lessons to
be learned from earlier experiences with the technology. Earlier
implementators of client/server technology found that the costs
involved far exceeded what was budgeted, especially labour, networking
and training bills. Worse, the expected benefits were hard to measure
and quantify. Productivity and improved customer service were
attributes which were simply impossible to be put on the balance sheet
and analyse.

One of the prime movers behind client/servers technology has been the
business unit managers who have profit and loss responsibilities.
Tasked and under pressure to realise ever increasing revenues and
income targets, these managers see client/server as the technological
enabler that will bring about faster and more prolific product
development, improved customer service and decreased costs.

Client/server may or may not provide the tool that is needed to achieve
these goals. However, the question can only be ultimately answered when
systems are fully deployed.

The implementation of client/server systems may improve productivity of
the organisation's non-technical resources as well as technical
resources. Client/server systems should provide tools for the end user
for data extraction, reporting and graphical interfaces. In some cases,
both technical and non-technical personnel will have access to CASE
(computer-aided software engineering) tools for developing and
enhancing client/server applications.

Although mainframe processing work load can be reduced through
client/server technology, this is not the area of greatest benefit to
the organisation. Data integrity may be improved by providing an
environment where information is created and maintained closer to the
user department responsible for information ownership. Through good
application controls, this information in detailed form can be
available to many user departments, but controlled through security
practices and procedures. Duplicate information and dispersed
information, which may lack consistency and accuracy, could be
minimised with proper design of the application.

While client/server architecture offers some significant benefits to
the organisation, it also can have disadvantages. Application
maintenance when dealing with several platforms, data structure and
programming languages could increase the complexity of the change.
Consequently, CASE tools that embrace departmental and host processing
requirements are important to minimise ongoing support and maintenance
of client/server systems. In addition, the lack of standards for
client/server technology may reduce the consistency of applications.

Ultimately, the lack of standards impacts the speed of modification and
implementation when application requirements need to change. Some de
facto standards already exist in the industry, such as the UNIX or
Novell operating systems for server operating software and SQL
(structured query language) for interfacing and accessing various
database systems. However, more specific standards may be needed for
the organisation to ensure proper control over the development and
implementation process. This can be achieved through a standards
committee, which would be responsible for identifying standards for the
organisation.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SOVEREIGN RISK: BANK DEPOSITS V. BONDS

Moody's explains why it maintains foreign currency bank deposit
ceilings that are distinct from foreign currency sovereign ceilings

IN OUR view, the two ratings (a foreign currency bank deposit rating
and a foreign currency sovereignity rating) are needed to reflect
inherent differences in the credit risks of bank deposits versus bonds.

As sovereign ceilings, both types of ratings are intended to account
for foreign currency transfer risk - the risk that no matter how
creditworthy a given borrower domiciled in the nation may be, that
borrower always remains subject to transfer risks.

On the basis of both empirical evidence and analytical considerations,
we believe that foreign currency transfer risk applies somewhat
differently to bonds and notes than it does to foreign currency bank
deposits, especially as we move down the ratings scale.

Specifically, a review of worldwide sovereign default experience since
World War II shows that when sovereign nations have defaulted on any of
their foreign currency obligations (in our concept of default we
include missed or delayed disbursement of interest and/or principal,
and/or obligatory credit maintenance arrangements), they have been more
likely to default on bank deposits and commercial loans than on
sovereign bonds or notes.

Put differently, when sovereigns have come under sufficient financial
stress to default on foreign commercial loans, if they have had any
significant amount of foreign currency bank deposits, they have usually
also defaulted on these deposits -but not necessarily on their
sovereign bonds.

In fact, we have concluded that the overall risk that a particular
country will "reschedule" foreign currency deposits comes very close to
equalling the overall risk that country will becoming involved in any
type of foreign currency debt rescheduling. The risk of a bond default
has been significantly lower.

There are several key reasons for this. For one, the consequences of
defaulting on (ie. rescheduling) bank deposits or loans has been more
predictable and potentially far less detrimental to a nation's
interests than defaulting on bonds and notes. In addition, it is clear
in international law that a foreign currency bank deposit is generally
within the purview of the country where it is located. Thus, a
government that forces a rescheduling of foreign currency bank deposits
through changes in its foreign exchange policy is unlikely to face a
successful legal challenge to its action from depositors.

By contrast, given the erosion of the older concept of sovereign
immunity since World War II, the legal immunity of sovereign who
defaults on foreign currency bonds has become considerably more
problematical than it once was.

Increasingly, defaulting sovereigns will face determined legal
challenges from bond-holders armed and encouraged by such developments
as the 1992 US Supreme Court case of Argentina v. Weltover, which
sanctioned an action brought against a sovereign borrower in a US
Court, Great Britain's State Immunity Act of 1978, which limited claims
of sovereign immunity, and the European Convention on Sovereign
Immunity which has also codified limits to claims of sovereign
immunity.

Given this risk differential, we are likely to maintain foreign
currency bank deposit ceilings that are in some cases lower than our
ratings for sovereign bonds and notes, While these ratings will tend in
practice to be identical in the case of countries characterised by high
credit quality - due to small differences in the two risks for
countries at the higher end of the ratings scale - they may diverge in
the case of countries in the lower investment grade or below investment
grade range.

The conceptual framework

In order to establish foreign currency bank deposit ceilings that are
distinct from currency sovereign ceilings, several preliminary tasks
are required, including: 1) an examination of what distinguishes
sovereign borrowers from other borrowers; 2) an empirical analysis of
sovereign default experience; and 3) an examination of implications of
the changing legal and economic framework for sovereign borrowing.

As indicated in this report, the legal framework surrounding sovereign
default has evolved considerably since 1945.

In the prewar period, countries enjoyed near-total immunity from
lawsuits. That is no longer true in the US, the UK, or throughout most
of Europe.

A good way to start a technical discussion is to lay out first
principles. By now, although most investors have become comfortable
with the concept of foreign currency sovereign ceiling, it is still
always worth defining our terms to avoid any misunderstanding.

What is sovereignty?

The first thing we should ask ourselves here is what is meant by
"sovereign"? According to Webster's dictionary, the possession of
sovereignty means having "supreme power, especially over a body politic
what distinguishes sovereign borrowers from all other creditors.

The self-image of sovereign states, and the way that sovereign states
view each other, have changed in many important ways over the
centuries. During various periods in history, sovereignty has lain with
villages, towns, cities and tribes. At some points sovereignty became
associated with entire empires. In the modern period, sovereignty has
become a property almost exclusively of the nation state, a relatively
recent political development. Since nation states did not appear
spontaneously, but rather emerged over time, it should not be
surprising that the nature of nation-state sovereignty has evolved and
mutated as circumstances have changed.

Freedom from a higher authority is clearly an important characteristic
of sovereignty. However, as we know from history, powerful states have
often influenced events in weaker ones through military, economic,
and/or diplomatic means.

What appears to be relevant since 1945 is that military intervention by
one state against another is no longer considered to be an acceptable
modus operandi, except for the gravest of reasons. Prior to 1945,
nations often used military force for all sorts of reasons: colonial
ambitions, ideology, territorial expansion, etc. In some cases,
countries resorted to military intervention to insure repayment of
foreign debts.

To realise how international convention has changed, one need only
consider that in today's world no one would ever propose military
intervention to deal with a sovereign state that was unable to meet its
foreign currency obligations on a timely basis, in contrast to the 19th
and early 20th centuries, when such measures were resorted to on
several occasions.

In recent decades we have seen the development of a greater respect for
national sovereignty. For instance, international boundaries are now
generally considered inviolate, as is a government's right to
non-interference in its domestic political affairs - except perhaps
when basic human rights are grossly threatened. Ironically, at the same
time, increased international co-operation has in practice tended to
reduce actual expressions of sovereignty.

Economic co-operation, economic integration, economic interdependence
all are creating a situation in which new limitations upon sovereignty
are evolving. A perfect example of this development is the development
is the changing relationship between commercial law and sovereign
states.

Any credit analysis must take into account not only a debtor's ability
- but also its willingness - to repay. Determining a country's ability
to repay is in the end not very difficult task. In all but the most
extreme cases, countries have the ability to repay their debts.

This may appear surprising to anyone who lived through the debit crisis
of the 1980s, let alone the economic devastation of 1930s. But in fact,
no matter what their economic status, countries usually have the
resources needed to repay their debts. However, as John Moody pointed
in 1933, when discussing depression-era sovereign defaults, "Many
[sovereigns] were confronted with the choice between suspension of debt
services or almost complete elimination of imports." As he noted,
import reduction could only be taken so far. If imports declined beyond
a certain point, governments faced the possibility of political
unrest.[1] The real question is - what level of resource mobilisation
are governments willing to undertake in order to repay their debts? In
the end, willingness to repay is the key to sovereign credit analysis.
And here we do not mean merely the desire to repay, but rather the
desire coupled with willingness to bear the consequences of repayment.

Governments may not like the economic and/or political consequences of
policies which would enable them to meet payments on their debts. There
is often a kind of conventional wisdom regarding the degree of
sacrifice which should be required in order for a sovereign to remain
current. In the final analysis, the nature of the "willingness issue"
is what distinguishes commercial from sovereign borrowers.

If a commercial borrower lacks willingness, legal sanctions up to and
including asset seizure and liquidation are available to creditors.
However, in cases where sovereign borrowers refused to pay - or as is
more likely the case, refuse to repay according to original terms -
they are immune from most of the legal sanctions available to creditors
vis-a-vis non-sovereign borrowers. Obviously, sovereign borrowers
cannot be forced into bankruptcy.

Until recently, foreign sovereign borrowers could not even be brought
into court in the world's major financial centres. Even now, attaching
sovereign assets is seldom seen as a viable option. Fortunately for
creditors, however, other less drastic sanctions, which will be
discussed below, appear to preclude frivolous sovereign defaults.

More importantly, there are many incentives for sovereigns to maintain
their creditworthiness. For instance, a creditworthy sovereign borrower
has much lower borrowing costs than one which has a poor credit
history. Economic conditions which contribute to sovereign
creditworthiness are also often associated with more rapid economic
growth. The more rapid the rise in income, generally the happier is a
national body politic. Unless subject to considerable stress, sovereign
borrowers clearly would prefer to meet their financial obligations on a
timely basis.

Sovereign ceilings

Sovereign ceilings for bonds and notes represent the highest foreign
currency rating an issuer might have where the obligor is subject to
the sovereignty of a particular government. Such ratings are based upon
the default risk for medium and/or long-term debt obligations issued by
a national government (denominated in a foreign currency), either in
its own name or with a guarantee. Put differently, it represents the
"foreign currency transfer risk" associated with investing in a
particular country.

In cases where there is no particular debt obligation outstanding, a
sovereign ceiling rating could still be issued based on an assessment
of risk posed by a national government if it were to issue a foreign
currency obligation.

We consider such obligations to represent the lowest foreign currency
default risk within a country. The reason: a national government,
through its ability to mobilise foreign currency assets within its own
domain, has almost by definition the best ability to obtain foreign
exchange of any issuer within the country. For instance, governments
may, and often have, imposed foreign exchange controls. Governments
may, and often have, instituted foreign currency deposit regulations
aimed at capturing foreign exchange within the country. The tools
available to a government to gain access to foreign exchange are well
established and clearly recognised under international law.

Private issuers often have argued that their obligations posed a lower
risk than those of their own government in this regard because of their
special circumstances. Although we always explore each case on an
individual basis, in the end, if the issuer is subject to the law of
its home government, even if its activities are mainly undertaken
outside the home country, we have found that the issuer is in fact
still subject to the foreign currency sovereign ceiling. The foreign
currency sovereign ceiling does not necessarily represent the risk of
the establishment of exchange controls.

Nor does it necessarily represent the risk of rescheduling bank loans.
Rather, it represents simply the assessment of default risk on medium
and long-term debt foreign currency marketable debt obligations of
national governments, which in our view carry, in almost all
circumstances, the lowest foreign currency default risk in that
particular country.

Sovereign ceilings for foreign currency bank deposits represent the
default risk of: 1) foreign currency- denominated bank deposits held
within a country; 2) deposits with a branch of a foreign bank located
in the particular country; 3) deposits with a foreign branch of a bank
domiciled in that country. A foreign currency bank deposit in any
foreign-currency-denominated deposit (eg. in Mexico, any deposit
denominated in any currency except the peso) in any domestic bank or
foreign bank branch located in the country. (A foreign currency deposit
held with Citibank's Mexico City branch office would be subject to the
Mexican foreign currency bank deposit ceiling.)

It also includes any foreign-currency denominated deposits in foreign
branches of the country's banks. A Japanese yen deposit in the New York
branch of a Mexican bank would be subject to default risk posed either
by US or Mexican government.

But since the bank is subject to the laws of its home country, in this
case Mexican, any legal actions taken by the Mexican government may
have an impact upon the bank's ability to meet its foreign currency
obligations anywhere in the world, despite the deposit being located in
the US. Therefore, the Mexico foreign currency bank deposit ceiling
would apply, despite the deposit's US location.

Looked at from a different angle, since the Mexican bank's foreign
currency deposit rating is limited by the Mexican sovereign ceiling for
the bank deposits, the ratings on deposits by Mexican financial
institutions anywhere in the world are limited by the rating of foreign
currency deposits of the bank in its home country.

A default on a foreign currency bank deposit would be judged to occur
if the government mandated credit maintenance facilities, which means
that if any depositor withdraws a deposit, the depositor must
immediately redeposit/relend the same amount as was withdrawn (eg. a
requirement whereby a maturing certificate or CD must be replaced by
the purchase of new CD or provide other credit equal to the amount of
maturing CD).

What do we mean by "default"?

Moody's defines default as any missed or delayed disbursement of
interest and/or principal. We include as defaults distressed exchanges
where: (1) the issuer offers bondholders of depositors a new security
of package of securities the amount to a diminished financial
obligation (such as preferred or common stock, debt with a lower coupon
or par amount, or less liquid deposit either because of a change in
maturity or currency of denomination, or required credit maintenance
facilities) and (2) the exchange has the apparent purpose of helping
the borrower avoid default.

Moody's also classifies as a default when an issuer delays payment even
when payment is ultimately made within the grace period provided for in
an indenture or deposit agreement. Our rationale for including grace
period defaults is simply that a contractual payment was not made when
due.

It is important to keep this definition in mind, because many
commentators use"default" in a much narrower sense, that is, in the
legal context of creditor actually declaring a debtor in default on a
particular obligation, resulting in a judgment by a court in favour of
the creditor.

Anyone who examines the post-World War II period will quickly recognise
the significant practical difference between what we mean by default
and what a judge might determine to be a default in a legal proceeding.
This analysis will provide some explanations of why creditors, in
recent year, have not declared sovereign debtors in default, even when
these same sovereigns would have been considered in default using our
criteria.

Empirical evidence

Since the debt crisis of the 1980s, there has been a tremendous
resurgence of interest in pre-World War II sovereign defaults. This is
certainly understandable, for analysing the past is always useful in
providing insights into possible future developments. Now that we have
once again entered a period where sovereign borrowers - in particular
most of the world's significant developing countries - have returned to
international bond markets in a big way, many observers see the threat
of a repeat of the sovereign defaults of the 1930s as an object lesson
for what might lie ahead for creditors.

Others see the experience of the 1980s, where sovereign defaults on
bonds or other publicly traded securities were relatively rare, as a
clear indication that such sovereign securities are now substantially
immune from default risk. When we examine the history of both the
prewar period and the debt crisis of the 1980s in the light of the
structural changes which have occurred in the financial and legal
framework of international capital markets since 1945, a much more
complex picture emerges. (Editor's Note: Due to space constraint, we
are unable to publish the full and interesting examination of the
history of defaults, but subscribers may request for a full version of
this comment.)

Although in 1980 official creditors still supplied a greater amount of
credit than commercial banks or bond markets did, the marginal increase
in lending in the decade was dramatically higher for commercial banks -
from about 10 percent of the total in 1970 to 40 percent in 1980 - than
for official creditors. The increase in the relative importance of
bonds as a source of funds for the LDC's was modest.

The Debt Crisis

Mexico's debt moratorium began a period where defaulting on sovereign
debt to commercial creditors became a rather commonplace occurrence
both in the developing world and among the socialist or former
socialist countries, with over the years, several hundred billion
dollars worth of credits falling into default.

This was due to a combination of economic pressures, including a
disinflationary commodity price environment, credit quality problems
emerging in the domestic markets of the major creditor nations (eg. the
savings and load industry's restructuring due to a changing interest
rate and regulatory environment in the US), and the emergence of
economic bottlenecks in the more advanced socialist economies. All
told, approximately 50 countries have defaulted on their sovereign and
commercial obligations since August 1982 (vs. 27 countries from 1960 to
1982). Many of these countries have had to reschedule more than once.
During this time period, we have also seen reschedulings of previously
rescheduled debt. A number of countries have had a portion of their
debt forgiven by commercial creditors in recent year. A similar pattern
emerges when examining official credits.

One category of debt which seemed, according to many, to have escaped
default during the crisis of the 1980s was bonds or other marketable
security debt. Unfortunately, on closer examination, this does not
prove to be the case - at least not to the degree generally believed.
Beyond the Costa Rican, Polish, and Rhodesian (Zimbabwe) defaults,
which predate August 1982, after a careful search into the records, we
have found that six additional countries defaulted on foreign currency,
marketable securities debt.

Changes in the Legal Framework since WWII

While changes have been occurring in the structure of world financial
markets, other important changes have also been taking place which
impact the whole question of sovereign risk. One of the most important
changes has been the growth of restrictions on appeals to sovereign
immunity.

This development, on the surface, seems counterintuitive, especially
during a period when nation-states have increasingly tried to respect
the right of other nation-states. The reasons are quite
straightforward.

If sovereign immunity were absolute, then any contract with a company
wholly-owned by a foreign government would be unenforceable in a court.
This was not only the disadvantage of the non-sovereign participant to
a contract, but also would put publicly-owned companies at a
disadvantage in international trade. The risk of entering into
contracts with them would be too great in many instances.

Therefore, it was to the advantage of both sovereign-owned firms and
non-sovereign firms for sovereign-owned companies not to be considered
fully protected by appeals to sovereign immunity So for the first time,
sovereign states had a vested interest in seeing their own sovereign
immunity curtailed in order that their newly acquired
commercial/industrial activities might prosper.

As time passed, more and more activities were felt to be outside the
traditional sovereign immunity sphere. Although these developments
began to emerge gradually through individual legal decisions, some of
these changes became codified in the US in the Sovereign Immunities Act
of 1976, and in the UK in the State Immunity Act of 1978, and by
international agreement in the European Convention on State Immunity.

Despite these relatively recent attempts to codify sovereign immunity
questions, major points of contention still remain, resulting, as one
would expect in this increasingly litigious world, in various lawsuits,
some of which helped illuminate certain aspects of the remaining
problems.

Medium and Long-Term Debt of the LDC's [12] US$ Billions

Owed to:             1970 (% of total)   1980 (% of total)

Official Creditors   32.1   (84.9)       182.7   (53.5)
Commercial Banks      3.8   (10.1)       139.5   (40.9)
Bond Markets          1.9    (5.0)        19.1    (5.6)
                     37.8  (100.0)       341.3  (100.0)

Default Experience, 1960-1982

Although most observers would not characterise this period as
particularly turbulent in terms of sovereign defaults, on careful
examination one finds more defaults than conventional wisdom would
seem to indicate.

Debt to official creditors:  During this period, at least 22
countries defaulted on debt to official creditors. (As pointed out
earlier our definition of default includes reschedulings.)

Countries Which Defaulted On Official Creditor Debt,
1960-August 1982

Argentina
Pakistan
Brazil
Peru
Central African Republic
Poland
Chile
Romania
Gabon
Senegal
Ghana
Sierra Leone
India
Sudan
Indonesia
Togo
Liberia
Turkey
Madagascar
Uganda
Nicaragua
Zaire

Commercial Bank Debt: During this same time period, at least 17
countries defaulted on debt owed to commercial banks. There is no
evidence that any of these other countries were ever legally
declared "in default" by a court of law, with one exception. In 1979
a major New York bank declared Iran in default and succeeded in
setting off deposits against the unpaid loan.[13] This default
occurred as a result of sanctions being placed against Iran. The
issue was later settled by negotiation.

Countries Which Defaulted On Foreign Currency Marketable Securities
1970-1990

Argentina
Costa Rica
Guatemala
Nigeria
Panama
Poland
Rhodesia (Zimbabwe)
Uruguay
Yugoslavia

Argentina defaulted on bonds (bonods). Guatemala restructured its
stabilisation bond debt. Nigeria defaulted on government-guaranteed
promissory notes. Panama defaulted on both bonds and floating rate
notes. Uruguay defaulted on bearer treasury bonds. Yugoslavia
defaulted on short-term bonds. Therefore, although it is clear that
since the 1970s, at least, marketable security debt has defaulted
less the risk of default of sovereign marketable security debt is
negligible.

Countries Which Defaulted On Commercial Bank Debt 1960-August 1982

Argentina
Poland*
Bolivia
Rhodesia*
Costa Rica*
Romania
Iran
Senegal
Liberia
Sudan
Madagascar
Togo
Nicaragua
Turkey
Peru
Zaire
Philippines

* Also defaulted on bonds or notes.

Bonds and Notes: It was much rarer for governments to default on
foreign-currency-denominated bonds or notes between 1960 and August
1982. But it did happen. Specifically, Costa Rica, Poland and
Rhodesia (present-day Zimbabwe) all defaulted on international bonds
and/or notes. We have found no evidence that either Costa Rica or
Poland were legally declared in default on marketable securities
although it has been reported that creditors did go to court in
Switzerland to try to remedy a default by Bank Handlowy (Poland's
official foreign trade bank).[14] It is not clear from our search of
the published records whether there was ever a formal default
judgment made against Rhodesia. Rhodesia's default is easily
explained by the civil war and the burden of international
sanctions. Costa Rica and Poland's defaults were related to economic
/political developments within both countries. Altogether, then,
from 1960 to 1982, at least 22 countries defaulted/rescheduled
against official creditors, 17 countries against commercial banks,
with just three defaulting on marketable securities. However, the
aggregate amount of credit involved, however, although difficult to
measure from public sources, was nonetheless small enough so that
the international financial system was in no way threatened by any
of these defaults/reschedulings. But once Mexico announced its
payments moratorium in August 1982, sovereign credits entered a new
phase.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

MITSUBISHI BANK'S PROFITS RISE

Mitsubishi Bank's consolidated net profit rose 15 percent in the first
half year ended September 30 1995. Net profits totalled 24.11 billion
yen ($237.2 million), or 8.37 yen a share, compared with 21.02 billion
yen, or 7.13 yen a share, a year earlier. Problem loans stood at 790.1
billion yen as of September 30 1995, down from 1.123 trillion yen at
March 31 1995. Non-performing loans accounted for 610.9 billion yen of
the problem loans. Reserves against uncollectible accounts totalled
500.7 billion yen, equal to 63 percent of total problem loans.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BANK OF TOKYO'S INTERIM RESULTS

Bank of Tokyo's net profit totalled 10.02 billion yen, or 4.92 yen a
share, in the half year ended September 30 1995. Reserves against
uncollectible accounts totalled 401.3 billion yen, equal to 60 percent
of total problem loans of 667.8 billion yen at September 30 1995.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

HANA BANK COMPLETES ISSUE OF FLOATING RATE NOTES

Hana Bank completed an issue of $50 million floating rate notes (FRNs).
The interest margin of Hana Bank's borrowing dropped from a 46 basis
point in 1994 to a 42 basis point in 1995 over the six-month London
interbank offered rate. The cost of funding for some Korean banks
soared from 39 to 45 basis points, resulting in some banks scrapping
their fund raising plans. The rise of the loan rates was due to
the"Japanese premium". Hana Bank will use $30 million for domestic
lending and the rest for offshore offices in Southeast Asia.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CITYTRUST SHARE OFFER

Ayala Corp, including the bank of the Philippine Islands, will join
Madrigal Group for the exercise of the latter's rights over Citytrust
Banking shares. Citytrust shares held by Citibank Overseas Investment
and Philex Mining have been offered for sale. The exact number of
shares up for sale had not been disclosed by the time Asian Banker went
to press. Citibank currently has a 47 percent stake in Citytrust and
Philex holds 17 percent. Only partial sales will be up for sale as both
parties will keep enough shares to maintain at least one board seat
each in the ten-person Citytrust board. Madrigal Group has the upper
edge because it already has a 16 percent stake in Citytrust, making it
the third-largest shareholder after Citibank and Philex. Ayala wants to
have an equal footing eventually with Madrigal in Citytrust.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

METROPOLITAN BANK & TRUST INTERIM RESULTS

Metropolitan Bank & Trust's net profit in the first 11 months of 1995
was PPs3 billion ($114.4 million). The bank was on track to meet its
yearly target of PPs3.5 billion. For the 11- month period revenue
totalled PPs12.3 billion. Interest income composed the bulk of the
revenue, amounting to PPs9.6 billion, while the remaining PPs2.7
billion came from bank charges, fee- based income, foreign exchange and
trading gains.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

FAR EAST BANK AND TRUST FORECASTS

Far East Bank and Trust Company (FEBTC) was expecting a capital of
PPs10 billion ($384.6 million) and a net income growth of 10 to 15
percent by the end of 1995. Assets were expected to grow to PPs90
billion by the year end. The bank aims to reinforce its position as one
of the largest banks and is expected to increase its branches to 300
within the next two and a half years from the current 220. FEBTC also
expects to have its own rights offering for purposes of increasing its
capital as soon as it gets the approval from its shareholders.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

GOVERNMENT UPS STAKE IN LAND BANK

Land Bank recently turned over to President Ramos a stock certificate
representing the bank's PPs4.2 billion ($162 million) stock dividend in
favour of the national government. This increases the national
government's share holdings in Land Bank by 233 percent, from PPs1.8
billion to PPs4.2 billion. In addition, Land Bank paid cash dividends
to the national government of over PPs600 million ($23 million) in 1994-
95. This translates to a 266 percent return on investment of the
government in the unibank.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

PHILIPPINE NATIONAL BANK PRIVATISATION OFFERING UNDERSUBSCRIBED

The Philippine National Bank (PNB) third tranche privatisation offering
allotment to the member brokers of the Philippines Stock Exchange (PSE)
was undersubscribed due to miscommunication between PNB and PSE. Out of
the 180 brokerage firms only 120 were able to subscribe to the
offering. PNB blames PSE for releasing the offer sheet only one day
before the deadline. The PNB sold 7.3 million shares and 2.4 warrants
attached to every three PNB shares. PNB expects to get an estimated
PPs1.750 billion ($68.6 million). These funds will help with its
privatisation.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

FLOATING RATE CD ISSUE

Security Bank and Trust Company (SBTC) recently tapped the
international capital market with its $30 million Floating Rate
Certificate of Deposit (FRCD) issuance, the first in its operation as a
commercial bank in the country. Proceeds from the issuance have been
set for the improvement of the bank's foreign currency lending
requirements and for the purchase of more securities to enhance the
bank's investment portfolio.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

UNITED WORLD CHINESE BANK PROFITS

United World Chinese Commercial Bank, or UWCCB, posted a pre-tax profit
for the first 11 months of T$3.81 billion ($139.5 million), 96 percent
of the company's forecast. One of Taiwan's leading banks, UWCCB also
generated a higher 11-month revenue of T$26.58 billion. It received
approval recently for listing on the local bourse. Jardine Fleming
Securities (Taiwan) expects UWCCB to post a net profit for 1996 of
T$3.6 billion, or T$2.46 a share.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

TAIWAN'S BIG THREE GOVERNMENT BANKS ANNOUNCE LOWER PROFITS

Taiwan's Big Three government banks announced lower July-November
pre-tax profits for 1995 amid an overall slowdown in Taiwan's financial
industry. First Commercial Bank's pre-tax profit declined by 14 percent
to T$2.80 billion ($102.6 million) from T$3.24 billion a year earlier.
Hua Nan Commercial Bank's pre-tax profit sagged 22 percent to T$2.65
billion from T$3.4 billion. Chang Commercial Bank reported a 4.7
percent decline to T$2.42 billion from T$2.54 billion. The Taiwan
Provincial Government plans to privatise the Big Three banks by early
1997. Currently, the government owns 71.35 percent of First Bank
shares, 57.83 percent of Hua Nan Bank and 53.01 percent of Chang
Commercial Bank. Taiwan's 59 offshore banking units, or OBUs, jumped
20.2 percent to a record $34.599 billion at the end of October 1995
from a year earlier.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-25</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B021-122</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi33.html 205.156.212.5 19970115003408 text/html 28220
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:32:19 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:10 GMT
Content-length: 28031
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi33.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
ASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
January 15, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>NEW YORK CITY PLANS TO SECURITIZE TAX LIENS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(515 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>LATIN AMERICAN ABS SEEN STABILIZING AFTER SURGE IN '95</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(336 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>INVESTORS BULLISH ON ABS PROSPECTS IN '96</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(495 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>FIRST CREDIT CARD ISSUES ENJOY SMOOTH RECEPTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(527 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>FASIT CAUGHT IN BUDGET QUAGMIRE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(193 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>COMMENTS TO FASB FOCUS ON REPOS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(311 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>CITIBANK'S MASTER TRUST RENAMED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(92 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>CORRECTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(25 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>FLOATING-RATE SECURITIES WELL-BID AS NEW ISSUANCE BEGINS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(330 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>CREDIT CARD ABS WEAKER: MOODY'S</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(69 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>CHARMING ABS STEADIER IF UNCERTAIN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(341 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>NOMURA'S TRAIN DEAL CLOSELY WATCHED AS EURO PIPELINE BUILDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(542 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
ASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

NEW YORK CITY PLANS TO SECURITIZE TAX LIENS

The nascent movement among municipalities to securitize delinquent
property taxes took a major step forward last week when New York City
stepped into the fray, requesting proposals from investment banks on how
best to securitize $200 million to $250 million of tax liens; it would be
the biggest such securitization ever.
        The city has approximately 250,000 properties with tax arrears
totaling over $2 billion, according to a request-for-proposal document; and
it is looking for a team of two to four bankers to underwrite the senior
notes, expected to receive an investment grade rating.
        Although the document states that an objective is to complete the
transaction by April 15 -- a timetable one source described as "pretty
tight" -- the letter also cautions that the implementation and completion
of any transaction is subject to the New York City Council's enactment of
pending legislation to permit bulk lien sales. WR Lazard & Co. is the
city's advisor.
        A source at City Hall said one of the main goals of the pending
legislation and securitization is to "enforce taxes" and remove the city as
the lender of last resort, which is what it essentially becomes when
someone falls behind on his property taxes.
        The proposed issue will be backed by the higher quality tax liens,
mostly commercial real estate with a high likelihood of repayment.
        According to the city, the proposed and subsequent securitizations
will accomplish four things: to increase the cash flow from delinquent tax
liens; provide an efficient real property tax enforcement mechanism;
increase the current property tax collection rate; and reduce the need for
the city to assume ownership of properties in tax arrears.
        "The sale of liens represents a faster, cheaper, and more efficient
method to enforce property tax collection than the ... foreclosure process
the City currently uses. Tax lien sales will enable the City to restore
fairness to the property tax collection system, maintain and improve
collection rates, generate additional cash for operations, and relieve
upward pressure on property taxes. Key to the success of a long-term sale
program will be the initial securitization," the request for proposals
states.
Choosing Bankers
        The issue will be sold to institutional investors, but unlike a
traditional private placement, it will be fully underwritten by the
investment banks, which will assume some risk. It will not be a best-
efforts transaction, the source at City Hall said. The raised capital will
be funneled into the city's operations fund.
The deadline for bankers to submit proposals to the city was last Friday,
and a team of underwriters is expected to be chosen in about two weeks.
        The document asks bankers to describe their experience implementing
new products such as tax lien securitizations. And the list of those with
specific tax lien securitization experience is quite short.
        Most recently, Smith Barney priced a $19 million issue for the City
of New Haven, Conn., in the fall. Chemical Securities worked on New York
City's securitization of cash flows from delinquent tax liens a couple of
years ago and CS First Boston has structured deals for Jersey City.
--Michael Sisk



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
ASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

LATIN AMERICAN ABS SEEN STABILIZING AFTER SURGE IN '95

Securitization of future cash flows in Latin America hit an all-
time high last year of  almost $3 billion. Although securitization of
future receivables may post a moderate gain in 1996, the market is unlikely
to see the same level of expansion, industry sources said last week.
        Duff & Phelps estimates that around $2.8 billion in new future flow
transactions were issued last year, up from around $1.5 billion the
previous year.
        "1995 was an extraordinary year," said Michael Moran, assistant
vice president. "It won't be that good this year, but we're projecting
moderate growth," he added. New issuers will learn about securitization
thanks to high profile deals from companies like YPF, Moran said. And
investment bankers searching for new business in Latin America will
cultivate securitized transactions, resulting in slightly greater volume
this year.
        Investment bankers note, however, that securitized volume is always
dependent on the Eurobond market. If Latin American issuers have access to
that market, many find it more economical.
        Following the Mexican peso crisis at the end of 1994, Latin
American issuers were essentially shut out of the Euromarket and
securitized volume grew dramatically as a result in 1995.
        This year, the door to the Euromarket may open a crack, noted one
banker active in securitization. Indeed, Mexico already tapped that sector
with a DM 1 billion bond two weeks ago which was reportedly well-received.
        "As conditions improve in the Eurobond market, future receivable
securitization will inevitably decline," the banker said. But Mexico is
still perceived as risky overall, with BB ratings from Duff & Phelps and
Standard & Poor's. "Mexican issuers will still use securitization," he
predicted.
        Ultimately, as countries in Latin America reach investment grade,
they will switch altogether to Eurobonds from future cash flow deals. At
that time, these countries will probably be ready to develop their own
domestic asset-backed markets.
        However, "this could be a ten-year process," one banker said, and
there may be several more cycles for future flow securitizations in the
coming years as a result.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
ASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

INVESTORS BULLISH ON ABS PROSPECTS IN '96

Despite the general tightening of spreads in 1995, fixed-income
investors are inclined to increase their allocations to asset-backed
securities in the year ahead, according to preliminary results from a
survey conducted by Asset Sales Report and MBIA Insurance Corp.  Final
tallies will be presented next week at the American Banker/Asset Sales
Report 11th Annual Asset Securitization Conference in Naples, Fla.
        Of the 13 institutional investors responding, 11 said they are
ready to put still more money into ABS even though 10 of the 13 believe
that spreads will at best remain near current levels and could widen out in
1996. Only one institution expected to cut its allocation to ABS and one
said that it was unsure at this point whether it would increase or decrease
its commitment to the area.
        Despite near unanimity about their commitment to ABS, investors
were clearly more ambivalent about the prospects for interest rates and the
economy. Of the 13 respondents, seven predicted higher long-term Treasury
rates and six projected a drop.
        An averaged forecast from the group would put the long Treasury
rate at about 6.18% at year-end 1996, or almost exactly where it was at
last Wednesday's close. At the time the first surveys were distributed in
late November, the long Treasury yield was at 6.30%.
        Similarly,  seven expected that GDP will rise in 1996 while six
foresaw a decline. An averaged growth forecast from the 13  put GDP at a
gain of just under 1% in 1996. There were no projections at either the high
growth (above 4%) or sharp decline (-4%) ends of the spectrum.
        Among the new asset classes that investors showed some interest in
were home improvement loans and subprime auto loan-backed securities. In
each case, more investors indicated that they would buy the securities in
1996 than actually did participate in 1995.
        Other areas mentioned were securities backed by 12b-1 fees
generated by mutual funds and franchise-backed securities. Asset classes
that elicited caution from the investor group included timeshares, future
receivables, subprime auto loans (appearing on both lists) and Latin
American securitizations. In each case, more than three investors said that
they would not consider participating in these kinds of deals.
        Although not listed as a choice in the survey, three investors
wrote in to say they would not consider healthcare receivable-backed issues
in the year ahead, possibly owing to the well-publicized fraud in Towers'
deals two years ago as well as the complexity of the asset itself.
        Overall, however, investors expect to see even more asset-backed
supply in the year ahead. All 13 respondents said they expect at least $100
billion in new issuance this year, while 10 said that volume should exceed
$110 billion. Two even projected that issuance would top the $130 billion
mark. Interestingly, the investors as a group were more bullish on this
year's issuance level than investment bankers.
        Final details on investors' and others' forecasts for 1996 market
will appear in next week's issue of ASR.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
ASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

FIRST CREDIT CARD ISSUES ENJOY SMOOTH RECEPTION

Three credit card issuers broke the ice in 1996, issuing around
$2.5 billion in new securities last week. All of the deals benefited from
pent-up investor demand including the first zero coupon asset-backed bond
from Citibank.
        Advanta's $466 million deal was fully sold just after pricing,
reportedly purchased with new cash, while Discover's transaction was
upsized by 100% to $1 billion.
        In each case, the deals were structured to appeal to more than one
sector of the asset-backed market or to bring in new investors entirely.
        Citibank's novel transaction was priced late Thursday through lead
manager Goldman Sachs at 37 bps over Treasury strip of February 2001 and
was quoted at around 37-38 bps over the five-year Treasury bond--on top of
five-year credit card securities. Priced at a discount of 74.817237, the
bonds yield 5.861%.
        The offering attracted around a dozen new investors to the asset-
backed market, mainly zero coupon buyers, traders said. "The interesting
thing is that this is probably the most liquid zero coupon paper in that
market," one syndicate official noted. The 6% subordinate tranche, also a
zero, was priced 15 bps behind the senior securities by lead manager
Merrill Lynch. (Full structure and pricing details will follow next week.)
        On Wednesday, Discover basked in the limelight with a five-year
floater; the issuer tapped into two investor bases, according to an
official at lead manager Dean Witter. Five-years is short enough for U.S.
buyers and although European buyers tend to buy longer-term securities, the
Discover bonds appealed to this sector as well, he noted.
        "We put in a $500 million deal and went to $1 billion without
giving up anything on the pricing," the official said. It was priced at par
with a coupon of 17 basis points over Libor, and once freed to trade, was
bid there.
        At the same time, Salomon Brothers sold two seven-year senior
classes for Advanta, one fixed and one floating-rate, using a structure
almost identical to the issuer's five-year Series 1995-F in November,
except for the maturity and the higher credit enhancement level.
        The combined fixed and floating-rate structure "allows us to tap
into two different investor bases," explained Mike Coco, director of credit
card securitization at Advanta. Issuing a fixed-rate bond was especially
attractive with interest rates so low, he added.
        The enhancement level was 100 bps higher than Series 1995-F because
of the longer maturity. Standard & Poor's "raises the enhancement level for
credit card securities with terms longer than five years," explained Ray
Galkowski, head of the credit card ratings group at S&P. Although he did
not comment on the Advanta deal specifically, Galkowski said the rating
agency holds that there is an increase in risk the longer the maturity, and
that the five-year term marks a natural dividing point.
        The additional support was all within the collateral interest which
was rated BBB by Fitch Investors Service. Because Fitch did not require
more enhancement for the longer maturity on the deal, it assigned a higher
rating of A+ to the subordinate tranche, according to analyst Mike Dean.
        Coco anticipated that Advanta's volume for 1996 would be close to
last year's level of $3 billion.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
ASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

FASIT CAUGHT IN BUDGET QUAGMIRE

As the U.S. budget talks continue, the fate of the Financial Asset
Securitization Investment Trust (FASIT) is hanging in the balance. While
proponents are optimistic, inclusion of the FASIT in the final legislation
is not ensured.
        "We're caught in the political crossfire," said Donald B. Susswein,
partner at Thacher, Profitt & Wood, who worked on the proposal. The FASIT
would extend many of the benefits of the REMIC to non-mortgage assets and
was first proposed as legislation two years ago.
        Dampening its chances for passage with the budget package, the
FASIT proposal was placed on the Clinton administration's list of
"objectionable special interest" provisions in the Budget late last month.
However, nine Democratic members of the House Ways and Means Committee
responded quickly with a letter to White House Chief of Staff Leon Panetta,
arguing the merits of the FASIT proposal.
        "In testimony before the Committee on Ways and Means, Treasury
stated that it did not oppose the FASIT legislation," the letter states.
"Treasury and the Administration have also consistently supported asset
securitization, included in the context of the Community Development Bank
bill." In addition, it concludes, "FASIT is also a revenue raiser."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
ASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

COMMENTS TO FASB FOCUS ON REPOS

As the deadline to comment on FASB's exposure draft on
securitization draws near, the Board has received about 25 comments, mostly
pertaining to repurchase agreements and requesting to testify at a public
hearing in February.
        Comments on the proposal, "Accounting for Transfers of Financial
Assets and Extinguishments of Liabilities," are due January 22.
        According to the commments received, the new rule would
dramatically limit banks' use of repurchase agreements, a major source of
funding, especially in light of the Board's recent tightening of financial
accounting standard 115.
        The exposure draft was issued around the same time that FASB
provided banks a window to transfer securities currently classified as held
to maturity into the available-for-sale category without a penalty. The
window of opportunity in FAS 115, "Accounting for Certain Investments in
Debt and Equity Securities," closed at the end of 1995, after which such
transfers are prohibited.
        As a result, a number of banking institutions put longer-term repos
into the held-to-maturity category,  where unrealized gains and losses
needn't be marked to market. However, the proposed statement would require
any repos with a maturity of three months or more to recorded as a sale,
and hence marked to market. Banks would thereby be limited to using repos
with maturities of less than three months to avoid increasing volatility in
their capital bases, and any longer transactions existing when the rule
comes into effect would suddenly have to appear in the income statement.
FASB  has noted that the three-month maturity limit on repos is a period
that was arrived at arbitrarily, largely because the Board believed that
the vast majority of repo transactions held far shorter maturities. "We've
since learned that there are more transactions with durations around three
months than we thought," said Halsey Bullen, the project manager at FASB.
The Board will likely reconsider the three-month limit as it continues its
deliberations.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
ASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

CITIBANK'S MASTER TRUST RENAMED

Citibank changed the name of its master trust last week to Citibank
Credit Card Master Trust I as part of an effort at the bank to increase
name recognition
        Since 1991, the trust was known as Standard Credit Card Master
Trust I. All deals issued from the trust will now carry the name Citibank,
including its first deal of the year, a $1 billion zero coupon bond last
week.
        With an estimated $44 billion in credit card receivables, Citibank
is the largest issuer of Visa and MasterCard credit cards in the world.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
ASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

CORRECTION

In last week's issue, an article on asset-backed returns on page 4
referred to a recent research report; that report was published by Salomon
Brothers.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
ASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

FLOATING-RATE SECURITIES WELL-BID AS NEW ISSUANCE BEGINS

After a two-day hiatus due to snowstorms on the East Coast, new
issuance got off to a strong start last week and players were bracing for a
blizzard of another sort: another year of credit card issuance.
         Despite expectations for increased supply, spreads in the
secondary market held ground, with floating-rate securities enjoying
renewed demand.
        "Once the trigger is pulled on the first deal, others will follow
quickly," said one rating agency analyst. Indeed, three credit card deals
were priced last week in quick succession: Discover, Advanta, and Citibank.
        Despite the addition of $1 billion in new five-year floaters from
Discover, floaters remained well-bid. The deal was priced "aggressively" at
17 basis points over Libor and held at that level once it was free to trade
last week, one investment banker noted.
        In general, floaters looked inexpensive compared with fixed-rate
bonds on a swap basis, and as a result, dealers and investors were taking
advantage of the opportunity last week, traders said.
        Fixed-rate securities suffered neglect as a result of that
opportunity. In addition, one trader said that "investors are apathetic to
Treasuries right now and the market in general is backing off."
        The five-year, fixed-rate sector, which suffered from oversupply in
the fourth quarter and widened a few basis points as a result, was holding
at around 37 bps to 38 bps over Treasuries.
        Advanta's seven-year fixed-rate deal, totaling $220 million, was
priced at 46 bps over Treasury, but was softer when freed to trade, sources
said. With interest rates so low, investors were apparently not overly
enthused with longer-term, fixed-rate securities; the floating-rate portion
of the Advanta deal went very well, traders agreed.
        Home equity loan securities, which had also widened significantly
during the fourth quarter, tightened at the end of the year and have held,
said one trader. Three-year pass-through securities were quoted at between
105 bps and 115 bps over Treasury depending on the specific issuer. Three-
year tranched paper was quoted at around 85-90 bps.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
ASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

CREDIT CARD ABS WEAKER: MOODY'S

Delinquencies on securitized credit card portfolios rose in October
to 4.23% from 4.17% in September. Overall, "performance continued to
decline," said Moody's analyst Ed Bankole, who prepared the credit card
index (see page 5).
        Charge-offs were slightly lower in October but still represent the
highest levels of the year with the exception of September. Thanks to
higher portfolio yield of 18.07%, excess spread moved up to 5.42% from
4.80%.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
ASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

CHARMING ABS STEADIER IF UNCERTAIN

Although the retailer faced fears of impending bankruptcy just
months ago, Charming Shoppes securities could rebound significantly, with
Salomon Brothers analyst Paul Jablansky now categorizing the issues as
"likely to generate among the best returns in the three-year sector of the
credit card ABS market."
        The Bensalem, Penn. based outfit reached a definitive agreement
last month with Congress Financial Corp.  whereby  Congress will provide
Charming with a $157 million asset-based working capital facility for a
term of 2.5 years.
        Under this arrangement, Charming has successfully restructured $83
million of bank debt with existing lenders and substantially extended the
typical 90-day letter of credit.
        Recently estimated with a spread over 80bp for a 3-year term,
Jablansky says the ABS is now "priced at a level that still heavily weights
the likelihood of a bankruptcy--and a subsequent early amortization event--
during the next 18 months."
        Other analysts are not so sure. "It may be compelling, but I'd have
to see a lot of evidence to be convinced," said one source.
        "At this point I'd say it continues to be an outlier, pretty hairy
and likely to underperform."
        In the first nine months of 1995, Charming experienced a comparable
sales decline of 22% in its nationwide chain of Fashion Bug and Fashion Bug
Plus women's clothing stores as rumors of its fiscal troubles drove spreads
40-50 bp wide on its single public credit card securitization.
        With the new financing agreement, the retailer is "virtually
assured" of remaining solvent through the offering's maturity, optimistic
sources said.
        Jablansky adds: "The likelihood (of insolvency) is arguably no
greater than that of other retailers, whose credit card ABS trade at
significantly tighter spreads...the actual probabilities of any of these
early amortization scenarios are well below our arbitrary assumption of
50%."
        Any potential divergence from this forecast, Jablansky argues,
would stem from the fact that "the holiday season was not good for
retailers overall.
        The performance of the retail sector as it influences the bond
market is something Charming Shoppes will have to face as would any other
retailer."



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
ASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

NOMURA'S TRAIN DEAL CLOSELY WATCHED AS EURO PIPELINE BUILDS

Overseas securitization engines were sputtering back to life last week
after the traditional new year's lull.  While the flow of deals is expected
to be thin this early in the new quarter and year, a number of deals are
heard to be in the pipeline for later months.
        The deal garnering the most interest from securitization desks has
been Nomura's zero coupon train lease deal. Expected to receive triple-A
ratings from Duff & Phelps, the deal totals about $726 million (ASR
12/4/96). The transaction is expected to price this week, but participants
were reluctant to discuss details since it carries a private Rule 144a
tranche for sale in the United States.
        The structure of the deal creates securities from a series of small
government payments of about $9 million each over 98 months. Those
payments, essentially a series of bullets, are to be bought by investors
who will then typically find their own swap counterparties to gain floating
funding. Securitization experts expressed concern that the deal's failure
to include an internal swap counterparty would lead to illiquidity.
        Syndicate desks will be eyeing the 144a structure of the deal in
the coming months with a view toward the larger potential rail lease
markets in Britain and elsewhere.
Goldman Loses Three ABS Pros
        The struggle for mandates this early in the season has led to some
key horseraces between premier U.K. desks. The Bank of Kuwait was set to
award its mandate late last week for a second deal. The first from Kuwait
occurred last year, as Goldman Sachs led a deal which was relatively well
received. This time around, Goldman appears to have had some competitors.
Chief among them was Lehman Brothers, whose proposal appeared to be in the
running.
        The chief reasons for Goldman's failure to win the mandate outright
appeared to be its slew of departures in recent weeks, capped by this
week's news that the head of securitization John Van Deventer had left. Van
Deventer's destination is not known, though it appears he will not be
joining another big firm. Van Deventer's departure, coupled with those of
two junior analysts last week, added to the perception that Goldman's
resources have been depleted. Executive director Roger Barris will assume
Van Deventer's responsibilities.
        The UBK deal itself will be sized at about $100 million pounds
sterling. It will be a floater, with collateral similar to the last deal.
The deal will securitize over 35 commercial mortgages on investment
properties.
Scandinavia Active
        Elsewhere, Lehman has won the mandate for another securitization
from Sweden.  A consortium representing a large group of Swedish municipal
housing firms has been working with Lehman to establish a conduit-like
structure for future deals. Lehman's Jim Clark, who heads up the asset
securitization group, was in Sweden last week to discuss the plans. A deal
for a municipal housing firm outside Stockholm is slated for this summer.
        A second St. Eric transaction is also heard to be on the horizon.
This time around, only one of the three housing firms which participated in
the first transaction will be involved.  Collateral for the deal will be
limited to the one loan for the housing firm Svenska Bostader on a number
of housing projects. ABN Amro will return to lead the transaction.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-26</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B021-155</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi48.html 205.156.212.5 19970115003438 text/html 34923
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:32:48 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:12 GMT
Content-length: 34734
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi48.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
BANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 24, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>THE YEAR AHEAD</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>RETAIL DELIVERY WILL COST YOU IN 1996 </A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1128 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>STRATEGIES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>TIPS FOR CONTRACTING TO DEVELOP SOFTWARE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1107 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>MARKETPLACE PROFILE: NETWORK PLATFORM PROVIDER</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>SYNC LINKING LEGACY NETWORKS TO CLIENT-SERVER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(502 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>BANK AUTOMATION NEWS BRIEFS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>BISYS AND BOTTOMLINE PARTNER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(102 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>BANK AUTOMATION ON COURSE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(69 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>BANK OF AMERICA PICKS ISSC</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(72 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>BANK OF GRAY AND PROVESA ALLY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(81 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>BANK CENTRAL ASIA MOVES TO M&I</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(69 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>PEOPLE...</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(50 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>SOFTWARE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>HUMAN RESOURCES SOFTWARE AIMS TO CUT EMPLOYEE COSTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(303 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>INDEX OF 1995 STORIES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>1995 STORIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1349 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
BANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 24, 1996

RETAIL DELIVERY WILL COST YOU IN 1996 

     Expect to experience growing pains this year as technology
platforms inside your bank change to facilitate offering new retail
delivery channels to your customers.  But don't expect these channels
to produce profits any time soon.
     Almost half of the largest U.S. banks and one-third of the
country's mid-size banks are operating electronic banking programs at
a loss.  The majority cannot determine profitability, the American
Bankers Association (ABA) said in its "1995 Retail Banking Survey
Report."
     The losses were attributed to up-front development costs, which
likely will continue throughout 1996 as new retail delivery channels
gain consumer acceptance, the report said.
     Also in 1996, consultants predict:

     *   continued slow adoption of client-server
        applications;
     *   the call center will become a focal
        point of the customer relationship and a
        major sales and marketing tool; and 
     *   continued merging in the bank and vendor markets.

Drawbacks of the RDS Boom

     Development costs likely will put banks in the red as they try to
offer alternative delivery channels to their customers, consultants
say.  Developing online banking and in-bank connection software is
expensive.  It can cost $300,000 just to get into the newest retail
delivery systems, such as personal computer (PC) home banking and
Internet transactions.
     In most cases, banks can use some of their existing hardware to
offer new retail delivery channels.  But most of the new applications
are client-server-based, and the legacy systems cannot provide access
to information in an interactive environment, said David Taylor,
executive vice president at the Bank Administration Institute (BAI) in
Chicago.
     These programs must interface with existing business systems,
mainframes and each other, said Bob Landry, technology analyst with
the Tower Group in Wellesley, Mass.
     Building these platforms so that they can talk to each other
might be expensive but this should be a priority so that banks can
move forward with seamless marketing and accounting efforts, Landry
said.

Security Issues

     You need to pay attention to three key security issues as your
bank implements new technology to compete in the retail delivery
systems market, says BAI's 1995 study:  "The Information Superhighway
and Retail Banking:"

    *   Authentication.  Can you identify the party requesting a
    transaction?
    *   Authorization.  If the party is identified, how will the size
    and nature of the requested transaction be approved?
    *   Security and encryption.  Can you prevent third parties from
    improperly accessing private transaction data, such as credit
    card numbers? 

The Client-Server Dilemma

    Unexpected implementation and activation problems with client-
server technology is adding development and networking problems,
analysts told BAN.  It was touted as the technology that could save
banks up to 15 percent in systems development and management costs. 
But implementation problems have delayed activation and created the
need for extra personnel.
    At many banks, expenses related to implementation issues ate up
anticipated savings quickly, said David Koto, principal with Brintech
in New Smyrna Beach, Fla.  "No savings have been realized yet," he
said.
    But vendors are plugging away with client-server introductions
(BAN, Oct. 18, p. 1).  Five companies showed new client-server-based
core accounting systems at the MicroBanker Expo last year.
    An informal BAN poll of about a dozen users and consultants at
the expo revealed that Eastpoint Technologies of Bedford, N.H., and
Perot Systems of Dallas are the companies to watch in 1996.
    Phoenix International of Maitland, Fla., also is considered one
of the most innovative client-server vendors (BAN, Aug. 9, p. 1), but
it has not sold its Retail Banking System outside of the circle of
institutions that initially invested in the company.

The Growing Importance of Call Centers

    Call centers are becoming critical to banks, financial
institutions and other service-oriented businesses as they work to
keep existing customers, expand their business and save money,
consultants said (BAN, Sept. 20, p. 4).  You would be well-advised to
upgrade your own call center this year to keep pace with your
competitors, consultants said.
    Banks selling mature products, such as credit card services, are
finding that keeping existing customers is as important as gaining new
ones and that having a sophisticated call center is one way of
ensuring this happens.  Plus, the call center provides an opportunity
to offer both customer service and telemarketing in one swoop.  Savvy
banks are using well-trained employees to turn customer service
requests into opportunities to sell additional products.  
    Consultants predict the telephone will emerge as a major selling
tool this year.  Merrill Lynch & Co. has 400 branches, $500 billion in
assets and a national telephone support system.  "There's a tremendous
focus on call centers" to reduce staff and create better selling
environments, Landry added.
    Additionally, telephones likely will emerge as the method for
account creation and verification, says Richard Crone, senior vice
president at the $50 billion-asset Home Savings of America of
Irwindale, Calif.  Customers may not be going into the branch as much
but they still need their questions answered.
     The emerging importance of having a well-rounded call center
spells growing opportunity for vendors.  For example, Customer Access
of Raleigh, N.C., claims it can manage a bank's call center at a
savings of about 20 percent.  The outsourcer was founded in July 1993
by four former Citibank managers.  It has two large bank customers in
North Carolina and plans to open additional offices in other areas of
the country this year (BAN, Oct. 4, p. 6).
    Outsourcing call center management will be attractive to smaller
banks.  But banks also run the risk of losing the bank's customer
service "personality," said Jeff DiFrancesco, with New York-based
Price Waterhouse.

Outsourcing Takes Off

    Expect outsourcing to continue its growth in popularity as banks
realize they can't absorb expenses associated with operating
processing centers or developing technology, consultants also tell BAN
(see related story, p. 4).  Some of the largest outsourcing contracts
were signed last year.  Chase Manhattan Bank signed Milwaukee-based
FIserv to a 12-year contract for check processing and check-imaging
worth $480 million.  That contract is guaranteed until 1997, but may
be in jeopardy as Chase merges with Chemical Bank, also of New York.
    Bank managers are beginning to trust outsourcing more as they
watch these large successful contracts fulfilled, said Arthur Gillis
of Computer Based Solutions in New Orleans.  Expect this trend to
continue in 1996, he said.
    It would be surprising if more outsourcing companies merge or go
out of business because the most profitable outsourcers are the
largest, Gillis said.
    Bank and vendor mergers also are expected to continue in 1996. 
Columbus, Ohio-based Checkfree, a check processor, already has started
off the year's mergers with its acquisition of software vendor
Servantis of Norcross, Ga., to improve its retail delivery service. 
(Richard Crone, Home Savings, 818/814-5172; Arthur Gillis, Computer
Based Solutions, 504/524-8429; David Koto, Brintech, 904/427-6772; Bob
Landry, Tower Group, 617/235-5777.)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
BANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 24, 1996

TIPS FOR CONTRACTING TO DEVELOP SOFTWARE

    Many banks are hiring vendors to develop bank-branded software
because developing in-house is expensive.
    Bank-branded software differentiates products from your
competitors' but developing software in conjunction with a vendor has
several hidden problems that seem to originate before actual source
code-writing even begins.  One- quarter of all major software projects
are terminated before completion, experts estimate.  Studies indicate
that 75 percent of completed software projects are "operating
failures" and a disappointment to users.
    The type of contract you want is the first thing to consider when
outsourcing software development, said Joseph Auer, president of
International Computer Negotiations Inc. (ICN) in Winter Park, Fla. 
Banks basically have two choices -- resources- or results-oriented
contracts.  The key difference between contracting methods lies in who
assumes responsibility for meeting business objectives, he said.
    A resources contract entails hiring staff to work inside the bank
to develop the software.  In this scenario, the development is managed
entirely by the bank and the bank is responsible if the project fails,
Auer said.
    The software is developed off-site in a results-oriented
contract.  This type of project is managed by the vendor with the bank
contributing a small amount of resources, such as machine time, data,
floor space and access to management.  The vendor retains
responsibility for the end-product, Auer said.
    Savvy vendors create results and resources contracts that
stipulate joint responsibility and accountability, which may sound
good to bank managers who are unable to give up control or who think
it is a cop-out to outsource development.  But demanding control in a
development relationship is asking for trouble because vendors are
more than willing to take the bank's money and give it all the
responsibility for failed programs and bugs, Auer said.  "[Banks] are
saying `please can we be a big target.'"
    Negotiate provisions that make the vendor responsible for bugs
and performance failure.  This likely will produce a need for a
results-oriented contract, which places the project in the vendor's
court, he said.

Drafting the Right Agreement

    "A well-constructed contract should give the system buyer some
assurance that desired business results will be achieved within a
reasonable time frame," Auer said.  "One of the most effective
techniques for providing this type of assurance is to develop a
detailed project timetable based on identified tasks, task
interdependencies and deliverables to be included in the contract."
    A carefully drafted software development agreement will prompt
the vendor and the bank to consider issues upfront and prevent
disaster later.  This type of agreement also will give the bank legal
recourse against the vendor if something goes awry, says technology
legal expert Dan C. Aardal, partner at Brown Raymans & Millstein in
Los Angeles.
    Success seems to hinge on thoroughly evaluating bank needs prior
to jumping into the development phase.  Include user, performance and
maintenance requirements emanating from this evaluation in attachments
to the development contract, he said.
    Aardal's checklist for development agreements includes:

    *  user involvement;
    *  bimonthly progress reports; 
    *  request for proposals guidelines; 
    *  acceptance testing criteria; and more.

    Almost any of these elements can be critical, but several
commonly neglected provisions are often pitfalls for the bank, Aardal
said.  For example, ownership of the software should be stipulated in
the agreement so that no dispute arises after the fact, Aardal said.
    Make sure your bank owns the source code and has licensing rights
to the software in return for the high price you pay to develop it, he
said.  These terms should be negotiated into the contract because you
won't own the software automatically just because you paid to have it
developed.
    The developer may charge a higher price for ownership rights than
for licensing because it will be the developer's only opportunity to
make money on the software, he added.
    Pay the higher price: it will give you peace of mind.  No other
bank will be using the same program or, in the case of home banking
software, offering it to customers in competition with the bank that
paid for its development, Aardal explained.
    One of the most useful provisions you can negotiate is a most-
favored customer clause.  Such a bank customer is guaranteed to
receive prices and services that are better or equivalent to those
being offered to the vendor's other customers.  Additionally, it
guarantees that the most-favored bank's contract will be amended to
include the same services, refunds or credits granted to new customers
that were given a better deal, Aardal said. 

Bargain for Warranties

    Banks can bargain for a multitude of warranties, too, in these
contracts.  Standard warranties, protecting the bank against copyright
infringement and defects in the material and workmanship, should not
be controversial during negotiations, Aardal said.  But other types of
warranties seem more burdensome to the vendor, although they can
protect your bank better.
    One such warranty would guarantee that the licensor is aware of
the user's business requirements and the intended uses for the
software, and that the software will satisfy such requirements and is
fit for the intended uses.
    This warranty works best if the user has made the initial
investment of time and effort to describe its business requirements
and intended uses in the contract.  Attach that description as a
schedule or exhibit to the software license agreement, Aardal said.
    Additionally, a bank with the resources will have prepared a
request for proposals describing those requirements and that the user
can give to competing vendors, he said.
    Aardal advises bargaining for these additional warranties:

*   Acceptance testing.  Ensure that your bank has the right to
thoroughly test the software in-house before making final payment on
its development. Include testing procedures in the initial development
agreement. Tests should include a request that the software system run
successfully for about 30 days in a live operating environment.
*   Performance.  Specify transaction response time, transaction
capacity, and reliability requirements.  Software should perform in
accordance with description, specifications and documentation of the
software set forth in exhibits and schedules in the license agreement. 
It will be difficult to contend later that the software did not
perform a particular function unless the license and related
specifications indicated the software was supposed to perform that
function.
*   Maintenance.  Negotiate maintenance provisions at the same time as
the development agreement.  If you wait until after a development and
licensing agreement is signed, your bank will have little leverage. 
State in the agreement that the vendor must respond immediately to
service calls or you will be entitled to a free one-month extension of
the warranty period, or credit against future maintenance costs.  (Dan
Aardal, Brown Raymans & Millstein, 310/789-2100; Joseph Auer, ICN,
407/740-0700.) 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
BANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 24, 1996

SYNC LINKING LEGACY NETWORKS TO CLIENT-SERVER

     Sync Research Inc. wants to capitalize on the financial-
institution migration from IBM legacy systems to faster client-server
networks. (see related story, p. 1).  
     The Irvine, Calif.-based company believes it can profit from
these conversions.  Although Sync is not directly targeting banks,
company officials said it is aiming to "focus on the IBM-centric
customer that is looking to migrate to client-server."
     Historically, financial institutions have built large IBM
networks to support their branches.  These networks communicated
through numerous leased lines, which are both expensive and limited. 
With client-server and wide-area-network (WAN) enhancement, such as
frame relay; banks can send data at higher speeds.  Data transfer
between legacy systems and client-server networks now can be supported
on one line.
    Sync's FrameNode product line is the "translator" that makes
various communications protocols compatible, including asynchronous
transfer mode (ATM) and ISDN technology.  Depending on the services
needed, Sync's FrameNode units can cost from $995 to $5,200 apiece.
    FrameNode manages the data that transfers between the old branch
terminal equipment and the newer personal computers.
    "We provide the glue, so to speak, between the legacy application
device -- the [IBM] 4700 controller or the [automated teller
machine] -- and this new WAN service," said Todd Krautkremer, a vice-
president at Sync.  "We connect the old device at the old speed and
the new devices as fast as you want."
    Sync, which began as a consulting firm in 1981 and started to
build products in 1986, began trading on the NASDAQ last fall.  It
will be releasing its fourth quarter earnings for the first time at
the end of January.
    The company's customers include New-York based Chemical Bank and
Citicorp., Pittsburgh-based Mellon Bank and San Francisco-based Wells
Fargo Bank.  However, Krautkremer admits "the smaller banks can
benefit more greatly."  One of Sync's newest customers has only 50
branches.

Market Strategy

    Sync is positioning itself to be profitable even when the legacy
systems are dead -- although for many smaller institutions that may
take a very long time, according to industry analysts.
    Krautkremer said ATM, frame-relay and ISDN essentially run at the
same speed and the only thing that separates the three services are
prices, which depend upon the rates charged by the local telephone
companies.
    For example, frame relay may be more expensive than ISDN in
California but ISDN is more expensive than frame-relay in New York. 
So, as interstate banking takes effect, branches of a national bank in
California may be using different protocols than branches of the same
bank in New York.
    "[Telecommunications] carriers are stepping up with intelligent
networks and providing numerous migration paths," said Krautkremer. 
"We will be developing technologies that will allow frame relay to be
translated to ATM ... The device on the edge of the network needs to
be able to deal with multiple types of services." 
**********************
Sync Research Inc.
7 Studebaker
Irvine, California 92718
714/588-2070

Contact:       Todd Krautkremer.
Products:      Frame-relay access platforms and protocol translators.
Customers:     Chemical Bank, Citicorp. and Mellon Bank.
Source:  EFT
***********************



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
BANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 24, 1996

BISYS AND BOTTOMLINE PARTNER

     Little Falls, N.J.-based BISYS Inc. will use Bottomline
Technologies' BranchGard and CheckGard products in its TotalPlus
product line.  TotalPlus, which supports more than 400 financial
institutions nationwide, automates account information.  BISYS's
community bank clients now can access BranchGard and CheckGard. 
BranchGard, developed by Portsmouth, N.H.-based Bottomline, is a
Windows-based payment issuing system.  BranchGard allows tellers to
create personalized starter checks, counter and cashier checks, check
letters, money orders and loan payment coupons at the teller station. 
CheckGard also supports applications that require high-quality batch
check printing, such as accounts payable, payroll and interest and
dividend checks.  (Liora Bram, Bottomline Technologies, 617/236-0082.)




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
BANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 24, 1996

BANK AUTOMATION ON COURSE

     On Course Solutions Inc. (OCS) of Orlando, Fla., is expanding its
product offerings into bank automation.  The financial consultancy
will cover five core areas of automation:
     *   data center operations;
     *   operational audits;
     *   system optimization;
     *   process automation; and
     *   automation solutions.
William D. Goulet, a former vice president of Abington Savings Bank in
Massachusetts, will head OCS's new bank automation division.  (Lori
Siragua, On Course Solutions, 407/886-7100.) 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
BANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 24, 1996

BANK OF AMERICA PICKS ISSC

     Financial institutions continue to outsource their information
technology departments with San Francisco-based Bank of America's new
deal with Somers, N.Y.-based Integrated Solutions Corp. (ISSC), the
latest example.  It inked a seven-year outsourcing contract with ISSC
earlier this month to oversee mainframe operations, application
development and business recovery services.  ISSC, a wholly-owned
subsidiary of IBM , already operates and manages most of Bank of
America's Illinois technology center.  (Ken Neal, ISSC, 914/766-4494,
kneal@vnet.IBM.com.)   



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
BANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 24, 1996

BANK OF GRAY AND PROVESA ALLY

     Gray, Ga.-based Bank of Gray converted its data processing
services to Atlanta-based ProVesa.  Bank of Gray will use ProVesa to
manage more than 10,000 customer and savings accounts.  ProVesa
services demand deposits, savings, certificates, loan applications,
integrated general ledger and customer information files.  Bank of
Gray, a family-owned institution, has more than $88 million in assets. 
Provesa provides third-party data processing for more than 40
commercial bank clients, ranging in size from $6 million-to-$648
million in assets.  (Donny Jackson, ProVesa, 770/246-3720.) 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
BANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 24, 1996

BANK CENTRAL ASIA MOVES TO M&I

     Bank of Central Asia finished converting its 440 branches,
serving approximately 4.6 million customer accounts -- to Milwaukee,
Wis.-based M&I Data Services' Deposit System and Customer Information
System (CIS).  The bank converted four operating platforms --
mainframe, personal computer (PC), AS400 and PC local area network --
to one mainframe operating system.  CIS uses IBM's DB2 relational
database management system.  (Lyle Gray, M&I Data Services, 800/236-
3282, ext 4-9212.) 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
BANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 24, 1996

PEOPLE...

     Roel Pieper was named president and CEO of Cupertino, Calif.-
based Tandem Computers Inc. Pieper was president and CEO of Tandem's
wholly-owned subsidiary, UB Networks, since 1993.  Before UB Networks,
Pieper was CEO of UNIX Systems Laboratories, a former AT&T subsidiary
which was purchased by Novell.  (Sally Smith, Tandem, 408/285-7515.) 



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
BANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 24, 1996

HUMAN RESOURCES SOFTWARE AIMS TO CUT EMPLOYEE COSTS

     Human resources (HR) management costs can be held in-check with
new software from Englewood, Colo.-based Jam.LOGIC Designs.
     The start-up software company recently released a product to help
large banks manage their human resources tasks and small banks to
create a human resources department.
     The Windows-based HR Task Counselor is designed specifically for
banks, with features including 107 financial job descriptions, release
agreements, on-line databases and on-line regulatory assistance.
     Since its release in November, at least five institutions,
ranging in size from 30 employees to 150 employees, have purchased the
software.
     BAN has learned one large banking organization will consider
endorsing and distributing the product at its next meeting within the
next two months.

Pricing

     "For small organizations, [HR Task Counselor] is an affordable
alternative to hiring an HR manager.  They can't afford to pay $40,000
to $50,000 for someone to manage 50 employees," said Jeff Schmitz
president of Jam.LOGIC.  "For larger organizations, it is an
alternative to hiring an HR assistant."
     One software license for a bank with less than 50 employees will
cost $600 to cover first-year maintenance and regulatory updates.  The
average sale in the banking arena has been $3,000, according to
Schmitz.
     Large organizations will input job descriptions and place them on
the network so the entire institution has one set standard.  
     In addition, each module is user-defined with passwords.  For
example, marketing managers only can look at the performance reviews
of their employees, not of the entire company.  (Jeff Schmitz,
Jam.LOGIC Designs, 800/750-8113.)   
***********************
HR Task Counselor Clients

Valley Bank         Mega Bank
Brighton, Colo.     Englewood, Colo.
100 employees       56 employees
6 branches          4 branches
Julie Durrim:       Roberta Houseley:
303/659-3450        303/740-2265

Aurora National     Evergreen National
Aurora, Colo.       Evergreen, Colo.
35 employees        150 employees
1 branch            5 branches
Carol Thomas:       Lynna Kay Sullivan:
303/364-7671        303/670-2700
***********************




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
BANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 24, 1996

1995 STORIES

KEY:
Article
Issue
Page

Case Studies/Solutions
Thrift Leverages Technology To Be More Like a Bank 
March 22
3

Trust Company Relies on Consultant In Conversion
Nov. 1
3

Fidelity and State Street Services Earn Gold Awards
Nov. 29
8

Client/Server
Hewlett-Packard Steps Up Efforts in Banking Industry
April 5
1

First Chicago Saves Time and Money with TradeConnection
April 19
3

Banks Lead Other U.S. Industries in Client/Server... 
July 12
8

The Hot Technology Companies in Your Industry
Aug. 9
1     

Conference Reports
Focusing Marketing Initiatives on Individuals... 
Feb. 22
1

Security Top Issue... To Surf the Internet
April 5
4

NOAC 1995 Report: NOAC Focuses on Technology
May 31
4
Debate over Technology Control Continues at NOAC
June 14
1

Start Home Banking Programs Now
Oct. 4
1

Bankers Evaluate Newest Core Accounting Systems
Oct. 18
1

Banking Marketplace Must Move to the Three A's
Nov. 15
1

Gates Tries To Alleviate Banker's Fears
Dec. 13
1

Contracts/Mergers
Outsourcing Broadens its Reach
March 8
1

IBM Shows its Stuff With Two Automation Deals
April 19
4

Justice Challenges Microsoft-Intuit Acquisition
May 3
1

Fiserv, Alltel Top Competition as Big Banks Continue...
May 17
4

Microsoft Backs Off, Intuit To Partner with Banks
May 31
8

Bank Consolidation Brings Technological Challenges
June 29
4

Vendors Benefit from Merger Mania
July 12
4

Interstate Banking Advice Offered from the Trenches
Aug. 23
4

Now the Real Work Begins for Chase and Chemical
Sept. 6
1

How To Save Your Job if Your Bank Merges
Sept. 6
3

Early, Cloud Acquisition Boosts IBM's Call Center...
Sept. 20
8

Document Management
Get a Grip on Document Management
Feb. 8
1

Rocky Times for Workflow Market
March 8
8

Don't Let the Standards Train Leave Without You
April 19
1
 
Hardware
Flat-Panel Technology Provides Space-Saving...
Feb. 8
8

Extra Horse Power in Mainframes Gives Banks... 
Feb. 22
6

Unisys and Intel Offer Server
May 3
8

Checkmate Scanners Speed Teller Line, Detect Fraud
June 14
8

IBM Delivers on AS/400 Promise
June 28
1

Amdahl Updates Server with CMOS Technology
Sept. 6
8

Marketplace Profile
Hardware Provider: Sun Microsystems
March 22
6

Software Provider: Associated Software Consultants
April 5
6

Data Processing Company: Provesa Inc. 
April 19
6

Information Services Provider: E.R.I.I.S 
May 3
6
Middleware Provider: Connecting Old, New Systems ...
May 17
6

Database Vendor: Informix Leads in Parallel Processing
May 31
6

Workflow Vendor: Intelus Focuses On Vertical ... 
June 14
6

Database Vendor: Worth Encourages Customer-Based ...
June 28
6

Commercial Lending Software Vendor: Baker Hill ...
July 12
6

Data Processor: Fiserv To Compete in Home Banking
July 26
4

Software Vendor: Sterling Leverages Electronic ... 
Aug. 9
6

Outsourcer: BISYS Diversifies Business Applications
Aug. 23
6

Software Vendor: Compliance Firm Branches Out ... 
Sept. 6
6

Software Vendor: Servantis Makes Changes To Compete ... 
Sept. 20
6

Outsourcer: Customer Access Easing Banks' Call Volumes
Oct. 4
6

Relational Database Vendor: Red Brick Systems Moves ... 
Oct. 18
6

Data Processor: First Commerce Finds Niche ... 
Nov. 1
6

Information Management Vendor: Unisys Relies ... 
Nov. 15
6

ATM Vendor: Diebold Doing More Than ATM's
Dec. 13
6

Software Vendor: Hogan Move To Outsourcing May ... 
Dec. 27
4
    
Miniguide
Database Marketing Vendors
Feb. 22
3

Home Banking Services
March 8
6

Imaging and Document Management Services
May 3
3

Platform Automation Systems
July 12
3

Platform Automation Systems
July 26
3

Interactive Kiosk Vendors
Dec. 27
3

Networks 
East-West Bank's New Platform Gives Power ... 
Jan. 25
6

Disaster Recovery Study Says LANS at Higher Risk...
Feb. 8
4

Farmer's Capital Solves Data Transfer Issues... 
June 28
3

Building Your Bank's Client-Server Systems
Oct. 18
4

New Products
Shawmut To Offer TV, Phone Banking This Year
Jan. 25
8

Online Network To Offer Instant Mortgage Rates... 
Feb. 22
8

Capital One Bank Provides Interactive Card Application
March 22
8

New Invoice Imaging Increases Wholesale Lockbox... 
April 19
8

Cybercash, First Omaha To Test Future of Internet...
May 17
8

First Bank-Owned Gateway To Premiere on Internet
May 31
1

Royal Bank Uses IBM Technology in New Check...
June 28
2

Standard Register Brings Item Processing to Branches
June 28
8

Retail Delivery Update
Aug. 23
8

Tandem Customers To Access Channel Speed
Nov. 1
1

RDS
Meca Software To Help Banks Compete with Microsoft
May 17
1

Home Banking Race Continues-Microsoft Signs Two ... 
July 12
1

Retail Delivery Update
Aug. 23
8

Verifone Invests in CyberCash
Sept. 6
5

Intuit Reveals Quicken for 96
Sept. 20
3

Industry's First Bank-owned Internet Gateway ...
Oct. 18
8

ATM Technology Secures Payments
Nov. 1
8

Keys To Customer Success: Pricing, Speed of Services
Nov. 15
8

Hardware May Advance Electronic Transactions
Nov. 29
1

First Union Smart Card Moves to Market Slowly
Nov. 29
4
MasterCard Picks Servantis To Support MasterBanking
Nov. 29
5
Incumbency Is Greatest On-line Asset of Banks
Dec. 13
8

Using Interactive Kiosks To Reach Customers
Dec. 27
1

Software
Windows 95 Delay Hurts Vendors More Than Banks
Jan. 25
1

IBM's Parallel Visual Explorer Helps Banks See...
Feb. 8
3

Eight Banks Adopt Sterling's Electronic Check... 
March 8
4

Technology Revolutionizes Software Licensing
March 22
1

Banking Management Software Packages Abound
April 5
8

Small Bank Automating To Compete with Rivals 
May 3
4

Fulton Uses Profitability Models in Business Decisions
May 3
5

Texas Bank Makes Servants its Home Banking Software
May 17
3

Banctec, Recognition Merge; Future of Software... 
May 31
3

Operating System Wars Could Rock Industry
June 14
4

Home Banking Race Continues-Microsoft Signs Two
July 12
1

Banks Ally with Software Competitors
July 26
1

DOJ Conditionally Clears CA's Legent Acquisition
Aug. 9
8

Virginia Bank Measures Profit with IPS Systems
Oct. 4
4

More Banks Using Windows NT
Oct. 18
3

Banks Can Save Money with Call Center Speech Agents
Dec. 13
5

Call Center Software Becomes Bank Specific
Dec. 27
8

Strategies
Banks Experience Mixed Results with Prodigy Offering
Jan. 25
4

Get a Grip on Document Management
Feb. 8
1

Using Customer Database Wisely Will Keep You ... 
Feb. 22
4

Rocky Times for Workflow Market
March 8
8

Banks Earmark Technology Dollars for ... 
March 22
4

Benchmarking Changes Help Banks Evaluate Technology
April 5
3

Wal-Mart Houses Banking Branches
April 19
5

Meca Software To Help Banks Compete with Microsoft
May 17
1

Banks Need To Leverage Cyberspace Technology
July 26
8

Credit Unions Offer Lessons for Banks in Customer Service
Aug. 9
4

Chemical Takes Huge Step Toward Imaging
Aug. 23
1
The Benefits of a Datawarehouse
Sept. 6
4

Screen Phones Losing Favor with Bankers
Sept. 20
1

AT&T To Focus on Financial Industry
Oct. 4
5

Banking Executives Propose More Technology Spending 
Oct. 4
8

How To Negotiate Your Next Software Contract
Nov. 1
4

How To Negotiate Your Outsourcing Contract
Nov. 15
4

Incumbency Is Greatest On-line Asset of Banks
Dec. 13
8

Tips For Negotiating Your Facilities Management Deal
Dec. 27
6

Telecommunications 
Screen Phones Losing Favor with Bankers
Sept. 20
1

Banks Using Call Centers To Save Money, Boost Profits
Sept. 20
4

Early, Cloud Acquisition Boosts IBM's Call Center...
Sept. 20
8

AT&T To Focus on Financial Industry
Oct. 4
5 

Outsourcer: Customer Access Easing Banks' Call Volumes
Oct. 4
6




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-27</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B021-188</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi76.html 205.156.212.5 19970115003601 text/html 41635
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:33:45 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:22 GMT
Content-length: 41446
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi76.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
BANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet <BR>
January 10, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><A HREF = "#1"><LI>7TH CIRCUIT REVERSES&nbsp;DISMISSAL OF LOAN&nbsp;FLIPPING CLAIMS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(879 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><A HREF = "#2"><LI>9TH CIR.: NO CLAIM BY&nbsp;SHAREHOLDERS TO RECOVER&nbsp;RECEIVERSHIP LOSSES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(495 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>CONVICTION IN ELABORATE&nbsp;REAL ESTATE SCHEME IS&nbsp;UPHELD IN 10TH CIRCUIT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(432 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>ORAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN&nbsp;LANDOWNER AND BANK NOT&nbsp;AS BINDING AS WRITTEN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(817 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>FIRST NATIONAL BANK OF&nbsp;BOSTON PETITIONS 11TH CIR.&nbsp;FOR WRIT OF MANDAMUS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(708 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><A HREF = "#6"><LI>INVESTMENT COMPANY MUST&nbsp;PAY RENT FROM COMMERCIAL&nbsp;PROPERTY TO LENDER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(670 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><A HREF = "#7"><LI>10TH CIRCUIT AFFIRMS&nbsp;CREDITOR CANNOT&nbsp;EXECUTE UPON MORTGAGES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(472 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><A HREF = "#8"><LI>DC COURT SUPPORTS BANK'S&nbsp;MOTION TO STRIKE CLASS&nbsp;ACTION ALLEGATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(456 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><A HREF = "#9"><LI>SECOND CIRCUIT SUPPORTS&nbsp;RECOMMENDATION TO KEEP&nbsp;BANKER OUT OF BANKS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(531 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><A HREF = "#10"><LI>10TH CIRCUIT UPHOLDS&nbsp;RETIREMENT FUND'S RIGHT&nbsp;TO KEEP CONTRIBUTIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(629 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
BANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 10, 1996

7TH CIRCUIT REVERSES
DISMISSAL OF LOAN
FLIPPING CLAIMS

The Seventh Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on Dec. 14, by a 2-1
margin, overturned a Chicago federal judge's order dismissing a
putative RICO class action brought against a finance company for
alleged loan flipping practices.  Emery v. American General
Finance
Inc., No. 95-1037 (7th Cir.).

The majority found that the plaintiff had sufficiently alleged
her
predicate claims of mail fraud so as to survive a motion to
dismiss.

Verna Emery first approached American General Finance for a loan
in
July 1992.  The lender issued her a three-year loan for $1,983;
the
finance charges over the term of the loan amounted to $1,327.
American General sent Emery a letter the following January,
stating
that she was entitled to borrow an additional $750.

Seeking an additional $200, Emery responded to the offer;
American
General's branch manager gave her forms for the refinancing of
her
original loan with additional funds advanced.  Emery signed a new
note for $2,399 with a finance charge of $1,641.  Emery's monthly
payments increased by roughly $20, effectively costing her $1,200
for the right to get $200 immediately.  (Such disclosure was not
required by the Truth in Lending Act, the Seventh Circuit noted,
as
the statute regards such transactions as a reborrowing of the
original loan amount.)

Emery filed her action in the Northern District of Illinois,
alleging that the lender engaged in a pattern of soliciting its
customers by mail for the loan of additional funds, without
informing them that the costs of refinancing are far greater than
those connected with taking out a separate loan.
The trial court granted the defense's dismissal motion in
December
1994, concluding that the plaintiff failed to identify any
specific
false statement of material fact allegedly made by the defendant.

The lower court also found that the plaintiff failed to cite to
any
case holding a failure to disclose actionable under the federal
mail fraud statute.

In a review authored by Chief U.S. Circuit Judge Richard A.
Posner,
the Seventh Circuit stated that "all the [mail fraud] statute
punishes is deliberate fraud."  While having no quibble with the
proposition that mere failure to disclose does not constitute
mail
fraud, the panel stated that "[w]hether a failure to disclose is
fraudulent depends on context."

Judge Posner wrote that the panel does "not of course know the
state of mind of the employees of American General Finance who
drafted the letter to Emery and its other customers; nor can the
plaintiff have more than an inkling until she has an opportunity
to
conduct pretrial discovery."  In viewing the letter in the
context
of the complaint's allegations, the court continued, "the letter
is
seen to be replete with falsehoods and half truths."

With respect to the lower court's finding that Emery failed to
allege a violation of the Truth in Lending Act, the panel stated,
"Suppose Emery were blind.  Or retarded.  Would anyone argue that
shoving a Truth in Lending Act disclosure form in front ofher
face
would be a defense to fraud?  The allegation is that she belongs
to
a class of borrowers who are not competent interpreters of such
forms and that the defendant knows this and sought to take
advantage of it," Judge Posner wrote.

As to the lower court's finding that Emery failed to plead a
fiduciary relationship between herself and the defendant, the
panel
wrote that "it is not true that if you are not a fiduciary
anything
goes, short of false statements.  A half truth, or what is
usually
the same thing a misleading omission, is actionable as fraud,
including mail fraud if the mails are used to further it, if it
is
intended to induce a false belief and resulting action to the
advantage of the misleader and the disadvantage of the misled."
The panel stated that it was not deeming loan flipping to be
fraud
or that the defendant engaged in fraud.  "All we know is that the
allegations of fraud are sufficient to withstand a motion to
dismiss the complaint for failure to state a claim.  There is a
state of facts consistent with the complaint that if proved would
establish a violation of the mail fraud statute, and no more is
required at this stage for the suit to continue."

Judge Posner did find meritorious the defendant's alternative
arguments that Emery failed to plead mail fraud with FRCP 9(b)
particularity.  The panel found Emery's allegations of the fraud
perpetrated upon her sufficient, but that she only generally
averred that American General did the same to other customers.

The panel wrote that a Rule 9(b) dismissal would have been
proper,
but that Emery should have been given the opportunity to amend
her
complaint.  The appellate panel then reversed and remanded.

Judge William J. Bauer concurred in the judgment.

Dissenting, Judge John L. Coffey stated that "[t]he cases in
which
this court has held that  non-disclosure' may be deemed
fraudulent
all involved a special circumstance of some kind....  There were
no
such special circumstances in this case.  AGF, as Emery's
creditor,
was not a fiduciary....  AGF did not engage in a  wide variety of
deceptive actions,' nor can its conduct vis-a-vis Emery be fairly
described as an  elaborate attempt at concealment.'"




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
BANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 10, 1996

9TH CIR.: NO CLAIM BY
SHAREHOLDERS TO RECOVER
RECEIVERSHIP LOSSES

A group of bank shareholders, charging the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corp. with fraud on the court, will not be able to
recover funds they lost when the agency took over receivership
from
a failed bank, a panel of the Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals
held Dec. 26.  Herring et al. v. Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.,
No. CV-93-00127-EHC (9th Cir.).

The circuit court affirmed a decision of the U.S. District Court
for the District of Arizona, stating that a party with no
interest
in the litigation generally has no standing.

In September 1981, the Arizona Superintendent of Banks placed
Southwestern Bank in receivership.  On May 1, 1990, the FDIC, as
court-appointed receiver, petitioned the Arizona Superior Court
to
enter an order approving payment of a final liquidating dividend,
payment of interest on claims, sale of any newly discovered
assets,
disposal of Southwestern's books and records and termination of
the
receivership.

The shareholders, Morris Herring, Raymond Herring, James N.
Corbett, Luis Valenzuela, Armando Alfaro and Sherman Montgomery,
who had invested in the Southwestern Bank, filed objections,
complaining of faulty accounting and insufficient information
regarding the receivership and alleged $530,124 loss.  The
shareholders requested the court to order a more specific
accounting or allow shareholders leave to examine the
receivership.

After hearings and the filing of post-petition briefs, the
Superior
Cour overruled the shareholders' objections.  The court held that
the disputed item of $530,124 consisted of losses sustained on
the
liquidation of assets and that the FDIC was not subject to
surcharge for this amount.  The court further held that the FDIC
was entitled to interest on its own claim, but that the
receivership funds were insufficient to cover the FDIC's claim
even
if the $530,124 was disallowed.  On Aug. 14, 1991, the court
terminated the receivership.

After being turned down by the state Supreme Court to review
their
petition that the FDIC perpetrated a fraud on the court, the
shareholders filed with the Arizona Superior Court an independent
action pursuant to Rule 60(b) to set aside the judgment for fraud
on the court.  The FDIC removed the case to federal district
court.
The shareholders alleged that the FDIC knowingly submitted false
accounting figures when it petitioned the court to terminate
receivership and presented perjured testimony to the court
concerning a bank receivership asset account labeled "other
assets/judgments."

The FDIC moved for summary judgment.  Following briefing and oral
argument, the district court granted summary judgment on two
grounds: (1) that res judicata and collateral estoppel barred the
shareholders' action, and (2) that the FDIC committed no fraud on
the court.

The circuit court found that, because the shareholders cannot
recover their funds, they have no standing.  The panel affirmed
the
district court's finding of summary judgment on their fraud on
the
court claim.

The shareholders were represented by Conrad Herring of San Diego.

The FDIC was represented by Lawrence G.D. Scarborough of Brown &
Bain in Phoenix.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
BANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 10, 1996

CONVICTION IN ELABORATE
REAL ESTATE SCHEME IS
UPHELD IN 10TH CIRCUIT

Over the pleas of the defendants, the 10th Circuit U.S. Court of
Appeals on Jan. 5 upheld their multicount convictions in district
court arising from a complex real estate fraud, including mail
fraud, wire fraud and making false statements in connection with
the scheme.  United States v. Austin et al., No. 91-CR-147
(10th Cir.).

Defendants Donald Austin and James Grandgeorge claimed that the
U.S. District Court for the District of Colorado-imposed
restitution of $12,618,772 was too high.  Based upon defaulted
loans, the district court determined the victims of the scheme
lost
more than $20 million.  The district court also sentenced Austin
to
a term of 27 years and Grandgeorge to a term of 23 years.  Each
was
given a sentence of five years' probation following release.

The essence of the scheme was to purchase properties from
legitimate sellers.  The defendants recruited numerous people to
act as "strawmen buyers," who secured mortgages from U.S.
Mortgage
Co. which were, in turn, insured by the U.S. Department of
Housing
and Urban Development (HUD).  Despite HUD's requirement that each
purchase be funded with a minimum of 15% downpayment by the
purchasers, no such investment was made by the strawmen.

Closing documents were drawn, however, which falsely stated the
downpayments were made.  The defendants paid the strawmen $1,000
for each of the transactions in which they participated.
Although
the defendants assured the strawmen the defendants would be
responsible for the payment of loans to the properties, no such
payments were made, and the properties went into foreclosure.

The defendants incorporated Fidelity Escrow Services, which they
used as an independent entity in connection with the sales
transaction to give the transactions the appearance of
legitimacy.
The use of Fidelity convinced the loan closer on the strawmen
purchases to believe the downpayments were paid by the purchasers
in cash or certified funds.

The defendantsalso arranged for all loans to be handled through
U.S. Mortgage, which was able to charge high interest rates
because
the purchasers had no real interest in the properties.  The high
interest rate and the prospect of HUD insurance made the loans
attractive to secondary lenders.  The processing of the loans
granted by U.S. Mortgage to the strawmen was done by three people
who were paid kickbacks by the defendants.  Although the
defendants' scheme involved hundreds of properties, 157 were
identified in the indictment.

Austin contended that the district court erred in imposing
restitution upon him because there was no proof of his ability to
pay.  However, the 10th Circuit concluded that Austin did little
to
prove this claim.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
BANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 10, 1996

ORAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN
LANDOWNER AND BANK NOT
AS BINDING AS WRITTEN

Since the alleged oral agreement between a landowner and her bank
to prevent foreclosure on her properties contradicts the terms of
the written agreement between the two parties, a California
appeals
court on Dec. 22 affirmed a trial court's grant of summary
judgment
to the bank to foreclose on the property.  Howard v. First
Nationwide Bank, No. A067566 (CA Ct. App., 1st Dist.).

The California Court of Appeal, First District, concluded that
since an alleged oral agreement between Ruth Fairley Howard and
Keith G. Becher, a First Nationwide Bank (FNB) liquidation
supervisor, directly contradicted the terms of the written
agreement between the two parties, Howard's appeal to seek a
reversal of the summary judgment by the Alameda County Superior
Court is without merit.

In 1986, Howard and her husband, Mark Howard, a commercial real
estate broker who was then in the business of buying and selling
properties for his own account, borrowed $210,000 from FNB to
purchase commercial property in Richmond.  The Howards executed a
standard promissory note and deed of trust on the property,
agreeing to pay off the loan in monthly installments and giving
FNB
the usual right to foreclose on the property if they failed to do
so.

In 1989, Mark Howard died of cancer.  The plaintiff spent two
years
caring for him and her mother, who was also terminally ill.
Howard
also struggled with her own condition, lupus.  During this
period,
the Howards' financial properties fell into disarray.  Payments
were not made to lenders, including FNB.  In June 1988, Howard
filed for bankruptcy.

Despite filing for bankruptcy, Howard continued to make payments
on
the loan to FNB for the next five months.  When the payments
stopped in November 1988, the bank moved for an order lifting the
automatic stay in the bankruptcy action so that it could begin
foreclosure on the loan's collateral.  Howard agreed to the
dissolution of the stay in exchange for FNB's agreement to defer
foreclosure for two and one-half months.

Howard resumed making payments on the loan for almost a year, but
again fell into default.  In November 1989, FNB sent her a
standard
late notice, giving her 30 days to bring the loan current.  When
Howard did not respond, FNB waited more than two months before
issuing a notice of default and electing to sell the property.
The
notice gave her three months to avoid foreclosure.

After the plaintiff did not bring the loan current, FNB scheduled
the trustee's sale for Aug. 8, 1990.  Howard asked for another
postponement and brought Fred Mangrum, a real estate broker and
friend, with her to meet with Becher.  They asked him to postpone
for sale for one month.

Howard said Mangrum would buy the Richmond property, with the
proceeds to pay off the loan and put the remainder of her
financial
affairs in order.  Although Mangrum had expressed an interest in
buying the property since the preceding January, a definitive
sale
price had not been set nor any written sales agreement executed.

 FNB, through Becher, and Howard agreed that if she paid the
escrow
arrears by Aug. 7, 1990, FNB would postpone the scheduled sale
for
two weeks until Aug. 22.  Also, if Howard would then pay one-half
the loan arrears by Aug. 22, FNB would postpone the sale an
additional 30 days, until Sept. 21.

Howard paid the first installment.  The day before the second
installment was due, Mangrum informed FNB that she could not pay
even one-half the next installment and needed another
postponement.
FNB agreed to postpone the trustee's sale if  Howard adhered to a
payment schedule.

Although the prior extensions had not been memorialized in a
writing signed by Howard, Becher at this point insisted that the
revised payment schedule must be written and signed by the
plaintiff.

Contrary to Becher's testimony, Howard testified that, sometime
prior to execution of the written agreement, Becher told her
that,
in return for three payments totaling approximately $14,000, FNB
would "cancel" the foreclosure and await the sale of the property
to Mangrum.

On Nov. 19, 1992, Howard filed her complaint against FNB and
Becher.  The complaint alleged claims for fraud, breach of oral
contract, intentional interference with contract, unfair business
practices and intentional infliction of emotional distress.

The pivotal allegation of the complaint was the existence and
breach of the oral agreement to "halt the foreclosure" in return
for partial repayment of the loan balance.

The defendants filed an answer on April 6, 1003, denying all of
the
plaintiff's allegations and raising numerous affirmative
defenses,
including various statutes of limitations.

On June 24, 1994, after conducting discovery, defendants moved
for
summary judgment on numerous grounds, including the contention
that
plaintiff's claims were barred by the parol evidence rule and
applicable statutes of limitation and were substantively without
merit.

The court affirmed the judgment.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
BANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 10, 1996

FIRST NATIONAL BANK OF
BOSTON PETITIONS 11TH CIR.
FOR WRIT OF MANDAMUS

The 11th Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on Nov. 30 granted the
First
National Bank of Boston's petition for a writ of mandamus,
instructing the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of
Florida to recall the remand and reinstate its case against a
Florida man in a dispute over a consumer loan.  In re First
National Bank of Boston, No. 95-5008 (11th Cir.).

The petition for the writ required the circuit court to decide
whether a district court can remand a case sua sponte within the
30-day period following removal notice provided in 28 U.S.C.
Section  1447(c) for motions to remand.

The district court remanded the case to state court during this
time period.  Because the circuit court concluded that the 1988
amendments to Section 1447(c) precluded the district court from
sua
sponte remand, the court granted the petition.

The origin of the present petition is the related federal case
filed in 1989 by Society for Savings in the U.S. District Court
for
the Southern District of Florida, concerning a consumer loan
secured by a motor yacht extended to Jerome H. Rogers (Society
for
Savings v. M/Y "CONJA", No. 89-6167-CIV-PAINE [SD FL]).

That case was settled by surrender of the vessel to Society for
Savings and the agreed payment of $13,000, representing the
difference in the value of the vessel and the outstanding debt.
Thereafter, various credit reporting agencies showed this loan as
a bad debt.

In 1995, Rogers sued petitioner First National Bank of Boston in
the 15th Judicial Circuit for Palm Beach County, which he alleged
is the successor to Society for Savings with offices in Palm
Beach
County, FL, and claimed damages exceeding $15,000 for Bank of
Boston's failure to correct credt information relating to Rogers
(Rogers v. Bank of Boston, No. CL 95 347AB [FL Cir. Ct., Palm
Beach
Cty., filed Jan. 17, 1995]).

Subsequently, Rogers filed a settlement demand, requesting
compensatory and punitive damages of $650,000.  Bank of Boston
filed an amended answer and affirmative defenses that denied the
material allegations of the complaint, including the allegation
that Bank of Boston maintained an office in Palm Beach County.

On June 13, 1995, Bank of Boston removed the case to the U.S.
District Court for the Southern District of Florida pursuant to
28
U.S.C. Section Section 1441 and 1446, and asserted complete
diversity (Rogers v. Bank of Boston, No. 95--8366--CIV--NESBITT
[SD FL, filed June 13, 1995]).

Bank of Boston represented that it is a national banking
association with its principal place of business in
Massachusetts,
making it a Massachusetts citizen, and that the amount in
controversy exceeded $50,000 in compliance with 28 U.S.C. Section
1332(a).

On June 19, 1995, the district court sua sponte remanded the case
to the 11th Judicial Circuit for Dade County.  The district court
determined that Bank of Boston's failure to reveal the state in
which it is incorporated constituted an inadequate showing of its
citizenship for diversity jurisdiction.  The court's order was
filed on June 22, 1995, and the case was closed.

On June 28, 1995, Bank of Boston moved for reconsideration and
vacation of the district court's remand order and for leave to
amend its notice of removal.  The bank explained that, as a
national banking association, it is not incorporated under any
state's law and that its citizenship is determined by its
principal
place of business.

The bank also filed an amended notice of removal, stating this
explanation of its citizenship and clarifying that it maintains
no
branch offices in Florida, although its independent subsidiary
mortgage corporation maintains at least one branch office in
Florida.

On July 21, 1995, the district court entered an order striking
Bank
of Boston's motion for reconsideration and leave to file an
amended
notice of removal because it no longer had jurisdiction over the
case.

The bank then petitioned the court for a writ of mandamus
directing
the district court to recall its remand and to reinstate the case
on its docket.

Pursuant to Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure 21(b), the
circuit
court directed the district judge to respond to Bank of Boston's
argument that the district court's remand was unauthorized under
28
U.S.C. Section 1447(c).




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
BANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 10, 1996

INVESTMENT COMPANY MUST
PAY RENT FROM COMMERCIAL
PROPERTY TO LENDER

In a diversity suit appeal, the Seventh Circuit U.S. Court of
Appeals on Dec. 12 reversed a decision by the U.S. District Court
for the Northern District of Illinois, ruling that an investment
company must pay Fidelity Mutual Life Insurance Co. rent money on
a commercial property.  Fidelity Mutual Life Insurance Co. v.
Harris Trust and Savings Bank et al., No. 95-1884 (7th Cir.).

The district court ruled that defendant Kaiser Investments could
refuse to pay on the grounds that a provision in a "Borrower's
Affidavit" requiring the indemnification of rents before the
appointment of a receiver when the trust defaulted was made
unenforceable by the "rents and profits rule."

The case was remanded to the district court for further
proceedings
consistent with this opinion.

In 1986, Fidelity made a $3.6 million loan to an Illinois land
trust that held title to a commercial property.  The trustee was
an
Illinois bank and the beneficiary of the partnership, Kaiser
Investments.

The loan was secured by a mortgage on the property, but i
addition,
Kaiser Investments executed a "Borrower's Affidavit" that
contained
a number of warranties and representations designed to induce
Fidelity to make a loan.

One of the paragraphs of the affidavit states that
"notwithstanding
anything to the contrary contained in the Loan Papers...Borrower
(Kaiser) shall be and remain personally obligated and liable for,
and shall indemnify Lender against the Property for any period
subsequent to an event of default, and shall pay over the same to
the Lender upon receipt, except to the extent that the same have
been applied in payments of any amounts due Lender under the Note
or other Loan Papers."

The trust defaulted on the loan in February 1993, and in July of
that year, having sent a notice of default the preceding month,
Fidelity brought this suit against the bank and Kaiser
Investments.

The suit asked for foreclosure and other relief, including the
appointment of a receiver and indemnification for any rents
collected after the default.  The district court appointed a
receiver in September 1993, and the receiver began collecting the
rents.  Later, the court decreed foreclosure, and the property
was
sold at a price that left Fidelity with a loss of more than $1.3
million on its loan.

U.S. District Judge James B. Moran held the refusal proper on the
grounds that the provision in the affidavit required
indemnification by the "rents and profits rule."

According to Illinois common law, this rule forbids a mortgagee
to
enforce a provision of a mortgage assigning rents or other income
of the mortgaged property to him until the mortgagee takes
possession of the property.  The judge, therefore, dismissed the
claim and, since other claims in the case had already been
resolved, the dismissal was the final order in the case and was
appealable.

However, Chief Circuit Court Judge Richard A. Posner ruled on
appeal that the indemnity agreement in the Borrower's Affidavit
was
"separate" from the loan papers, and that the borrower, Kaiser,
was
not technically the mortgagor, affects the applicability of the
rents and profits rule.

Judge Posner stated that the rule would be a joke if it could be
avoided by designating certain papers involved in the loan "the
loan papers" and reciting that the assignment of rents was not
among them.  He said it would also be a joke if, as in this case,
that of an Illinois land trust, only the trustee was forbidden to
make an enforceable assignment of rents.

In an Illinois land trust, which is becoming a common mode of
ownership in Illinois and other states, property that is subject
to
a mortgage is "owned" by a trustee whose only function is to hold
title, leaving management and control of the property entirely in
the hands of the beneficiary of the trust.

The agreement between the two parties was that Kaiser was to pay
over the rents to Fidelity upon receipt of the rents by Kaiser.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
BANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 10, 1996

10TH CIRCUIT AFFIRMS
CREDITOR CANNOT
EXECUTE UPON MORTGAGES

A ruling that a default judgment creditor is not entitled to
execute upon mortgages in Texas owned by the Government National
Mortgage Association (GNMA) as a matter of law was affirmed Dec.
18
by the 10th Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals.  Pipkin v. Mortgage
Creditcorp, Inc. et al., No. 94-6443 (WD OK).

The opinion involves the question of whether a default judgment
creditor may divest the interest of GNMA in certain Texas real
estate mortgages solely because GNMA failed to record its
interest
in the mortgages in adherence to the law.

Plaintiff Roger W. Pipkin III appealed the district court's grant
of summary judgment in favor of GNMA and its mortgage services,
Midland Mortgage, Co., MidFirst Bank and Northwest Bank
(collectvely, the Midland Group).  The district court held that
Texas law was superseded by GNMA's enabling stature and that
Pipkin
was not entitled to execute upon Texas mortgages because GNMA
owned
the mortgages as a matter of law.

Pipkin is the judgment creditor of defendants Mortgage
Creditcorp,
Inc. and Westmark Mortgage Corp. (the Westmark Parties), two
defunct mortgage serving companies.  In 1994, Pipkin obtained a
$4.8 million default judgment against the Westmark Parties in
Texas
state court.  That court then entered the post-judgment order
instructing the Midland Group, the defendants-in-intervention and
third-party plaintiffs, to turn over to Pipkin several Texas real
estate mortgages the court deemed "nonexempt assets of the
Westmark
Parties.

To execute his judgment on the Oklahoma-based Midland Group,
Pipkin
filed the post-judgment order in Oklahoma City.  Subsequently,
the
Midland Group obtained a stay of execution from the state court
and
filed a petition in intervention naming GNMA as third-party
defendant.  GNMA removed the case to the U.S. District Court for
the Western District of Oklahoma.

GNMA and the Midland Group then moved for summary judgment,
arguing
that the mortgages sought by Pipkin were owned by GNMA, not the
Westmark Parties.  Pipkin countered that, under Texas law, the
Westmark Parties continued to own the mortgages because GNMA
failed
to record its interest in the mortgages.

The district court granted GNMA's and the Midland Group's motions
on the ground that GNMA's enabling statute, 12 U.S.C. Section
1721(g), expressly preempts any Texas law limiting GNMA's
ownership
rights in the mortgages.

Under Section 1721(g), Congress vested GNMA with broad powers to
carry out the congressional objective of establishing and
encouraging a secondary market for home mortgages, the district
court said.

Pipkin contended, however, by virtue of the Texas recording
statute
and GNMA's failure to record its interest in the pooled
mortgages,
the Westmark Parties own those mortgages under Texas law.  As a
judgment creditor of the Westmark Parties, Pipkin argued, he is
entitled to execute on those mortgages.

The circuit court was not persuaded by Pipkin's argument and
affirmed the district court's decision.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
BANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 10, 1996

DC COURT SUPPORTS BANK'S
MOTION TO STRIKE CLASS
ACTION ALLEGATIONS

In a memorandum filed Dec. 26, the U.S. District Court for the
District of Columbia decided in favor of NationsBank Corp. and
denied class action status to a pending fair lending lawsuit
against the bank.  Lathern et al. v. NationsBank Corp. et al.,
No. 95-CV-1805 (NHJ) (D DC).

The judge had harsh words for the plaintiffs' counsel, the
Washington Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights and Urban Affairs
(WLC) for failing to timely move for class certification in a
prior
action.

The bank asked the court that the class allegations be stricken
entirely.

This action began Sept. 21, 1995, when plaintiffs filed a
complaint
containing class action allegations under the Fair Housing Act,
the
Equal Credit Opportunity Act and the Civil Rights Act of 1866.

However, by failing to move for class certification by Dec. 20,
1995, which was 90 days from the date on which the class
complaint
was filed, the plaintiffs violated Local Rule 203(b).

Accordingly, the court decided, the plaintiffs' class action
allegations should be stricken in their entirety.

John Relman, director of the fair housing project at the WLC,
said
his organization had not missed the deadline, but refused to
elaborate.  He did say WLC's position will be explained in a
future
court filing.

Class action status is important to the WLC's case against the
bank, which alleges that NationsBank discriminated against
borrowers.  At the heart of theissue is money.  If the class
action
is fought in court, NationsBank would have more to lose.  Without
class action status, the case involves 13 plaintiffs and nine
loan
applications, and the awards would be less.  As a class, the WLC
would ask NationsBank to compensate all affected consumers, which
would increase the bank's costs.

In its memorandum, the court stated that WLC had since Dec. 13,
1994, the date of its initial press conference announcing its
campaign to solicit plaintiffs for its class action against the
bank, to construct its legal argument.

To achieve this goal, the WLC used a variety of methods to
attract
plaintiffs, including an "800" hotline number, press statements
and
conferences, and print and radio interviews.

Despite this effort, the court stated that WLC was only able to
attract an additional 11 plaintiffs since the suit was filed
Sept. 21.

The court said that if the plaintiffs feel they have individual
claims, they should litigate them as such.  Also, the court held
that NationsBank should not be subjected to any further
prejudicial
adverse publicity tied to promises of class action litigation.

NationsBank is represented by Robert S. Bennett, Richard L.
Brusca,
Andrew L. Sandler and Heidi L. Mason of Skadden, Arps, Slate,
Meagher & Flom of Washington, DC.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
BANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 10, 1996

SECOND CIRCUIT SUPPORTS
RECOMMENDATION TO KEEP
BANKER OUT OF BANKS

The Second Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals ruled Jan. 2 that it
supports a prohibition order by an Acting Director (AD) for the
Office of Thrift Supervision against a former bank executive as
proper and a matter of law.  Cousin v. Office of Thrift
Supervision, Nos. 94-4206 and 94,6070 (2nd Cir.).

Also, Michael Cousin's petition for review of the final decision
and order of Jonathan L. Fiechter, AD for the OTS, prohibiting
Cousin from further participating in any manner in the conduct of
the affairs of any banking institution regulated by the OTS.

Since the petition for review of the final decision and order is
denied, the circuit court dismissed as moot the appeal of the
denial of declaratory judgment.

In August 1990, Cousin, then chairman of the board and chief
executive officer of Cross County Federal Savings Bank, was
charged
in federal court with several counts of bribery.  The OTS was
informed of the charges and, two days later, issued a temporary
suspension and prohibition from participation in the affairs of
County Federal.

Cousin then sought to have the criminal indictment against him
dropped in federal court, asserting that he was neither
physically
nor mentally fit to stand trial.

The district court agreed to dismiss the indictment against
Cousin
because he was not physically capable of standing trial; however,
included in the order dismissing the charges against Cousin,
dated
May 25, 1992, was language -- agreed to by Cousin's attorney --
to
the effect that the dismissal of the indictment did not amount to
a dismissal on the merits (Cousin v. Office of Thrift
Supervision,
840 F.Supp. 8,9-10 [ED NY 1993]).

The language was specifically included in the order to ensure
that
the dismissal was not construed as requiring the discontinuation
of
the OTS's temporary suspension and prohibition  against Cousin.

After his physical recovery, Cousin informed the OTS that he was
fit to reenter the banking world.  Despite the explicit language
in
the order dismissing his indictment, Cousin thereafter sought a
declaratory judgment in the district court that his indictment
had
been dismissed on its merits and that, as a matter of law, the
OTS
temporary suspension was required to be lifted.

In light of the language in the order dismissing his indictment,
the district court dismissed Cousin's suit on waiver grounds.
Cousin then appealed the district court's dismissal f his action.

On May 13, 1993, the OTS instituted a proceeding to permanently
prohibit Cousin from further participating in any manner in the
conduct of the affairs of any banking institution regulated by
the
OTS.  In support of the permanent prohibition, Cousin was charged
with bribery and aiding and abetting bribery.

He responded to the OTS claims, asserting a number of affirmative
defenses that focused primarily on entrapment.

A hearing of the claims was held before Administrative Law Judge
Walter J. Alprin in September 1993.  On March 31, 1994, the ALJ
issued his recommendation, disqualifying Cousin from further
participation in the banking
industry.

OTS was represented by Geraldine R. Gennet, Office of the Chief
Counsel, OTS, Washington, DC.  Cousin was represented by Ramsey
Clark, New York City.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
BANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet
January 10, 1996

10TH CIRCUIT UPHOLDS
RETIREMENT FUND'S RIGHT
TO KEEP CONTRIBUTIONS

The 10th Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on Dec. 28 reversed a
decision by the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of
Oklahoma, ruling that the lower court's decision to award a
multiple-employer pension benefit plan to the plaintiff violated
the exclusive benefit rule of the Employee Retirement Income
Security Act of 1974 (ERISA).  Resolution Trust Corp. v.
Financial
Institutions Retirement Fund, No. 95-5016 (10th Cir.).

The issue presented by this case is whether the Resolution Trust
Corp., as successor to a failed thrift institution, can recover
an
actuarial determined sum known as Future Employer Contributions
Offsets (FECO) attributable to the failed thrift as an employer
in
a multiple-employer pension benefit plan under ERISA.

The district court treated the FECO as discrete funds and awarded
them to RTC under a common law unjust enrichment theory.

Financial Institutions Retirement Fund (FIRF) is a
multiple-employer pension benefit plan under ERISA.  The fund is
a
single plan, meaning all of its 360 participating employers pay
into, and all of its approximately 35,000 employees benefit from,
a single fund.

Because of favorable market conditions in 1987, FIRF declared the
plan had reached "full funding," suspended further employer
contributions and advised its overfunded employers, including
Sooner Federal Savings and Loan Association, that the FECO would
be
used to offset the employers' future funding obligations to the
plan.

When Sooner became insolvent in 1989, the RTC, Sooner's receiver,
sold some of its assets to a successor savings association,
excepting any interest in, or claims against, FIRF.   Because of
its liquidation, Sooner was deemed to have withdrawn from FIRF.
At
the time of its insolvency, the value of Sooner's FECO credit was
approximately $4.1 million.

RTC brought the instant action against FIRF in 1989 to obtain
payment of the FECO credits, asserting a common law unjust
enrichment claim.  In response, FIRF claimed it was prohibited by
ERISA from distributing the FECO credits to RTC or to any
employer
for nonpension-related purposes.  Judgment in the amount of $4.6
million was entered in favor of RTC, and this appeal ensued.

On appeal, FIRF contended ERISA's "exclusive benefit" rule
prohibits the use of FECO balances for nonpension purposes.

The 10th Circuit agreed, citing Patterson v. Shumate, 504 U.S.
753
(1992), which denied the inclusion of pension benefits in a
bankruptcy estate.  The court also agreed with FIRF, citing to
Guidry v. Sheet Metal Workers National Pension Fund, 493 U.S. 365
(1990), which reversed the imposition of a constructive trust on
a
convicted union official's pension benefits.

The circuit court found it evident that the exact amount of the
FECO constantly varies in concert with he values of the
investments comprising the body of the fund.  Yet, the district
court found the FECO are neither hypothetical nor theoretical
because FIRF itself has stated that FECO assets are fund assets.

For this reason, RTC contended, the FECO are tangible assets of
the
fund.  The court ruled that RTC's argument missed the mark.  The
question of whether the FECO credits are needed for the payment
of
benefits can only be determined once the plan as a whole has been
terminated.

Until then, FIRF must anticipate that there could be dramatic
changes on either side, the court held.

The court concluded that RTC's removal of the FECO credits could
potentially destabilize FIRF.  Furthermore, the district court's
decision leads to the prospect of further diminution of the body
of
the plan because other employers may be encouraged to leave the
plan and remove their FECO credits, the court said.

RTC was represented by Thomas C. Morrison of Patterson, Belknap,
Webb & Tyler LLP in New York City.  FIRF was represented by
Richard
B. Noulles of Gables, & Gotwals in Tulsa.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-28</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B021-237</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi93.html 205.156.212.5 19970115003635 text/html 87210
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:34:32 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:33 GMT
Content-length: 87021
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi93.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet <BR>
January 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>UK:  DIRECT LINE'S FAMOUS LITTLE RED TELEPHONE KEEPS ON RINGING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(510 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>ITALY:  ROYAL REVOLUTION IN LOMBARDY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(343 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>US CARD ISSUERS SPONSOR SPORTS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(347 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>PROFILING TODAY'S INTERNET USER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(367 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>ADVANCE BANK AHEAD IN AUSTRALIAN INTERNET RACE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(506 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>NAB OFFERS LOAN APPROVAL OVER PHONE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(301 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>CCF LAUNCHES REMOTE `BRANCH' SERVICE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(452 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>SOCIETE GENERALE REMOTE SERVICE EXTENDED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(410 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>BANKS FUEL DIRECT MAIL BOOM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(252 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>FIRST DIRECT WINS SERVICE AWARD</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(349 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>RBOS DEFENDS ITS TESSA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(303 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>SPAIN:  BANKS OPT FOR ALTERNATIVE DISTRIBUTION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(324 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>PORTUGAL:  MUNDIAL GETS IMAGE OVERHAUL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(352 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>VIDEOCONFERENCING AT IMPERIO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(334 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>GERMAN BANKS RULE OK</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(780 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>BFG BANK STIRS GERMAN MARKET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1030 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>TAKING OFF THE FRILLS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(885 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FEATURE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>DESIGNING YOUR ON-LINE OFFERING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2445 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>CAPTURING THE CUSTOMERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2208 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>THE FUNDAMENTAL FLAWS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(655 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

UK:  DIRECT LINE'S FAMOUS LITTLE RED TELEPHONE KEEPS ON RINGING

DIRECT LINE, the direct insurer founded in 1985, is back in the
headlines again. The latest official statistics show it has grown to
become the leading comprehensive motor insurer in the UK - and by a
long way!

The insurer, whose distinctive red telephone logo has become a
household name in just ten years thanks to inspired brand management,
has seen its market share grow from 4.8 percent four years ago to 11.2
percent, according to the latest figures from Datamonitor.

"This phenomenal growth has been due to the development of a strong
brand image and a policy of undercutting the prices of most of its
closest rivals by leaving out the middleman - the broker," states the
report from the London-based research and management consultancy.

Datamonitor based its research on end-1994 returns filed by insurance
companies with the DTI (Department of Trade and Industry) and,
according to Direct Line's Adrian Webb, the gap between it and its
competitors has further widened since then.

"We have now attained a figure of 2.2 million motor policies - nearly
twice as many as our nearest rival," Webb told BMI.

This rapid rise in market share can be attributed in part to the highly
competitive rates offered by Direct Line - it claims to have expenses
of 11 percent, compared to an industry average of 25 percent, and it
passes much of its economies onto the customer.

However, insurers like Eagle Star and Norwich Union have launched their
own direct insurance operations with competitive rates, and Direct Line
now finds itself competing directly with these as well as Churchill
Insurance and others. So, how does it continue to gain ground so
rapidly, at the expense of its rivals? Many have attributed its success
story to the memorable brand image, described by one corporate image
consultant as "a marketing director's dream".

"A strong brand is one of the most important elements we have going for
us," Webb said. "There is a huge awareness of the Direct Line brand in
the market. I think that when people are thinking of phoning around for
a quote, ours is one of the first names that springs to mind."

Webb attributes this success to a strong branding strategy, and ongoing
brand advertising on radio, TV, and in the national press. "We have
ongoing campaigns to build brand awareness, or rather to build on the
brand awareness that already exists," he said. "Direct Line has been on
either TV or radio almost every day since 1990." The overall marketing
budget for 1995 was #25 million ($38.64 million).

Direct Line's foray into the home and contents insurance market has
also been, to say the least, a great success. It had been offering such
policies since 1988, but in quite a"subdued" way until 1992 or 1993
when Direct Line put its weight behind the marketing of this section of
the business. The company is now the largest household insurer in the
UK.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ITALY:  ROYAL REVOLUTION IN LOMBARDY

ROYAL INSURANCE of the UK launched its direct selling operation in
Lombardy on January 15, in a bid to provide direct motor insurance to
car owners in the Greater Milan area. The launch was preceded and
accompanied by a major marketing campaign, using the slogan
"Rivoluzione Inglese" (English Revolution), a play on the initials of
the UK insurer.

Royal declined to disclose the campaign budget "for reasons of
competition", but the first phase of the campaign began after Christmas
and ran until the launch date, with teaser posters appearing in the
Milan Metro, in bus shelters, on buses, and in other outdoor sites
around the region.

The second phase got under way on the launch day, when new posters
giving a direct response number were accompanied by radio spots and
adverts in the national dailies.

"In Italy, it is illegal to refuse motorists insurance," a spokesman
told BMI. "So, basically, we are targeting the 25-60 age group, with
better risk profiles. The 1.5 million drivers who fit that profile in
the Greater Milan area - that's the pool we will be fishing in."

According to Royal, market research undertaken after the liberalisation
of the Italian insurance market last year showed that while customers
were generally content to deal with agents, a growing number wanted the
option to deal direct with their insurer.

The new operation is closely modelled on Royal's other direct writing
operations in the UK and Spain, and fits into the insurer's strategy of
developing multi-channel distribution of personal lines business.

Customers will have a choice between receiving a quote by phone or, for
a more personal service, going along to Royal's drive-in basement at
its headquarters where they can deal directly with sales people,
inspectors and claims assessors.

Royal's strategy is to use this initiative as a testing ground, the
spokesman said, at least for the short term."When we see how this goes,
we may in the future consider further expansion in Italy."

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

US CARD ISSUERS SPONSOR SPORTS

CREDIT CARD issuers and organisations are spending millions on
sponsorship, particularly of sporting events, in order to enhance their
brand image.

The latest industry deal saw MasterCard sign a $2 million exclusive
deal with the National Hockey League last month, while it continues to
promote its gold cards at high profile golf tournaments like the PGA
Grand Slam and the Colonial. Three more important golf sponsorship
deals are on the cards, according to a MasterCard spokeswoman.

MasterCard is also heavily involved in soccer events, and is reported
to have already paid $10 million to sponsor the 1998 World Cup
championships in France - a four-year package of associated
sponsorships leading up to the championship which is said to be worth
$40 million. MasterCard and its members spent a combined $75 million in
relation to World Cup 1994 in the US.

Visa too is extremely active in the sponsorship field, and is reported
to have spent between $30 million and $35 million on sponsorship rights
on the National Football League, the Elton John tour and some
destination deals.

American Express signed on with the National Basketball League in May,
paying $30 million for three years, as well as signing a sponsorship
deal with the Dallas Cowboys football club to be the official card of
Texas Stadium, despite Visa's sponsorship supremacy over the football
league as a whole.

Cards sponsorship activity dates back to the 1984 Olympics when
American Express was a leading sponsor, but Visa subsequently took over
in 1988, and has had great success exploiting its exclusive Olympics
sponsorship rights. Such high profile sponsorship opportunities don't
come cheap, however. Visa reportedly paid $40 million for the 1992 and
1996 Olympics.

Credit card companies are not alone in their enthusiasm for sponsorship
as a marketing tool. Sponsorship will top $5.4 billion in the US next
year, said Jim Andrews, vice-president of IEG, a consultancy
specialising in sponsorship. That is 15 percent higher than the $4.7
billion forecast for the whole of 1995.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

PROFILING TODAY'S INTERNET USER

A JUST-PUBLISHED survey allows us to draw a profile of today's typical
European Internet user, and gives pointers as to what is likely to grab
his or her (although the ladies represent only 12 percent of users for
the present) attention when surfing the Net.

According to the survey by Durlacher Multimedia of London The Internet
in 1996: An investment perspective, the average Internet user is aged
between 22 and 36 with an annual income of between #13,000 ($20,000)
and #20,000. He spends between six and ten hours a week on the
Internet, has probably made one purchase through the World Wide Web,
and would be more likely to do so if happier with the security issue.

Durlacher claims its 190-page report is the "first substantial
European-orientated survey of the Internet", and would like to see it
become a benchmark for subsequent studies. Its findings are numerous
and varied.

"The World Wide Web is doubling in size every three months," said
Geoffrey Chamberlain, chief executive of Durlacher Multimedia.
"Approaching 100,000 Web sites are forecast by early 1996."

The authors concluded from their research that the first wave of
successful Internet-related businesses will include Internet access
service provision, Internet software applications provision and
Internet consultancy. The second wave will be dominated by content
provision, including provision by the financial services institutions.

The study also forecasts that by early 1996, 33.4 million users will be
connected to the Internet, and that by 2002, more than 200 million
people worldwide will be connected to at least part of the Internet,
with 150 million subscriptions to on-line services.

Security comes up again as an issue. Of 250 respondents, 23 percent had
made one or more purchases via the Web, and 87 percent expressed
interest in doing so. Fifty-seven percent stated that improved security
would certainly encourage them to shop via the Web. The authors believe
secure transaction standards will be set before the end of 1996.

According to the report, analysts expect worldwide on-line advertising
to be worth $200 million in 1996, and to top $1 billion by the end of
the next decade.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

ADVANCE BANK AHEAD IN AUSTRALIAN INTERNET RACE

ADVANCE BANK, Australia's sixth-largest bank by assets, is living up to
its name with its latest service offering to customers. It has just
become the country's first bank to allow customers access to their
accounts via the Internet. Other banks are offering product information
services on the Net in Australia.

The 300,000 or so customers of Advance's Quickphone service can now
access their accounts with their Advance card number and Quickphone PIN
when they enter the bank's World Wide Web site.

The bank is not only hoping for a large response from existing
customers, but hopes also to catch the eye of potential new customers
who will be able to view a demonstration when they call up the Advance
Web site.

Transfer funds

At first, the service will just allow business and personal customers
to call up account information, but the plan is to enhance the facility
so as to allow customers to transfer funds between accounts, make loan
repayments and see a full month's statement.

Australian banks have been cautious about providing Internet banking
because of the security issue, and have tended to sit back and wait for
the US to lead the way as regards developing security technology. With
reportedly over 900,000 Australians now regularly surfing the Net,
however, many banks have opened sites on the World Wide Web over the
past year.

These pages generally contain advertising-type information as opposed
to any real banking service. In other words, at present, most banks are
using the Internet mainly as an advertising medium.

One of the more high profile initiatives, Priority One, was set up by
AMP in October to offer home loans from the World Wide Web. It
reportedly received 7,000 queries in the first six weeks, but it
admitted that the conversion rate of Internet inquiries is lower than
from traditional inquiries.

Web presence

Back in September, Westpac launched a Web site containing loan
information. National Australia has its presence on the Web, and the
Commonwealth Bank is developing sites both on the Web and on the
Microsoft Network. In December, St George announced its Internet site
which it claims is more "interactive" than other bank pages.

With the assistance of Techway, a leading Australian information
technology company, Advance is confident that security is not a
problem. All customer information is encrypted for transmission in both
directions over the Internet so the information remains secure, it
claims.

"[Techway] has studied worldwide trends in all aspects of security on
the Internet and it can confidently claim to have secure Internet
transaction software that sets world class standards," a spokesman
said.

Although Advance has beaten its rivals to the post as regards providing
an Internet banking service, the initiative will not provide the bank
with an exclusive advantage in the market. Techway is also"talking
informally" with several others, and seems determined to market its
technology to two or three of Advance's rival banks.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

NAB OFFERS LOAN APPROVAL OVER PHONE

NATIONAL AUSTRALIA Bank, the country's largest bank by assets, has
launched what it describes as "the first concerted move into telephone
banking in Australia", offering a special telephone loans service for
personal customers.

The bank claims that its customers can now have a home loan approved in
less than 25 minutes. The service also offers approval for credit
cards, personal loans and term deposits over the phone, typically in
around 15 minutes, according to NAB. It is available to customers
anywhere in Australia seven days a week between 8am and 9pm.

Until now, Australian banks have provided customers with inquiry
services and basic transactions over the phone, the bank claims.
Indeed, NAB itself already offers these various possibilities through
its telephone banking service.

"This new service ushers in true telephone banking, whereby customers
can be provided with major services over the phone," said managing
director Don Argus.

National Telephone Bankers - as the service is called - uses a
computer-based credit assessment system, developed by the bank over the
past two years, allowing the "National Telephone Banker to give or
refuse loan approval in a matter of minutes.

"A decision is made during the initial phone call in almost all cases,"
Argus said."The National is the only bank offering this level of
convenience."

If a loan is approved, all that remains is for the customer in question
to call into a branch, have his or her income verified, and sign the
loan documents.

The launch of the service follows a six-month pilot in New South Wales
and South Australia, which exceeded all expectations, with operators
fielding over 1,000 calls a day. NAB expects to approve over 7,000
loans in the first year in service.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CCF LAUNCHES REMOTE `BRANCH' SERVICE

FRANCE'S CCF has launched a new remote banking service, Banco PC. It is
the first European banking management software program developed on a
PC, according to the bank. This interactive banking service goes far
beyond a simple data transfer on personal finance software. CCF defines
it as a real bank branch accessible by PC - a new remote banking format
which gives CCF an even broader range of services.

Banco PC is built around three main services: Banco PC Branch,
("Agence"), Banco PC Self Management, "Libre Gestion") and Banco PC
Budget. A fourth service is still in development - Banco PC Boutiques
(retail shops).

Banco PC Branch is a remote banking service via PC using the concept of
combining a bank branch graphic with a windows environment. It gives
access to basic banking services such as account balances, deposits,
credit lines, and so on, in the visual environment of a bank branch.

Banco PC Self Management can transfer a bank statement directly to a
spread sheet such as Excel or Lotus 1,2,3. This eliminates
time-consuming data entry or downloading from the Minitel. Banco PC
Budget allows the client to follow a budget using a personal financial
management software program. The CCF has signed an initial partnership
agreement with Intuit for its budget management program Quicken. Thanks
to this agreement, CCF clients using Quicken can record their banking
operations onto their respective Quicken documents to facilitate the
supervision and analysis of their spending.

CCF plans to add other partners to its initial software agreement.
Banco PC Boutiques will give CCF clients the possibility of shopping
directly from their PC, much as they are already doing through the
Minitel (Bancoscope).

The range of Banco PC services are accessible through a PC with a
windows environment, equipped with a modem and a telephone connection.
Banco PC services cost Fr29 ($5.89) monthly for the first service (any
of the four mentioned), and Fr10 for each additional service, with a
maximum monthly charge of Fr49 (tax included). The Banco PC software is
free of charge, as is the service help-line.

To aid its clients in equipping themselves, CCF offers an internal
high-speed modem at a cost of Fr1,000 (the average retail price is
Fr1,500). For their clients who don't have a computer, the multimedia
IBM Aptiva can be obtained with direct delivery from IBM.

This evolution of CCF's long-distance banking services demonstrates its
willingness to respond to the changes in consumer demand and,
therefore, its clients' needs. Currently, 10 percent of French
households have computers and by the year 2000, it is expected that 40
percent will be fully equipped.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SOCIETE GENERALE REMOTE SERVICE EXTENDED

SOCIETE GENERALE'S 680,000 clients in Paris and Hauts de Seine (one of
the more affluent regions in the Paris area) have received along with
their December bank statement the announcement of the new telephone
remote banking service, Vocalia Service, complete with phone number and
the necessary code number.

In November, Societe Generale decided to go ahead and launch Vocalia
Service without the agreement of the unions. The 680,000 clients
concerned are able to reach a "teleoperator" from Tuesday to Friday
from 8am to 9pm, and on Mondays and Saturdays from 9am to 5pm. This is
the first service available following a pilot which was carried out
with the 120,000 clients of six branch groups in the Paris area, and
using different operating times (5pm to 9pm from Tuesday to Friday and
9am to 5pm on Saturdays). As of the second quarter of 1996, this
service will be extended to all 3.5 million Societe Generale clients.

The appointed teleoperators belong to the Societe Generale staff.
Previous to the launch of the service, most operators worked in the
bank's network as client managers and were then trained to work on the
phone.

A Societe Generale spokeswoman insisted that this new service is the
result of developments predating Compagnie Bancaire's Banque Directe
entry onto the market.

"We launched the first platform with essentially Parisian groups,
practically at the same time as Banque Directe was launched," she
said."It is therefore a fully-developed project in Societe Generale,
and not just a reaction to Banque Directe." At present, the service
only concerns Paris and the Paris area.

The French unions involved have refused to accept any agreement
concerning working on a rota basis. In order to bypass this obstacle,
SocGen management decided to have Vocalia Service set up two separate
platforms enabling the service to operate on a timetable of more than
eight hours. Each platform is situated in a different location to avoid
having to set up any form of relay or rota teamwork. The 1937 decree on
bank's working hours is thus respected.

Despite this, the CFDT (Confederation Francaise Democratique du
Travail, one of the French unions) tried to stop Vocalia Service from
being launched in this fashion, by going to court.

The court, however, dismissed the case, and there was no appeal. The
service, which had been on hold pending the decision, was launched
immediately afterwards.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BANKS FUEL DIRECT MAIL BOOM

BANKS MADE a considerable contribution to the strong growth in direct
mailings last year, resulting in another record quarter for direct mail
volume. This was one of the findings of recent research from the Direct
Mail Information Service (DMIS) in London.

It was a good year all round for the direct mail industry. Figures from
the DMIS show that between July and September 1995, direct mail volume
hit 700 million items - up 4.2 percent on the same period in 1994.

Second only to the retail sector - which saw an increase in direct mail
volume of 25 percent - the banking sector increased its volume of
direct mailings by 21 percent to 202 million items for the same three
quarters.

Expenditure on direct mail in the July to September 1995 period was up
3.5 percent on the previous year, at #264.2 million ($400 million).
With only the final quarter figures to come, the DMIS expects
expenditure to hit the $1 billion mark for the second year in a row -
total expenditure was 1.05 billion in 1994.

DIRECT MAIL VOLUME

                   % share 12  % share 12  Percent     Volume 12
                   months to   months to   increase    months to
                   Sept 1994   Sept 1995   in volume   Sept 1995 (m)

The four fastest growing sectors

Retail              8.9        10.4        25          293
Banks               6.3         7.2        21          202
Manufacturers       9.9        10.8        16          302
Mail order         27.5        28.7        11          805

Source: DMIS

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

FIRST DIRECT WINS SERVICE AWARD

FIRST DIRECT, the UK's first direct bank, has won the 1995 Customer
Champion Award, as well as the Best Financial Customer Service award,
presented by Unisys and The Sunday Times.

"We were delighted to be recognised for the standard of customer
service we offer," customer services project manager Amanda Stott told
BMI. "From the launch of First Direct, we have always set out to be the
best in the world, and customer service has been a key priority."

Stott outlined various initiatives which are designed to ensure that
customer satisfaction remains high at First Direct. QUEST (Quality
Undertake Every Single Time) is a staff suggestion scheme, which allows
management to get feedback from those working directly with the
customers, and to get ideas from the customers themselves.

"Action Teams" exist too in every department, where members of staff
get together regularly and have "brainstorming" sessions.

Regular customer satisfaction surveys are also an important way of
monitoring consistency, according to Stott. Once new customers have
reached the end of their "welcome period", questionnaires are
automatically sent out, so as to catch any problems early on in the
process. These new arrivals are asked how the account opening process
went; if they had any problems; and, if so, were they dealt with
swiftly and effectively. The responses to these questionnaires are
monitored monthly.

What is more, each quarter, a survey of established customers is
carried out, involving a mailing of 10,000 or so questionnaires. First
Direct itself carries out the survey for the first three quarters, and
has the final quarter executed independently by NOP.

That said, many banks carry out similar initiatives and yet customer
satisfaction is low. Where are they going wrong?

"We had the added benefit of starting from scratch, of starting with a
clean slate," Stott mused."We carried out extensive market research on
the banking industry, and we were very careful when recruiting.
Remember that, as the banks move towards customer service, they are
having to re-educate their people's thinking."

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

RBOS DEFENDS ITS TESSA

ROYAL BANK of Scotland has defended the performance of its TESSA
following a damning article, headlined Royal rip-off, that appeared in
the latest Which? - the magazine published by the British Consumers
Association.

"Savers who put their money in the Royal Bank of Scotland TESSA may
find they get less than they bargained for - around #250 [$388] less,"
states the article in question. The magazine criticises the Royal Bank
Tessa because interest is not compounded, but rather is credited to the
account at the end of the five-year term.

"What Which? has failed to do is to look at the whole picture," said
Frank Kirwan, UK director of retail banking at the bank. "The
association has only looked at one element of our return, and forgotten
all about the additional bonuses we offer. What matters to the customer
is not the method of calculation, but the total return investors
receive on their savings.

"Independent surveys show that the overall return to savers on the
Royal Bank TESSA is one of the best available from a high street bank,
and ahead of many of the leading building societies. Indeed, research
by Moneyfacts and Blay's place it second to the TSB and ahead of the
`Big Four'."

Kirwan pointed out that the TESSA was designed for those investors who
held them to maturity."It was always meant to be a long-term savings
medium."

He cited the Moneyfacts research, which placed Royal's TESSA second to
TSB as regards return. Assuming that the TESSA was opened at launch
with the maximum investment of #3,000 and that maximum contributions
had been made on the anniversary of each year after that, the projected
maturity value would be #11,870, compared to TSB's figure of #11,904.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

SPAIN:  BANKS OPT FOR ALTERNATIVE DISTRIBUTION

AS A RESULT of new banking legislation introduced in July 1995, a
number of Spanish banks have begun to explore the possibility of
developing tied agents networks to supplement their traditional
distribution channels. Bankinter is one of those to pilot such an
initiative.

Although banks have used financial advisers and insurance agents to
market financial products in the past, no legal framework which defined
and regulated the role of financial agents previously existed.

The new law defines financial agents as mediators who, without being
employees of the bank, habitually carry out determined banking
activities on its behalf. The legal text stresses that financial agents
must respect the same standards of transparency as banks, and cannot
represent more than one bank or consolidated financial group, nor
operate through sub-agents. That said, it is the bank or financial
group that will be held responsible for any failure by the agent to
comply to banking standards and regulations.

This introduction of the financial agent is as a result of EC
legislation which allows banks to operate in other member states
without being obliged to have a banking presence there. However, it is
thought that tied agents networks might also prove a popular option for
the smaller domestic banks. Combining an agent network with a telephone
banking service could be an effective way for banks to reach a wider
market, at a relatively low cost.

Bankinter, one of Spain's most dynamic second-tier banks, has already
begun to recruit financial agents on an experimental basis and,
according to a bank spokesman, hopes to have drawn up a definite
network plan within the next two months.

Bankinter, which has a very small network - 253 branches -compared to
its rivals, hopes tied agents will help it to expand rapidly in regions
where it has no branch presence, as well as reinforcing its existing
branch network.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

PORTUGAL:  MUNDIAL GETS IMAGE OVERHAUL

CIA SEGUROS Mundial Confianca, one of Portugal's largest insurers, is
currently undergoing a radical image overhaul in a programme that will
have cost the institution an estimated Esc400 million ($2.67 million)
by the end of 1996. Mundial Confianca is the country's third-largest
non-life insurer and its eighth-biggest life insurer.

The basic aim of the company's new image is the portrayal of stability,
and at its core is the slogan "Live safely because life is a roller
coaster". The company has also changed its emblem from red and brown to
blue and yellow.

"The old emblem was 15 years old and no longer reflected our corporate
identity," explained Paolo Bracon, Mundial Confianca's head of
marketing, adding that the new colours are also those used by Banco
Totta e Acores (BTA) and Credito Predial Portugues (CPP), both of which
are controlled by the owner of Mundial Confianca, Antonio Champalimaud.
"We want to show our customers that we are part of a much larger
private financial grouping."

The launch of the new look, at the end of 1995, was accompanied by a
major publicity campaign using all forms of media advertising. The
campaign, which was designed by marketing company Neovox, is to
continue throughout 1996 and, according to Bracon, the company will be
using this opportunity to launch a whole range of new products
throughout the year, aimed principally at the personal lines sector.

"We are not looking to corner any particular segment of the market,
however," he said. "We are a universal insurance company which can
cover the needs of the entire market. So, while this year we will be
concentrating on one particular area, we will not be doing so at the
expense of other areas." Indeed, a whole range of Mundial Confianca
products will soon be available in all BTA and CPP branches. Mundial
Confianca already markets its products through another bank owned by
Champalimaud, Banco Pinto e Sotto Mayor."This will allow us to greatly
increase the number of clients, which currently stands at about
600,000," Bracon said.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

VIDEOCONFERENCING AT IMPERIO

PORTUGAL'S LARGEST insurer, Cia seguros Imperio, has launched a
videoconference booth network in 20 of its branches across the country
- a first for Portugal, it claims.

The new interactive system, called "Video Servicio-Imperio 24", allows
a client to communicate at any time of the day or night with a customer
services officer in the specially-designed booth which is equipped with
only a computer screen and a telephone receiver. It also has a backup
system whereby the client can obtain information without having to
speak directly to the officer, simply by touching the screen.

"The system allows a client to get up-to-the-minute information on any
of our products: how much it will cost to insure the contents of his
house or how much his automobile insurance has gone up, etc," said
Imperio's marketing director, Eugenia Coimbra. "The client can also use
it to make an appointment with one of our agents. However, the real
point of the new system is not just to complement our existing
services, but rather to introduce a human factor."

Pilot trials on the booths revealed that many people initially felt
extremely uncomfortable in them, but Imperio said it does not view this
as a real problem, "as the reaction to Multibanco booths was much the
same when they first appeared". Its primary targets are executives and
educated people "who don't like to stand in queues and are not afraid
of new technology".

Financially, the system has a clear advantage for the company, Coimbra
said."It allows us to provide a 24-hour customer service with a minimum
of staff and reduces the work-load of our staff during office hours."

Imperio plans to increase the number of these booths in its branches to
80 by the end of 1996 alone, and the long-term strategy is to have them
fitted in all its branches. Similar booths are also to be fitted into
Banco Mello branches, which controls Imperio.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

GERMAN BANKS RULE OK

Recent research commissioned by the German Bankers Association suggests
that customer satisfaction with the banking industry there is high. Ann
O'Dea analyses some of the findings

AROUND 88 percent of customers are satisfied with the service they
receive from the German banking industry. This is one of the findings
of a representative study carried out by IPOS (Institute for
Practically-oriented Social Research) of Manheim, and commissioned by
the German Bankers Association (Bundesverband deutscher Banken).

This represents a rise in satisfaction of 4 percentage points, when
compared to a similar survey carried out by IPOS in the spring of 1995,
and will be a relief to banks at a time when many European banks are
coming in for severe criticism from their retail customers.

The recently-published results are based on 1,303 interviews, made by
telephone from October 30 to November 2 1995. The total of those who
were questioned is "a representative sample of voting citizens in
Germany", the association said.

The respondents were questioned on various points: the level of trust
in their service providers; analysis of competence; location of their
accounts; judgment of performance; standard of personal advice;
confidentiality; influence of banks on the economy, specifically on
politics.

There was little fluctuation in satisfaction levels between different
types of institutions; commercial banks, savings banks and co-operative
banks. According to the association, this general satisfaction suggests
that the financial service providers take justified criticism
seriously, and are making an effort to improve. Those who confirmed in
writing that they are receiving an improved personal service rose from
28 percent in the spring, to 33 percent in November.

Customers were also asked to comment on the perceived competence of the
banks and, in this area, the commercial banks have the edge. While 57
percent were of the opinion that there is no difference between
institutions in this respect, and 19 percent left the question
unanswered, 14 percent believed that commercial banks display the
greatest competence. Only 5.6 percent pointed to savings banks and 4.4
percent co-operative banks.

As regards the standard of personal advice (see table 2), over half the
respondents said the level has "hardly changed", but 32.6 percent
believed it has improved.

The findings on standards of personal advice contrasted significantly
with results of a recent survey by watchdog Finanztest (see BMI 63)
which suggests that most retail banking customers are given scanty and
ill-considered advice.

Researchers posed as would-be customers seeking advice, and visited the
branches of 21 different banks. The result? One-third of the 147 advice
sessions were rated as "unsatisfactory" or"poor". This of course
suggests that customers would be less aware of the shortcomings of one
bank's investment advice than would be the various financial watchdogs.

Customers were also asked if they felt that information on citizens'
financial relationships was kept confidential by the banks and savings
banks in Germany. While 46.5 percent believed it is, a significant 45.8
percent did not.

Respondents also answered questions on how they perceived the influence
of the banks on the economy and on politics. While 4.1 percent said it
is not enough, and 30 percent said it is just right, over 50 percent of
respondents felt that banks have too great an influence on the economy.
Again, a high 44.6 percent of respondents felt their financial
institutions have too great an influence on politics.

TABLE 1: CUSTOMER SATISFACTION (OCTOBER 1995)

Question: How satisfied are you with the services provided by your
          bank or savings bank?

                        Pri-   Collec-  Sav-
                        vate   tive     ings   Post          No
Percentage       Total  banks  banks    banks  banks  Other  account

OWN MAIN ACCOUNT
Number           1,255  167    294      620    70     54     50

WITH SERVICE:
Very satisfied   24.0   26.0   31.5     21.5   25.5   23.5    8.8
Satisfied        64.1   64.1   59.6     66.9   68.0   67.3   51.0
Dissatisfied      7.2    5.7    7.3      8.2    5.1    6.3    2.7
Very dissatisfied 2.3    3.1    1.1      2.8    1.4    2.9    1.6
Don't know        1.5    1.1    0.5      0.6      -      -   18.7

Source: IPOS/Bundesverband deutscher Banken

TABLE 2: STANDARD OF PERSONAL ADVICE (OCTOBER 1995)

Question: What do you think? has personal advice in your bank
          improved, worsened or not changed much at all?

                        Pri-   Collec-  Sav-
                        vate   tive     ings   Post          No
Percentage       Total  banks  banks    banks  banks  Other  account

OWN MAIN ACCOUNT
Number           1,303  156    310      671    51     49     66

PERSONAL ADVICE IS:
Better           32.6   32.9   35.0     33.9   25.2   29.1   16.9
Hardly changed   51.1   49.5   48.5     54.0   49.6   51.8   38.9
Worsened          9.2   13.8    8.9      8.5   15.3    9.8    1.8
Don't know        6.2    3.8    7.6      3.6    9.9    9.3   25.2

Source: IPOS/Bundesverband deutscher Banken

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

BFG BANK STIRS GERMAN MARKET

BfG Bank believes Germany is seeing a trend towards lower bank charges,
and has decided to anticipate that trend with free banking. BMI takes a
look at the bank's marketing strategy

THE FIRST nationwide German bank to introduce free banking hopes to
double its market share within two years and use cross-selling to
compensate for the lost bank charges.

After carrying out extensive market research on a new strategy for its
retail banking business, BfG Bank has come up with a non-traditional
response. Rather than reducing its cost base and establishing a
stand-alone direct bank, the medium-sized institution has decided to
rely on the strengths of its existing branch network and offer free
banking across the board.

Above all, BfG hopes to increase its market share - which is currently
just under 1 percent - to 2 percent in just two years. "The savings
banks [Sparkassen] and co-operative banks have the dominant position
with an 87 percent market share," said Paul Wieandt, chairman of the
board of managing directors. "Therefore, BfG Bank has to offer
something different from its competitors - and where it counts - in
order to have an impact on the market."

Free banking may be old hat in other markets, but BfG's idea has
created a stir in Germany. Although no-fee accounts have been tried
before by small regional banks, BfG is the first nationwide institution
to attempt it. Last year, one of the big banks, Bayerische Hypotheken-
und Wechsel-Bank (Hypo-Bank), offered free banking for an introductory
period of six months but had little success, probably because of a
flawed marketing strategy (see BMI 61). By contrast, BfG intends to
make its free banking service permanent.

Known as BfG plus, the new BfG current account offers an unlimited
number of free transactions, personal advice in BfG branches, use of
ATM machines, Eurocheques, an EC card and a Visa card. Unusually for
the German market, there is no additional charge for telephone banking
services and no extra fees on overdrawn accounts, as long as the
customer adheres to the agreed overdraft limit (except credit
interest).

BfG admits that free banking will be a loss-maker unless the service
attracts a substantial number of new customers (60,000 in the first
year alone) and earns new income from cross-selling. In the past, BfG
current account customers have opted for an average of two further
products from the bank and its allfinanz partners.

Thus, the success of the venture depends crucially on the selling and
advisory skills of branch-based staff, and, consequently, BfG is
planning to improve its expertise. "Our advantage is the bank's size,"
Wieandt said. "As a medium-sized bank . . . we are able to come up with
initiatives and new products which small regional banks could not
afford to offer and which would be too expensive, i.e. unprofitable,
for our large competitors."

BfG has a network of 178 branches, compared with the 1,000 or so
branches run by its largest competitors such as Commerzbank and
Deutsche Bank. That network was slimmed down during a restructuring
several years ago.

Free banking is also BfG's long-term response to a range of strategic
challenges, which Wieandt mapped out:

- Branch-based banks such as BfG are under threat from non and
near-banks, which already control 10 percent of the retail financial
services market, and from direct banks, which Wieandt believes will
grab 15 percent of the market within five years.

- Germany is over-banked and over-branched. It has one branch for every
1,500 people, compared with 2,500 in the UK. By the year 2000, BfG
expects less than half of all transactions to be done in a branch,
compared with around 60 percent at present.

- Customers are increasingly responsive to price and quality. There is
a trend towards lower bank charges, and BfG has decided to anticipate
that trend with free banking. "We aren't reducing bank charges, we're
bringing them down to zero," Wieandt said.

- It is apparently no longer true that Germans are loath to switch
banks. BfG's market research has indicated that 70 percent of retail
customers would consider changing to another bank, and around half of
them would be motivated by lower charges.

- Telecommunications are forcing the face of innovation in the German
banking market. Customers are increasingly receptive to telephone
banking, direct banking, electronic cash and PC banking.

- Many direct banks and credit card issuers now pay interest on credit
balances:

- Customers can reduce bank charges by making voucherless payment
transfers.

"The transformation of the banking market has not left the retail
banking business untouched. It has long since made the transition from
seller's to buyer's market," Wieandt said.

BfG has begun to build an innovative reputation over the past couple of
years. It was one of the first German banks to introduce telephone
banking, and, in 1993, it successfully launched an account combining
branch-based services and telephone banking. This month, the bank has
introduced the mail-order sale and home delivery of traveller's cheques
and cash in foreign currency. Furthermore, there are plans to establish
a direct broker in the spring.

Previously labelled the"trade union" bank and regarded as highly
traditional in strategy and marketing, BfG Bank was owned by a
union-controlled holding before its sale to Credit Lyonnais in 1992.
The CL-BfG deal was the first sale of a large German bank to a foreign
institution.

At the time, market observers suggested that many German banks,
weakened by low profitability, would have to decide whether they want
to make a serious commitment to universal banking or whether to look
for a niche strategy. BfG now seems to have decided to focus on retail
banking, which has always been one of its most important business
areas.

According to Wieandt, more than half of all claims on non-banks are
loans to retail customers. On the liabilities side, 40 percent of
claims from non-banks are deposits by retail customers. Moreover, the
retail banking division contributes more than half of interest and
commission earnings.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

TAKING OFF THE FRILLS

Following calls from the Prices Surveillance Authority for the
abolishment of fixed account-keeping fees, the Big Four Australian
banks have announced basic no-frills accounts. BMI reports

THE BIG Four retail banks in Australia have all announced the launch of
new basic "no-frill" accounts in the past few weeks.

Banks had been set a December 31 deadline to respond to the - now
defunct - Prices Surveillance Authority's (PSA) inquiry last summer
into bank fees and charges, which resulted from public disquiet over
their high level.

Among the PSA recommendations resulting from the inquiry is a greater
use of a "user pays principle" rather than fixed account-keeping fees.
The authority also called for a "basic" account with no account-keeping
fee and a number of "free" debit transactions per month before any fees
were applied.

While each of the Big Four abolished the fixed monthly account-keeping
fees from their new offers, the other features differed from one bank
to another, and were greeted with varying reactions among consumer
bodies and the powers that be.

The Australian Consumers Association judged National Australia Bank
(NAB) to be the only one of the Big Four to have introduced an
acceptable basic transaction account. The product efforts from Westpac
Banking Corporation, ANZ Banking Group and the Commonwealth Bank were
all judged as "could do better".

NAB is pleased with the reception its new fees structure obtained, as
it feels that the changes "reflect the views of current customers and
the outcome of government and community consultation".

"We have listened to the concerns expressed about affordability, access
and the need for a more equitable approach," said Allan Diplock, chief
general manager of NAB. "The outcome is a range of options that provide
flexibility for customers and the opportunity to manage accounts in a
way that will ensure no fees are paid." This fits in well with the PSA
wish to apply the "users pay" principle, thus not penalising those who
carry out a small number of transactions per month.

The number of free transactions is one of the major bones of
contention. NAB is offering eight free transactions monthly to
customers with the `basic' account, after monitoring customer research,
while the other three allow only six.

"Our records show that in a typical month less than 10 percent of our
customers with balances below A$500 would have more than eight
withdrawals," Diplock said. "That is why we've set the free withdrawal
level at eight."

A spokeswoman for the association is also critical of the fees of
between 40 cents and 65 cents charged by Westpac, ANZ and CBA for
excess electronic transactions, particularly in view of National
Australia Bank's modest 25 cent fee.

ANZ's basic Access Simplicity account came under pressure from the
federal treasurer who refused to comment on the account the day it was
announced, whereas he had expressed satisfaction when NAB, CBA and
Westpac made their announcements.

ANZ is charging a higher than average fee for excess over-the-counter
transactions - A$1.25 - but, according to a spokesman, this is designed
to encourage customers to use an ATM or other electronic service,
rather than branch transactions which cost the bank much more. CBA's
even higher fee of A$1.50 for the same excess came under fierce
criticism from the Consumers Association.

However, Allan Fels, chairman of the Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission, which took over the functions of both the PSA and
the Trade Practices Commission, recognised that all the Big Four banks
have "made moves in the right direction". The commission must now carry
out an assessment of the fees structure and report back to the
treasurer, probably before March next.

But how are the banks faring with the loss of revenue from cutting
fixed monthly bank charges? "You need to remember that while we lose
the A$2 or so monthly fixed fee, we have also added the 25 cents charge
for excess transactions, which did not previously exist," said a
spokesman for NAB."That will help offset the account-keeping fees, and
overall we believe the process will be revenue neutral."

Another new charge at NAB is the 75 cents fee for withdrawing cash from
an ATM outside the bank's own network. But customers need not fear -
the bank is busy sending out explanatory literature to all 3 million
customers.

Westpac too is going to great lengths to ensure its customers are well
informed as to the new accounts it is offering. A sum of A$3 million
has been spent on direct customer communication involving direct mail
and advertising, in order to convey the changes to its 1.5 million
customers. Westpac had a time limit in that it launched its new range
of accounts on January 15 - the remaining three will all see start-up
in March.

AUSTRALIA'S "BIG FOUR" - NEW BANK FEES

The `Basic' Account                        NAB   Westpac CBA   ANZ

Cheque book                                Yes   No      No    No
Account-keeping fee                        No    No      No    No
Free withdrawals/month                     8     6       6     6
Charge per excess electronic transaction   25c   65c     45c   40c
Charge per excess branch transaction       $1    $1      $1.50 $1.25
Comes into force 1995                      March Jan 15  March March

Source: Lafferty Group/The banks

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

DESIGNING YOUR ON-LINE OFFERING

When it comes to on-line delivery, there is an increasing awareness of
the necessity for the banking industry to act now or be left behind.
BMI examines recent research on the issue

BANKS HAVE seen their market share drop over the past two decades, as
non-bank financial companies, like mortgage providers, brokerage firms
and mutual funds, have poached some of their most profitable customers.
According to the just-published second volume of The Information
Superhighway and Retail Banking, a joint report from the Bank
Administration Institute (BAI) and the Boston Consulting Group (BCG),
banks face the same risks from emerging on-line providers, unless they
can effectively use their key assets - customer relationships and
customer information.

In developing their on-line strategies, banks will have to consider at
least three options: remaining an integrated player, becoming the
customer's agent, or specialising as a product manufacturer. This is
one of the conclusions of the study.

"In all likelihood an individual bank's strategy will be a hybrid of
these three primary options," says Richard Hartnack, vice-chairman of
Union Bank, and chairman of the Centre for Banking Issues and
Strategies at BAI. "In addition, alliances among banks to aggregate
their collective capabilities and scale will play an important role."

When volume I of the report was published in the summer of 1995 (see
BMI 62), many banks still showed little interest or activity in on-line
delivery. However, as predicted by the authors at that time, the use of
on-line services and the Internet has grown significantly.

The following are some of the more significant developments since the
first part of the report was published, according to the authors:

- A marked increase in the number of banks that have signed agreements
with entities focused on on-line delivery, such as Microsoft, Intuit,
Visa Interactive and MasterBanking;

- A significant increase in the number of banks that are staking out
positions as content providers on the major on-line services;

- An explosion in Internet Web sites, by bank and non-bank players
alike;

- The joint purchase of Meca Software by BankAmerica and Nationsbank;
and

- The aggressive development of strategic payments alliances, such as
Visa and Microsoft; and MasterCard, IBM and Netscape.

The report also draws attention to the rapid growth in the number of
users of commercial on-line services and the Internet. At November
1995, there were approximately 8 million subscribers to commercial
on-line services, and about 10 million users of the World Wide Web part
of the Internet.

The result of this has been an increasing awareness of the necessity
for the banking industry to act now or be left behind, as well as a
realisation of the threats and opportunities facing banks over the next
few years.

"The task at hand for banks now shifts from deciding whether to take
action to deciding how, in what form, and at what speed," the report
states.

Two issues dealt with in detail by the study are how electronic banking
will affect customer behaviour and how banks are to determine the
design of the product offering. A segmentation analysis is used to
evaluate which customers are likely to be early adopters of on-line
delivery, and to assess likely future customer behaviour.

The conclusions suggest that the barriers to on-line delivery are lower
than might be anticipated, and that some of the most attractive
customer segments for banks seem likely to be early adopters.

KEY DESIGN ISSUES BY SEGMENT

New enthusiasts

Description:  Upscale, above-average income, secure about financial
              future
              Desire to learn new things
              Usually married
              Higher level of education,

Issues:       Looking for convenience and time savings
              Will use technology when offered

Implications: Attractive segment
              May be retained by electronic banking

Surfers

Description:  Mostly young and single
              Lower income; temporary for some within segment
              Above average ability to use technology

Issues:       Will use technology
              Concerned with security and privacy

Implications: Many transaction accounts; cost-saving opportunities
              May stop often with technology
              May increase income in future

Old liners

Description:  Usually older and less wealthy
              Capital depleting
              Do not use new technology

Issues:       Like current system, comfortable
              Probably will continue to use branch and teller
              Some migration to ATM and phone

Implications: Least likely to move on-line
              Some may move to screenphones, etc.
              Lower priority

Source: BCG/BAI

But how does one forecast how customers will respond to on-line
banking? The study points to research which indicates that almost 70
percent of current financial transactions are conducted using methods
other than branches and ATMs - phones, mail and AVRUs (Automated Voice
Response Units). Almost half the remaining 30 percent are interactions
with ATMs. It concludes that customers who currently bank by phone or
ATM will migrate more rapidly to on-line banking.

"In many ways, the move from a branch to an ATM was a bigger shift for
some customer segments than the move from telephone to PC will be," the
authors say. "The first move required new behaviour; the second shift
requires a more modest change in behaviour and is accompanied by a
significant increase in functionality."

The study also makes an interesting point as regards the
cannibalisation debate. It claims that rather than rendering the branch
network obsolete, as on-line banking takes hold it will cannibalise
existing electronic bank delivery systems - "those used by the affluent
`early adopters' of technology".

There is also a feeling that the millions of dollars invested in
electronic projects, including screen-phones, may have been better
spent elsewhere. "Near term, only the PC is really viable," claims Tom
Wurster, vice-president of the Boston Consulting Group. "The slowdown
in the deployment of broadband services says to us that the PC will
dominate on-line banking for the near to medium term."

The study cites research which supports this thinking. PC with modems
will be in 40 percent of US households by the year 2000, it claims, and
one of the most attractive segments of the banking community (under 30
years, over $50,000 income) already has a PC/modem penetration of 43
percent - four to five times higher than that in households with
incomes below $30,000 (see figure 1).

The principal "roadblocks" for these key customer segments is "the lack
of compelling on-line content, easy ways to gain access to that
content, and a secure on-line payments system", the authors say, adding
rather ominously that non-bank financial services players are currently
focused on providing these latter, particularly for these attractive
customer groups.

Because the different customer segments differ radically in their
openness to on-line delivery, and use of banking products, the design
of the on-line offering necessitates a close analysis of customer
segments and product use. BCG uses a lifestyle segmentation format,
developed by US market research firm Odyssey L.P., to make general
observations on how different offerings will need to be designed to
appeal to different segments, dividing customers into three possible
target segments (see figure 2):

- New enthusiasts: upscale, typically between the ages of 30 and 60,
largely white collar;

- Surfers: a subsegment of younger households, typically more highly
educated with upscale potential; and

- Old liners: retired customers with moderate or fixed incomes,
typically below $50,000.

These three segments, the study says, constitute a significant
percentage of the overall market, and are useful starting points when
looking at the key considerations in the design of the offering by
segment.

Banks have traditionally had a lower share of wallet with the wealthier
customers between the ages of 30 and 60 - similar to the new
enthusiasts. These potentially profitable customers typically have
relationships with several financial institutions, tending to use
specialist providers for some of the larger investments, like mortgages
or mutual funds. What is more, these are likely to constitute a very
attractive on-line segment.

Attitudinal research, according to the study, would suggest that this
segment is often looking for convenience and time saving, and will
often opt for technology when offered.

An on-line offering for these customers will need to address both the
desire for convenience and their specific life cycle product needs, the
BCG concludes. A focus on the role of investment products, financial
planning, mortgages and so on may be necessary, as well as the
interactive on-line environment. The study offers the example of
"integrated information, such as an on-line net worth statement, linked
to both bank holdings and other holdings" as a core information
offering. Above all, it insists on the importance of being early with
an on-line offering to this segment, so as to gain usage and loyalty,
at a time when competing non-bank institutions are targeting this same
segment.

Another key group for which to design an on-line offering may be the
surfer-type subsegment of under-30 households. Unfortunately, this
segment is typically unprofitable for the banks. "They keep small
balances, use only a few products and generate many transactions."
However, many of these households will become attractive customers as
they grow older and more successful.

The authors suggest a streamlined offering, with lower delivery costs
while improving access and convenience, in this way increasing
profitability and retention. The on-line offering should take into
account the attitudinal and behavioural characteristics of this
segment. These customers are generally comfortable using technology and
may value the convenience of on-line delivery of statements and e-mail
inquiries. It is also a segment associated with loans and credit
facilities so an offering which includes on-line credit applications
with quick response could have particular appeal, for example.

Retired customers with fixed incomes, similar to the old liners,
represent one of those segments which are low priority when designing
on-line offerings, in the short or medium term. These latter are often
the most frequent users of the branch, and lowest users of ATMs.
Attitudinal research suggests these may be one of the hardest to switch
to on-line delivery.

In designing their on-line offerings, it is essential that the banks
consider the actions of the non-bank players who are busy designing
their own, the report insists. "Financial services has many attributes
that make it a logical and attractive candidate for on-line delivery,"
it points out. "Recent events have confirmed this view." The following
are laid out as some of the principal considerations in relation to the
design of on-line offerings:

The most innovative non-bank players have a significantly lower
delivery cost structure than banks, in part because they do not have
the investments in brick and mortar that banks do. The possibility of
on-line delivery will probably cause them to see opportunities to
further expand their customer relationships at the expense of banks.

Some of these players have strong brand positions, national presences,
and high shares of the early adopter segments of the market (e.g.
surfers, new enthusiasts).

Some of these players may also take advantage of their current brand
positions by expanding the range of products and information offerings.
These offerings can easily be outsourced.

Only by evaluating the differing motivations of the non-bank players
can the banks come to understand the likely competitive threat from the
different on-line offerings, the report warns.

The authors suggest a return to analysis of customer needs and product
characteristics. Many of the surfers and new enthusiasts, for example,
will prefer to shop for products, as opposed to having products sold to
them, and will thus react positively to an offering that includes
comparison shopping. "If banks are hesitant to promote the products of
others, their offerings will have less appeal to these customers," the
authors claim.

Banks are also reminded of their own competitive advantages -owning
current customer relations with a high level of trust, wide range of
delivery channels for customer convenience, payment systems access and
access to customer data. The report concludes that transforming this
data into customer information is one of the greatest challenges for
banks today, and will be crucial for an effective on-line presence.

The platform options available to banks are numerous and priorities
will have to be established from the start, the report says. Banks need
to decide whether to develop their service on commercial OLS (on-line
services), the Internet or both. Another option would be for banks to
develop a proprietary banking platform.

The choice of a commercial OLS provider, like Microsoft's Microsoft
Network, has advantages like access to new customers and standard
interfaces for customers to use when carrying out their on-line
transactions. The report cites the example of Fidelity Investments in
the US which has a "strategy of ubiquity", aiming to get on the maximum
number of OLS platforms as possible, while others prefer to be more
selective.

Before choosing a platform provider, the report says, it is essential
to consider the following: the on-line service's customer base; on-line
delivery development, including software skills; brand visibility and
positioning; and ownership of customer information. It will also be
necessary to look at the OLS's customer base and how it overlaps with
the bank's existing and target customer segments.

While the Internet has been the subject of much hype, and we have
recently seen the creation of an Internet-based bank, Security First
Network Bank, the report notes that it is far from certain how this
platform will develop. Despite its huge popularity, the report points
out that it is accessed by anyone, but controlled by no one, and
questions whether security on the Internet will ever be sufficient to
transact financial services.

Proprietary platforms, on the other hand, offer three principal
advantages: lack of an intermediary between the bank and the customer;
complete control over content, navigation as well as the "look" and the
"feel" of the service; and the lack of other financial service
providers vying for customers on the same platform. However, many
customers have previously demonstrated their lack of interest in
provider-specific platforms.

"Each institution must map its objectives against the alternatives and
the uncertainties before deciding where and how to participate."

Above all, BCG concludes that the banks must be alert to the
competitive threats closing in on all sides and respond effectively.

"The banking industry stands at the crossroads," says David Taylor,
executive vice-president of the BAI and co-director of the study."The
on-line services, software giants, global entertainment companies,
telcos and utilities have the pipelines and the navigational tools. If
banks don't act with foresight and firm purpose, the prognosis is for a
continuing erosion of their core retail business."

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

CAPTURING THE CUSTOMERS

Hong Kong is one of Asia's largest financial centres. With 1997 rapidly
approaching, Andrew Moody reports from a market where product
development takes precedence over slick marketing campaigns

FEW WORLD markets are now as attractive for marketing banking services
as Asia, where there have been dramatic increases in personal wealth
for more than a decade. Per capita incomes in many of the so-called
`Tiger' economies now exceed those in Europe and the rest of the
western world.

The region's banks face a tough challenge to develop new products and
offer ever improved services to capture this new wealth against a
background of fierce competition.

Despite the spectre of 1997, nowhere is this more true than in Hong
Kong, one of Asia's largest financial centres with more than 400
domestic and foreign banks, although only 180 of them are licensed.

Over recent months, in particular, all of the leading banks have been
launching products, hoping that a particular extra specification will
be enough to attract elusive customers.

Like western banks, they have been trying to segment the market to make
sure they do not fail to properly target the territory's burgeoning
middle class population, the result of a decade or more of GDP growth
of between 5 percent and 8 percent.

The partial collapse of the so-called Hong Kong interest rate cartel,
which made it difficult for the banks to compete on loan and deposit
rates, has also led recently to very aggressive price-driven marketing
strategies.

Despite the competition, Hong Kong banks, unlike their western
counterparts, meet with very little consumer resistance. The territory
is one of those rare places where banking and bankers are popular. The
average Hong Kong citizen has 2.4 bank accounts in 1.9 banks.

Newspapers, both Chinese and English, are scoured for any
advertisements signalling changes in deposit rates.

Talking about banking and finance over dinner would not necessarily
single you out as a crashing bore but just as someone talking about one
of the most interesting subjects around.

The challenge for the banks is therefore not to come up with slick
subliminal advertising campaigns to make banking seem exciting because,
in the minds of the consumer, it already is. Much of the marketing
literature is, therefore, matter of fact and very much to the point.

Instead, what the banks have to do is not so much to work on the image
but rather on the real products, a much more difficult exercise.

All the banks spend considerable resources on product development so
they might have that added feature which influences a consumer's final
decision.

Peter Wong, banking director of Citibank, one of the leading foreign
banks in the territory, which has just moved to luxurious new offices
near Hong Kong Telecom Tower in Quarry Bay, said the marketing
challenges for the bank are very different from those in the US.

"It is a unique market in many ways. People here are very
entrepreneurial and they have that mentality," he said. "If you go to
the US, nobody in the street is going to know what the dollar exchange
rate is for the German mark but they would here.

"As a result, we have, to some extent, to launch aggressive products
which are ahead of the competition."

The leading product innovators in the market are, by common agreement,
the Hong Kong Bank, the Hang Seng Bank (62 percent owned by the Hong
Kong Bank but autonomous and independently listed), Standard Chartered,
Citibank and Bank of East Asia.

There has been much recent emphasis on packaged products in the market.
Hong Kong Bank has launched Asset Vantage which gives those that have
access to it gold trading and the ability to hold deposits in different
currencies.

And last July, Hang Seng Bank, the second-largest locally-incorporated
bank, launched its Bank-in-One account which consolidates a number of
features including flexible overdraft and 24-hour automated phone
banking to the mass market customer. This was one of 17 new products
launched by the bank last year.

Despite the risks, foreign currency accounts are traditionally very
popular, even among mid-range customers, perhaps largely because of
Hong Kong's trading nature.

Other very popular products are tax loans which people take out because
there is no PAYE or pay-as-you-go tax system in the colony.

The key products, however, are deposit accounts and mortgages. These
and not the cheque account - as in the west - are regarded as the coat
hanger product on which to build a long-term relationship.

Alex Au, managing director of the Hang Seng Bank, said the important
thing is to establish a long-term relationship with a customer.

"This is what you have to do in banking everywhere, and probably the
best way to do it is through the deposit account or mortgage," he said.

"One can read too much into this as a cultural difference between us
and the west since people here often use their deposit accounts the
same as a cheque account.

"Once you have got the customer, you can cross-sell other products,
which enables you to build your competitive strategy and market share."

The growing middle class has encouraged the banks to target their more
affluent customers.

It has even brought banks into the retail sector which weren't
previously there. One of these is ABN-AMRO which, although in the
region for 90 years, only decided to offer retail products three years
ago. These now bring in an incredible 30 percent of its Hong Kong
profits.

"We saw the middle and upper sectors of the market as a real
opportunity and we have come in with a mortgage product which has an
interest rate 0.5 percent cheaper than most of our rivals," said Sergio
Rial, ABN AMRO's general manager in Hong Kong.

"We are still very much building up our retail side but it is certainly
a marketing strategy which has already paid off."

Citibank too makes no bones about targeting the well off.

"The Hong Kong affluent are very much our target market and our minimum
to open an account is $HK50,000 ($6,465)," Citibank's Wong said.

Hong Kong Bank has gone further than most by developing new Select
branches for its upper segment customers, leaving other customers to
slum it in standard and automated branches.

But Eric Tai, senior executive, retail, marketing and planning with
Hong Kong Bank, insisted it is not ignoring other customers.

"Although we segment the market, banking is banking is banking is
banking," he said. "We can't really offer a significantly different
service to one customer compared to another."

Branch design has come to be a key element of any marketing strategy of
Hong Kong banks.

The banks are reluctant to reveal their expenditure on branches, but
with few exceptions they are among the most splendid examples of both
interior and exterior banking architecture anywhere in the world.

Branches are not just about getting customers inside, but about making
use of the time customers spend within them. Customers very often use
their local branches as meeting places for colleagues and friends.

So, after they finish their business they often stand around engaging
in long conversations, perhaps about the day's currency movements or
the latest rate of interest in the bank around the corner.

Creating the right ambience in the banking hall is therefore important.
The Bank of East Asia deploys music, ranging from light tunes in the
morning to heavier up-beat music in the evening.

HONG KONG FACTS

Population                   6.15m
Life expectancy              Males 75.4, Females 81
GDP                          $HK151.0 billion
Per capita income            $HK24,361
Growth rate                  4.5%
Inflation                    9%
Prime interest rate          9%
Money supply (M2) increase   18%
Unemployment rate            3.5%

The branches do, however, represent greater opportunities for marketing
than in Europe. Many of the banks have installed computer displays
which give customers up-to-date information on products and markets.

As Au said: "I think in terms of branches we are very much ahead of
banks in the west. We place great emphasis on giving our customers
first class service within the branches."

Pricing in terms of interest rates on deposits and loans has become a
much more fundamental part of the marketing strategy since the
relaxation of the cartel began in October 1994.

Instead of being fixed by the Hong Kong Association of Banks, interest
rates on deposit accounts held longer than seven days are now freely
floating.

This has led to a lot of market buying with banks trying to gain market
share in new product areas by taking a loss lead position.

Some of the bigger banks are concerned about this added uncertainty in
the market, particularly in the run-up to 1997 which creates more than
a few uncertainties of its own.

The Dah Sing Bank, a new entrant to retail, has been accused of
deliberate market buying.

It launched a credit card 18 months ago with a bonus scheme which gave
it an effective interest rate 25 percent below the competition. Derek
Wong, Dah Sing's head of retail, defended the strategy.

"I think the competition is now open and fair," Wong told BMI. "It is
now a matter of how you operate your business strategy which will
determine how successful you are."

Those marketing banking products in Hong Kong are as preoccupied with
age targeting as their counterparts in the west.

Most of the banks are keen to attract students, not only because they
may prove to be lifelong customers but because they are likely to be
monogamous in their banking habits - a rare quality in Hong Kong.

They do this by offering discount credit cards and air miles, less
gimmicky offers than the record token and free gift offers of some
western banks.

"The competition for students is driven partly because of this," said
David K.P. Li, deputy chairman and chief executive of the Bank of East
Asia. "The student does not have much money so he is unlikely to bank
with anyone else, which makes him or her a better all-round customer.
You do, however, hope to hang on to them for the rest of their lives."

Older people are also becoming increasingly a target market for the
banks. The average life expectancy for males in Hong Kong is 75.4 and
females 81, compared to 73 years for men in the US and 79 for women.
Hong Kong is therefore moving more rapidly to an ageing population than
many countries in the west.

The banks are responding by providing products geared specifically to
older customers.

W.K. Mok, deputy general manager and head of retail in Hang Seng Bank,
said investment and protection products are particularly attractive to
this market.

"We have specifically developed a greater array of insurance products
and wealth accumulation investment products to cater for this very
important market," he said. Citibank's Wong said banks are having to
think more and more of the life cycle in their product offer to
customers.

"I think you have to look at taking the customer over, for example, at
25 years. When he or she is younger, the credit card might be the
driving product, then the mortgage, then the savings account, then
foreign exchange and then insurance products," he said.

Although Asia is becoming an increasingly attractive market for banks,
it remains very difficult for outsiders to penetrate.

Banks such as Standard Chartered and Hong Kong Bank have their roots in
19th century colonisation and to all intents and purposes are local
banks rather than British ones.

Across Asia, the US and European banks which have a presence have a
long association with the region. They also have a regional
infrastructure with a network of branches across the key capitals and
financial centres.

It would, therefore, be difficult for a carpet-bagging bank just to
target, for example, Hong Kong, because it would be at an immediate
competitive disadvantage with other banks which could offer regional
services.

"I think if you were going to set up in Asia it would be very difficult
just to set up in Hong Kong. You really need a presence across the
region. You could get lost," said ABN-AMRO's Rial.

A key element of future marketing strategies will undoubtedly be China.
The branches that banks have there tend to be there to facilitate
business between the mainland and Hong Kong and for the Chinese
businessman. But, as the Chinese market liberalises and a retail
banking demand emerges, the Hong Kong banks will be in a better
position than most to take advantage.

"While Hong Kong is likely to remain a key component of the HSBC
Group's business well into the foreseeable future, our mainland
operations will grow increasingly important," said Hong Kong Bank's
Tai.

"Foreign banks are unable to deal in the renminbi, the local currency,
at present. But this will eventually change and when it does we will be
ready to take the initiative."

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 1, 1996

THE FUNDAMENTAL FLAWS

The way in which banks market their electronic banking services is
often fundamentally flawed, according to Richard G Lyons of Internet
Inc.

WHILE MOST retail bankers see their electronic banking services as a
priority, they are making some common mistakes in the way they market
them to their customers. This is the claim made by Richard G Lyons Jr,
executive vice-president and chief operating officer of Internet Inc.,
which operates the Most ATM network in the US.

Many retail bankers have not yet made clear the message they wish to
convey to those customers who might be interested in electronic
banking, he said at the BAI (Bank Administration Institute) Retail
Delivery Systems conference last month.

While almost 63 percent of retail bankers believe their electronic
banking services save money, only 17 percent feel their institution is
"where it needs to be in its electronic banking programme". These are
some of the results of recent research that Lyons shared with the
delegates. Only 42 percent believe their institutes "have a clear
strategy for where we're going with EFT [Electronic Funds Transfers]".

Internet's research involved extensive interviews with retail banking
managers, marketing managers and branch managers from 140 different
financial institutions. A large majority agreed that electronic banking
is a priority. Yet, many admitted they are not spending enough time or
money on it, and are not investing enough in training for staff.

Only 18 percent of interviewees agreed that "we spend enough time and
money promoting electronic banking". While 87 percent agreed that
electronic banking transactions at their institutions are increasing
every month, 73 percent admitted "Our branch personnel probably have a
lower understanding of EFT than I."

"Consumers' antennae are up higher when they need what you're selling,"
Lyons stated, insisting that banks would have a far greater degree of
success marketing their electronic services if customers were made
aware that it allows them a hassle-free lifestyle. Yet, he said, 65
percent of bankers agreed that "at account opening, we spend more time
with cheque choices than explaining electronic banking options".
Indeed, the research found that a mere 27 percent of retail bankers
agreed that their customers are "well aware of all our electronic
banking services".

Over half of the bankers interviewed felt customers are not yet ready
for many EFT programmes, but Lyons suggested this might be a false
presumption and pointed to a recent survey in which 64 percent of total
households agreed "using electronic banking services is more convenient
than going to a branch". He claimed that consumers are much more
willing to use alternative delivery channels than banks realise, and
that banks need to communicate the availability of such channels in
order to compete.

There seemed, from the research, to be a realisation among financial
institutions of the threat from non-bank institutions. While only 18
percent agreed that banks are in control of the emerging consumer
electronic delivery channels, 70 percent agreed that"Microsoft and
regional telephone companies could someday [soon] threaten to siphon
deposits away from financial institutions". Indeed, 87 percent of
interviewees felt that non-banks are in a position to compete with the
electronic banking delivery systems owned and operated by banks.

Lyons suggested that many changes in attitude are needed to be made in
order that bankers make a success of their electronic banking
strategies. What are needed are clear marketing objectives, customer
focus, effective brand management and good investment, he said.

FIGURE 1

AS THE POPULATION AGES, ELECTRONICS USERS BECOME THE MAJORITY

              Total households         Electronic users (%)
              1995     2005            1995     2005

Under 25       5,156     5,314         45       60
25-34         19,229    16,949         60       75
35-49         31,660    34,121         51       70
50-64         21,024    28,403         37       51
65+           21,664    24,451         17       27
Total         98,733   109,238         42       56

20 million more "electronics" users over the next decade

Source: Internet

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-29</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B021-274</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi07.html 205.156.212.5 19970115003720 text/html 23462
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:35:24 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:45 GMT
Content-length: 23273
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi07.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
BANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNet <BR>
January 15, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>RAYMOND JAMES PLANS BIG BOOST FOR BANK SERVICES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(485 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>OCC READIES INSURANCE EXAM ACTIVITIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(457 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>FED ALLOWS ANNUITY SALES IN SECTION 20 SUBSIDIARIES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(340 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>KEYCORP PURSUES SMALL BUSINESS 401(K) PLANS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(187 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>TORONTO-DOMINION BREAKS NEW GROUND</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(233 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>FIDELITY ADDS UNIT TRUSTS TO BANK OFFERINGS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(361 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>STEIN ROE PICKS NEW FUND NAME</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(220 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>REUTERS TO ADD NEW INVESTING SOFTWARE TO ONLINE BANK OFFERING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(140 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>CALENDAR</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(247 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>BANKS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>SUPERMARKET MUTUAL FUND SALES EXPECTED TO INCREASE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(185 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FUNDS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>ANGLIM JOINS FLAGSHIP AS NATIONAL SALES MANAGER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(107 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
BANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

RAYMOND JAMES PLANS BIG BOOST FOR BANK SERVICES

In the financial equivalent of "man bites dog," Raymond James
Financial Inc. has underway a major thrust into traditional banking
services via its wholly owned bank, Raymond James Bank. The St. Petersburg-
based financial conglomerate will offer in February FDIC-insured products
like checking and savings accounts. And, in a few months the bank will
market home equity lines of credit, and, possibly, residential mortgages.
     If all goes well, the securities dealer's bank might become the
nation's largest virtual bank. Theresa Schefstad, the president and CEO of
Raymond James bank, promises to reach her market "telephonically and
electronically. Our objective is to provide consolidated financial services
so all their financial services can be received from our firm," she said.
     The bank's initial target market will be the company's hefty customer
base of some 300,000 securities clients. Raymond James actually has
400,000, but some of the accounts are linked and Schefstad preferred the
more conservative estimate of 300,000 to describe her potential customer
base.
     "We'll be able to offer our clients several product choices. We have
the FDIC option, our credit interest program (sweep account) option, and
the third is our Heritage mutual funds," Schefstad explained. The Heritage
funds are Raymond James' proprietary mutual funds.
     The company will continue its tradition of not incenting brokers to
sell proprietary products. "The compensation for our three options is
consistent for all three product options," Schefstad pointed out. In fact,
this compensation practice has worked to the detriment of the Heritage fund
family. Growth of its individual funds hasn't even come close to other
brokerage houses proprietary funds despite the company's nationwide branch
network.
     Schefstad claims that James is the only broker/dealer to wholly own a
full-service bank. Unlike other nonbanking companies, which must resort to
the "nonbank bank" strategy to get into the banking business, James
purchased the bank branches with a total deposit base of $12 million from
the Resolution Trust Co. In May, 1994 the company chartered the Raymond
James Bank FSB, which has a capability to operate in all 50 states. The
bank ended 1995 with approximately $162 million in assets and $136 million
in deposits.
     Over the past 20 months, Schefstad, the bank staff has been wrestling
with regulatory approvals, developing disclosure policies and integrating
the bank's systems into the Raymond James computer network.
     "Because of who owns us for everything we have done we obtained
regulatory approval. For example, when we developed our consolidated
statement we received approval (beforehand) of our disclosure policy and
separation of accounts," Schefstad said.
     The bank will maintain a physical branch office near its headquarters
in Florida. Schefstad envisions the remainder of the bank's efforts to take
place electronically, particularly through the nationwide automated teller
machine networks. Of course, deposit-taking via the ATM isn't yet possible
but Schefstad said the firm's brokerage clients are sophisticated enough to
understand and use direct-deposit options available through the automated
clearing house system.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
BANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

OCC READIES INSURANCE EXAM ACTIVITIES

The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency is preparing for the day
when national banks receive insurance powers. The Washington-based
regulator has created a task force to consider how a national bank's
insurance activities should be supervised. The Comptroller has created the
task force in anticipation of Barnett Banks winning its landmark case
scheduled for this month in the U.S. Supreme Court. A win for Barnett is
generally interpreted as blanket permission for national banks to sell
insurance.
     "They (the OCC) are laying the groundwork for determining quickly how
national bank insurance activities should be supervised," said one banker
familiar with the OCC's secret task-force meetings. He said similar
meetings were held several years ago to discuss how the OCC should regulate
the sale of mutual funds by banks -- well before the OCC published its
guidelines.
     Under examination, sources said, are the issues of licensing for bank
employees and the development of either regulations or guidelines governing
insurance sales but not both. The difference is crucial. Violating
guidelines usually brings little more than a wrist-slapping to the
offending bank. Violating regulations brings down the whole panoply of
fines, dismissals, and bank takeovers.
     For example, violating an OCC cease-and-desist order can bring fines
up to $1 million daily against the banks as well as their officers and
directors.
     The Comptroller's Office decided to go ahead with the insurance
examination task force after meeting with representatives of the American
Bankers Association and the Bankers Roundtable. Attending the task force
sessions, sources said, were Konrad Alt, chief assistant to Comptroller
Eugene A. Ludwig, and General Counsel Julie Williams. The task force
reportedly is expected to decide its next steps -- still unclear -- by
today.
     The OCC task force is apparently a reaction to rumblings on Capitol
Hill where, reportedly, insurance industry lobbyists are telling members of
Congress that the Supreme Court ruling will not address the issues of
supervising and licensing bank insurance activities.
     Banking industry officials charge the insurance lobbyists are
indulging in "scare tactics" to influence Congress to answer the court
ruling with legislation that will brunt the effect of a win for Barnett.
The banking officials characterize the insurance lobbyists' concerns as
unwarranted. They further say the OCC is trying to be proactive to reassure
Congress that the OCC will continue to monitor, examine, and regulate all
national bank activities.
     "Indeed, this oversight would be considered suffocating by regular
insurance agents," a banking industry lobbyist said.
     Among the questions raised during the task force meetings, according
to a banker who attended, was the issue of whom the agency should consult
before putting the final touches on its insurance rules. Among those
suggested were state insurance commissioners and the banking and insurance
industry trade groups.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
BANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

FED ALLOWS ANNUITY SALES IN SECTION 20 SUBSIDIARIES

The Federal Reserve Board will allow banks to consolidate their
annuity sales and brokerage activities under the terms of a no-action
letter the Fed published last month. The regulatory agency declined to name
the bank holding company receiving the permission.
     The newly permitted activity allows a bank to use its employees of a
nonbank subsidiary of the holding company, i.e., a Section 20 subsidiary,
to also sell annuities. The Fed's general counsel, Virgil Mattingly, signed
the letter which is an indication of the importance the letter had taken in
the eyes of the Fed staff and the Board of Governors.
     The no-action letter, dated December 6, establishes a format that
contemplates two forms of contracts. The first is a contract between a
third-party vendor and the Section 20 subsidiary. The other involves a
contractual lease of space between a vendor and the bank. The assumption of
the no-action letter is that the banking subsidiary of the holding company
can either engage in annuity sales under state law or can sell annuities
because it is a national bank.
     The particular format approved by the Fed works only if the bank
holding company uses a vendor offering brokerage services through the
Section 20, and the employees selling the annuities work for both the
Section 20 subsidiary and the third-party vendor.
     Some critics of the Fed's action charge that the arrangement is
convoluted and not as simple as the authority granted freely by the
Comptroller of the Currency. This is true. And a 14-year-old banking law is
the reason. There is a specific reference in the Garn-St Germain Act of
1982 barring annuity sales by holding companies. So, the Fed created the
convoluted annuity sales structure to accommodate the Garn-St Germain
restrictions.
     The Comptroller has already allowed dual employee relations for
national bank annuity sales. The structure is simpler for two reasons.
First, the Valic decision gives national banks the power to sell annuities
and, second, the incidental powers authority of the Comptroller makes it
easier for the regulator to authorize annuity sales.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
BANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

KEYCORP PURSUES SMALL BUSINESS 401(K) PLANS

Add Cleveland's KeyCorp to the list of banks eyeing the hotly
contested small-business market for defined contribution plans. It appears
the entire banking industry has carved out this niche as a way to make
money and to further boost sales of bank proprietary mutual funds.
     In KeyCorp's case, the program consists of five Victory proprietary
mutual funds.
     KeyCorp will eventually market the product, dubbed PRISM Small
Business, nationwide to businesses with fewer than 100 employees. It will
start offering the system to businesses in Albany, Buffalo, Cincinnati,
Northern Indiana, and Syracuse. The heavy concentration of New York state
markets reflects the former headquarters of Key Bank before it merged with
Society Bank to form KeyCorp. The banking company markets its PRISM product
to large company 401(k) plans. KeyCorp developed PRISM in 1991 and claims
to serve more than 750 plans in 14 states with assets under management
totaling $4 billion.
     The market for small business 401(k) plans is expected to swell to
$199 billion by the end of the decade. In 1994 the market stood at $70
billion in plan assets, according to widely published research numbers.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
BANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

TORONTO-DOMINION BREAKS NEW GROUND

In the U.S., the average bank mutual fund customer faces the quandary
of which funds to select in addition to the bank's proprietary fund. Not so
in Canada where, until recently, banks were allowed to sell only their own
proprietary funds clearly marked with the bank name. Now, Toronto- Dominion
Bank has received approval from several provincial securities commissioners
to sell other brand-name mutual funds in its 900-branch network throughout
Canada. Toronto-Dominion is the first Canadian bank to receive this power.
     Mark Wettlaufer, president of TD Asset Management (TDAM), also
announced that the bank was creating an asset-allocation account in which a
customer may accumulate not only the bank's Green Line No-Load mutual funds
but also the other funds the bank has received the power to sell.
     Investment advice will come from TDAM's portfolio managers; the bank's
discount brokerage company, Green Line Investor Services, will provide the
back-office execution.
     Last year, Toronto-Dominion announced the first of its expansion plans
in the U.S. with the opening of several Green Line investment centers
anchored by the company's office in New York. While the company would
specialize in servicing the Canadian investments of U.S. and Canadian
investors, it also aims to break into the competitive discount brokerage
market in the U.S.
     Wettlaufer said Green Line operates a sales force of 5,000 throughout
its branch network and has C$10 billion (roughly US$7.3 billion) in assets
under management



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
BANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

FIDELITY ADDS UNIT TRUSTS TO BANK OFFERINGS

Fidelity Investments has decided it's time the investing public at
banks had a shot at unit investment trusts. The Boston-based financial
behemoth has added a series of Fidelity-sponsored unit investment trusts to
its well-known line of Fidelity Advisor funds, the principal Fidelity funds
sold through banks.
     The funds come through Fidelity Capital Markets. The Fidelity unit
calls them Fidelity Defined Trusts. Fidelity Rolling Government Series
(FRoGS), will feature one short-term Treasury portfolio product and
Fidelity Laddered Government Series (FLaGS), will feature a short-term
Treasury portfolio product and a short/intermediate-term Treasury
portfolio.
     Fidelity Investments Institutional Services Company will offer all
three UITs as part of its Fidelity Advisor family of mutual funds sold
through investment professionals at brokerage firms, banks, and insurance
companies. Fidelity also will continue to make third-party UIT products
available to its retail and institutional customers.
     "UITs are a viable alternative for investors who want a fixed maturity
date and a maturity value in their fixed-income investments," said Tim
McKenna, executive vice president of Fidelity Capital Markets fixed-income
division.

Fixed, Unmanaged Treasury Portfolio
     While Fidelity mutual funds are managed by Fidelity Management &
Research Company, Defined Trusts are selected by Fidelity Capital Markets.
Fidelity's new FRoGS are designed to provide monthly income and
preservation of principal through a fixed and unmanaged portfolio of U.S.
Treasury securities.
     Maturities on FRoGS will be distributed in 25% increments every three
months over a one-year period beginning in March 1996.  Spreading the
return of principal over a period of time allows investors to increase
flexibility and minimize risk.
     Proceeds from maturing U.S. Treasury notes on FRoGS will be used to
repurchase an additional one year U.S. Treasury note.  Fidelity will "roll"
these distributions four times a year beginning in 1996 and ending in 1997.
The Trust will distribute principal in 25% increments in 1998.
     Treasury securities maturing every six months beginning in November
1996 and ending in November 1998.  The average maturity is about two years.
Series 2 consists of five short- and short-intermediate U.S Treasury
securities maturing every 12 months beginning in May 1996 and ending in May
2001.  The average maturity of the Series 2  FLaGS is approximately 3.5
years.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
BANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

STEIN ROE PICKS NEW FUND NAME

Stein Roe Mutual Funds has renamed the Stein Roe Prime Equities Fund
the Stein Roe Growth & Income Fund effective the beginning of next month.
      "We believe the new name more accurately reflects the Fund's
investment philosophy by recognizing both its growth and income
components," said Tim Armour, president of Stein Roe Mutual Funds. The
fund's investment objective also will be revised to better reflect the
income mission of the fund.
     The revised objective will be to pursue both growth of capital and
current income. It is  designed for investors seeking a diversified
portfolio of securities that offers the opportunity for long-term growth of
capital while also pursuing a steady stream of income.
     The fund's investment strategy will remain the same, which is to
invest in well-established companies whose common stocks are believed to
have both the potential to appreciate in value and to pay dividends to
shareholders.
     The fund will continue to emphasize investments in equity securities
of companies having market capitalizations in excess of $1 billion.
Securities of these well-established companies are believed to be generally
less volatile than smaller companies.
     Founded in 1932, Stein Roe & Farnham is a Chicago-based investment
management firm. It provides professional investment management for
individuals and institutions and serves as investment adviser to the Stein
Roe family of 18 no-load mutual funds.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
BANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

REUTERS TO ADD NEW INVESTING SOFTWARE TO ONLINE BANK OFFERING

On January 9, Reuters America Inc. acquired for cash Equis
International of Salt Lake City, a developer of technical analysis software
for individual investors.
     Reuters America will integrate the Equis International product line
with that of RealityOnline, Inc. of King of Prussia, PA, a Reuters company
that develops and operates an online personal investment service, Reuters
Money Network.
     Reuters is using the personal finance software in an attempt to break
into the bank securities industry as a technological vendor for retail
accounts.
     Equis offers a product line that includes MetaStock, a technical
analysis charting software; the DownLoader, a software application that
automatically collects security price updates from several online services;
MetaStock RT, software that charts real-time market information; Pulse
Portfolio Management System, a portfolio value tracking software
application; and the Technician, an application that charts and analyzes
investment marketing conditions.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
BANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

CALENDAR

With the winter storm still a very fresh memory in the minds of many
on the East Coast, two investment product groups have wisely opted to hold
their meetings in Palm Springs, CA. And it appears the popularity of the
site has caused at least one group to run out of rooms for the time being.
The Bank Securities Association's Tom Cote said the group is negotiating
with hotels in Palm Desert to cough up more rooms for the February 24-27
annual convention of the BSA.
     The meeting starts Saturday, February 24, with an address by Phil
Feigin, the securities commissioner for Colorado. Other featured speakers
are Robert Novak, a syndicated columnist and (invited) Rep. Sonny Bono, a
member of the House Banking Committee, and the former mayor of Palm
Springs. For the latest update on the meeting call the BSA at (415) 924-
8010.
     Starting six days before the BSA's meeting is the popular marketing
conference of the National Association for Variable Annuities. It'll be
held in a "suburb" of Palm Springs in La Quinta, CA. The exhibit area opens
on Sunday, February 18, but the real meeting starts the next day. The
conference runs through February 24, with concurrent sessions running each
morning. The keynote address comes from Robert Palmer, the California
insurance commissioner. So far, the lone banking representative speaking at
the meeting is Philip Corwin, the American Bankers Association's director
of operations and retail banking. For more information contact NAVA at
(703) 620-0674.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
BANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

SUPERMARKET MUTUAL FUND SALES EXPECTED TO INCREASE

The supermarket banking trend appears to be maturing beyond plain
vanilla banking, according to a survey conducted by supermarket banking
consultants, National Commerce Bank Services in Memphis.
     The consulting company, a subsidiary of National Commerce Bancorp.,
also in Memphis, surveyed 800 shoppers in 20 states.
     "We've said for years that in-store banking was the wave of the
future. Well, the future has arrived," said Douglas W. Ferris, the
consulting company's president. What's more, he said, the number of
services shoppers want from their supermarket bank branches has increased.
"In the early days of in-store banking, customers used the branches for
withdrawals and deposits," Ferris said. This has clearly changed.
     For example, 40% of the survey's respondents said that sale of mutual
funds in the supermarket branches was important. Only a few banks operating
in-store branches offer investment products but this is likely to change as
the number of in-store branches continues to grow.
     Ferris' group estimates the number of in-store bank branches will grow
by 150% in four years. These branches, the consulting company said, will
play an increasingly import role in bank delivery systems.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
BANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNet
January 15, 1996

ANGLIM JOINS FLAGSHIP AS NATIONAL SALES MANAGER

Phil Anglim has become the national sales manager of Flagship Funds,
effective immediately. Anglim had been a regional sales manager for the
company before this most recent promotion. He will administer the company's
15 regional sales vice presidents.
     This is almost a new position for Flagship, since Richard P. Davis,
the Flagship president, served as national sales manager since the
company's inception in 1984.
     The fund company, located in Dayton, OH, specializes in fixed-income
municipal securities. It has $4.5 billion in assets under management. It
previously had been the money management arm of Mead Corp. before Davis and
the current chairman, Bruce Bedford, led a management buyout.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-30</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B021-309</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi71.html 205.156.212.5 19970115003908 text/html 49273
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:36:42 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:20 GMT
Content-length: 49084
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi71.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY 8, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Seafirst Bank Expands Its ATM Network</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(55 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>EBT Ground Rules Elicit Some Boos From The Bleachers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(419 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Another Internet Company Goes Public</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(115 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>A New Year's Revolution In ATM Pricing</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1332 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Deluxe Corp.  Sneezes, Deluxe Data Catches Cold</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(363 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>The Quest Begins For A National EBT Network</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1414 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Visa Aims For Debit Summit From Plus' Denver Base</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(886 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>When It Comes To ATM Deposits, Money Talks</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1142 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>First Fidelity Gets A Charge Out Of Balance Inquiries</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(310 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>What's An ATM?  'Just A Vending Machine That Dispenses Cash'</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(415 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>EFTA Tries Again To Accelerate Into The Fast Lane</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(965 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

Seafirst Bank Expands Its ATM Network


Seafirst Bank, a Seattle-based subsidiary of Bank of America, has won a
contract to install 140 ATMs in Safeway convenience stores in Washington,
Idaho and Oregon.  The deal will increase the bank's ATM base 19% to 878
units.  Installation will begin January 15 and is expected to be completed in
90 days.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

EBT Ground Rules Elicit Some Boos From The Bleachers


The electronic benefits council agreed to a number of rules in principle at
its December meeting.  The rules are circulating among the council's 38
members and will be released to the public by March.  Recommended rules
include:

* Printing balances on receipts.  Terminal drivers must print a recipient's
account balance on the transaction receipt for approved food stamp purchases,
food stamp refunds and when a food stamp purchase is denied due to
insufficient funds.  Printing a balance is optional for cash benefits at the
point-of-sale.  Terminal drivers aren't required to print balances under
commercial rules.

* Record retention.  Operating rules should reflect commercial standards and
require issuing or acquiring financial institutions to keep transaction
records for at least two years.  Food stamp records must be kept three years
by issuing institutions.

* ATM transactions.  Recipients should be able to download at least $20 and a
maximum of no less than $200 from ATMs.  Most EFT networks currently provide
minimum and maximum withdrawal requirements.

* Technical specifications.  Participating cards must comply with Independent
Sales Organization and American National Standard Institute operating
standards.  Primary account numbers must be displayed on the face of the
cards, and a signature panel or signature image is required.

* Settlement procedures.  Settlement procedures will mirror commercial
standards where settlement takes place on a daily basis.

* Scrip machines (under review).  Scrip machines can be used for dispensing
benefits as long as they're treated as point-of-sale terminals and not ATMs.
With scrip machines, recipients get vouchers that can be redeemed for cash
from a store clerk.

Tom McLaughlin, vice president with Milwaukee-based Deluxe Data, takes issue
with several rules, including the option of printing account balances on
receipts for cash benefits at the point-of-sale.  "If recipients don't have
balances on receipts, we could see more denials and help desk calls," he says.
"Making it optional could run up the cost of EBT."


Kansas And Illinois Announce EBT Deals

The Midwest is the latest hotbed for electronic benefits transfer programs.
Late last year, the Kansas Department of Social Services awarded a seven-year,
$11.6 million EBT contract to Milwaukee-based Deluxe Data Systems.  The
program will begin in Wichita in July, with a statewide rollout to be
completed by July 1997.

In other EBT developments, the Illinois Department of Public Aid has selected
Texas-based Transactive Corp.  to negotiate a five-year EBT contract.  The
program will initially serve 65,000 households and expand to 500,000
households statewide.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

Another Internet Company Goes Public


CyberCash Inc.  is going public.  The Reston, Va.-based developer of
encryption software for financial transactions over the Internet filed with
the Securities and Exchange Commission late last year for an initial public
offering of two million shares of common stock.  Underwriters will have the
option to purchase an additional 300,000 shares.  The estimated price of the
stock will be $15 to $17 per share.

CyberCash plans to spend the estimated $34 million in proceeds on new product
development and on marketing two new services, Secure Check and Coin Check.
Secure Check will be the equivalent of an electronic certified check, while
Coin Check will encrypt small denomination payments over the Internet.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

A New Year's Revolution In ATM Pricing


There's no question how much a can of soup is worth on the free market.  The
price is clearly marked, and if it's too high the grocer will soon know
because his shelves will remain full.

That's not been the case for the price of using an ATM in most areas, as
networks rules have prevented ATM owners from charging the consumer directly
for getting cash.  But the industry appears poised on the brink of a
fundamental shift in the pricing of ATMs as major networks relax their
surcharging bans and allow market forces to determine the price of a service
many consumers have come to view as a necessity.

And early returns from markets that allow surcharging suggest consumers may
value the convenience of ATMs more than many in the industry believed.

The momentum toward surcharging has grown in recent years as 14 states passed
laws that allowed surcharging, overriding the restrictions of both the
Visa/Plus and MasterCard/Cirrus national ATM networks.  While surcharging
spread rapidly in those states, many of them heavily touristed areas in the
South and West, the Plus and Cirrus rules effectively prevented the practice
from spreading to the major population centers of the Northeast, Midwest and
West Coast.

The big breakthrough came last fall when Plus announced it would allow
surcharging at ATMs bearing its logo beginning April 1.  Last month, the
largest of the regional networks that still banned surcharging, Delaware-based
MAC, announced it, too, would allow the practice on April 1.

Industry participants now expect Cirrus and other major regional networks to
fall into line.  "I would imagine it would be a foregone conclusion," says
Charles Raphael, first vice president of electronic banking at First Chicago
NBD.  "In order to hold their members, and obviously the big deployers of
ATMs, I don't think they would have a choice."  A Cirrus spokesperson says,
"It is very likely the Cirrus board will take up this issue at its next
meeting, which probably will be in March."

With Plus and many of the larger regionals allowing surcharging, the holdouts
are left in a position many view as untenable.  If Cirrus were to maintain its
ban, an ATM deployer in California, for instance, could place a machine with
the logos of Star System, which allows surcharging, and Plus, and serve the
big majority of consumers.

Regionals Feel the Heat

And if Cirrus does allow surcharging, the pressure will shift to regional
networks like Virginia-based Most that maintain the ban.  Because a Most
member must put its ATMs into the network, it would not be able to surcharge,
while a competitor that did not belong to the network could surcharge on a
machine bearing the Plus and Cirrus logos and accept most ATM cards.

Rather than put its members at a disadvantage, the Most board will reconsider
its policy at a meeting later this month, says David A.  O'Connor, president
of the network.  "We see the pattern," he says.  "The forces of the
marketplace seem to be driving the industry towards surcharges.  I think
that's a fairly strong movement that we probably won't resist."  Executives at
Michigan-based Magic Line, the seventh-largest network, and Missouri-based
BankMate, the ninth-largest, say they, too, may have to reconsider their
surcharging bans.

New Rules

Some networks whose owners oppose surcharging, such as Chicago-based Cash
Station, may hold the line for a while, says George Albright, president of the
Atlanta-based Speer & Associates consulting firm.  "But, over time, as the
ownership changes as a result of mergers, and banks come in that are
surcharging in other regions, you're not going to just be able to say, 'Our
rules don't allow it.' They'll say, 'Let's change the rules,'" Albright says.

Why are more banks anxious to surcharge now?  Industry participants offer many
explanations, but among the most common is the growing pressure on banks to
generate increased non-interest income.  "People see a lot of untapped
potential in ATMs," says Raphael.  "The hardware and the switching system are
there, so the additional revenue you can produce off that network is almost
pure profit."  Another banker who requested anonymity observes, "For ATM
deployers, this is a Christmas present of enormous potential."

Off-Premise Rivalry

At the same time, non-banking companies, such as Texas-based Electronic Data
Systems, and Affiliated Computer Services, have been moving aggressively into
off-premise locations.  Banks, which enjoy low maintenance costs and no rental
fees when placing ATMs in their own lobbies, have moved more slowly because
they were not certain they could generate enough revenue from off-premise
locations to justify the investment, observes David Baker, director of
marketing at Fujitsu-ICL Systems Inc., an ATM manufacturer.

"But," Baker adds, "they don't want to see all the locations snapped up by
nonbank deployers.  Bigger banks are saying, 'Give us the opportunity to
surcharge, lower the transaction volume needed for profitability, and we're
going to go head-to-head with ACS and EDS.'" As an example of that approach,
Baker points to NationsBank's outbidding EDS and ACS in August for the
contract to place ATMs in 661 Stop-N-Go convenience stores owned by National
Convenience Stores in Texas, a state that allows surcharging.

The successful implementation of surcharging by some major banks also has
influenced their peers, says Albright.  Among large banks, he says, the
pioneer was Bank One of Texas, which began the practice in 1993, and led the
way in raising the typical surcharge in the state from 25 cents to 50 cents.
"They showed they could do it and not get hurt in the marketplace," he says.
"All of a sudden the whole state of Texas was charging and the price went up
to 50 cents."

Many Will Pay

Albright says developments in Texas and other states suggest consumers are
willing to pay more for ATM convenience than they were being charged.  He
points out that at the same time as surcharges were being imposed in Texas,
issuing banks raised the foreign fees they charge their customers who use ATMs
not owned by the bank.  "The typical foreign fee went from 50 cents to $1.25,
and some banks are charging $1.50," Albright says.  With Bank One and other
Texas institutions raising their surcharges to $1 in recent months, many
consumers now are paying more than $2 to use an ATM, counting both foreign
fees and surcharges.  "And exactly the same thing has happened in the state of
Georgia just from March 1995 to the end of the year," says Albright.

Is the price too high?  Apparently not for many consumers, based on network
reports of only temporary declines in transaction volumes.  Network officials
in Alabama reported an initial drop in volume of 8% and in Texas of 15%,
Albright says, "but everyone tells me after six to nine months it comes back."

And that occurs despite the spread of surcharging in most cases to include
many machines on bank premises as well as off.  Network executives say 75% of
ATMs surcharge in Alabama, 60% in Texas and more than half in Utah.

Ultimate Test

Nonetheless, some believe surcharging will spread more slowly in the major
Northern cities.  Lynch says some NYCE members may not surcharge at all in
hopes of pressuring competitors to refrain from the practice.  "There are many
large organizations that have the point of view the revenue isn't worth the
risk to the customer relationship," he says.

Albright and Lynch both warn that consumer advocates and regulators are more
likely to raise objections in the Northeast than elsewhere.  And, Albright
adds, "the New York press will jump on it, whether the rest of the country is
doing it or not."

With all those factors, he says, the Big Apple may be the ultimate test for
surcharging.  "If the same thing happens in New York that has happened in
Georgia and Texas," he says, "then surcharging will have become the norm."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

Deluxe Corp.  Sneezes, Deluxe Data Catches Cold


When a company's board of directors holds a special meeting just before
Christmas to implement a major restructuring, subsidiaries can expect big
changes early in the New Year.

And that's what's happened at Milwaukee-based Deluxe Data Systems, whose
president, James E.  McGowan, was relieved of his duties last week and placed
on special assignment, reporting to J.  A.  "Gus" Blanchard, president and CEO
of Deluxe Corp., the Minneapolis-based corporate parent.  John B.  Benton,
chairman and CEO of the Benton International consulting firm which has been
involved in the Deluxe Corp.  restructuring, was named interim CEO, an
assignment he says will last two to three months.

The moves follow Deluxe Corp.'s announcement of the closing of several
check-printing plants and unveiling of a plan for growth that highlighted new
products from Deluxe Data.  "I felt this major expansion required new
leadership to move us to this higher plane," Blanchard said in a statement.

Industry sources say Deluxe Data is at a crossroads, having lost major
processing contracts in recent years at the NYCE and Yankee 24 regional EFT
networks, which took their processing in-house, and facing aggressive
competition from Electronic Data Systems, which now processes for two of the
10 largest regional networks, Cash Station and The Exchange.  They add the
company's major investments in electronic benefits transfer have yet to pay
off.

Deluxe Data also has lagged in offering newer technology, such as home
banking, Internet access and prepaid phone cards.  While Deluxe Data is
expected to unveil a home banking and bill payment product soon, they trail
competitors like EDS, Servantis and FIserv, says Richard Yanak, president of
the New Jersey-based NYCE network.

McGowan, who came to Deluxe Data 28 months ago, after many years at IBM, may
lack the EFT experience needed to chart a new course for the company, says
Donald Mauer, senior vice president of Gensar, a Pennsylvania-based processor.
"What's required here is not just broad management skills," he says.  "You
need someone who can define what this company's going to be."  Adds Yanak,
Benton's interim role "may signal there isn't anyone inside the company that's
likely to get the job."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

The Quest Begins For A National EBT Network


In the early days of ATMs, customers could only use their cards in machines
owned by their own bank.  To give the ATMs more value, financial institutions
formed shared EFT networks so that customers could use their cards in machines
owned by other banks, including those in different parts of the country.  The
networks then teamed up with retailers to let customers use their cards to
make purchases at the point-of-sale.

Now a second electronic payment evolution is underway.  But rather than create
more national ATM and POS networks, coalitions are forming for interstate EBT.

State governments involved in electronic benefits transfer programs are
teaming up with other industry participants to let welfare recipients receive
benefits at ATMs and POS terminals across state lines.  While some states have
already rolled out EBT programs, recipients from one state usually can't
receive benefits in other states because the programs don't have common
operating rules.  The National Automated Clearing House Association's
electronic benefits council is trying to change that by developing common
rules.

The electronic benefits council, a multi-industry trade group that includes
state governments, retailers, third-party processors and EFT networks, adopted
a set of standards in principle late last year (see sidebar).  The rules
represent the first major action of the council created in September in
collaboration with the U.S.  Department of Treasury and the Federal EBT Task
Force, a federal agency that oversees EBT implementation.  The council also is
negotiating with the board of directors of the Quest shared EFT network to use
the Quest logo as a national mark for EBT cards.

Common Rules

"Rather than have 50 states develop their own systems individually, we're
trying to lay the framework in advance so everyone knows what to expect," says
Helena Sims, senior director of the council.  While states with current EBT
projects can negotiate with EBT contractors in other states to let recipients
receive benefits across state lines, the process is often burdensome and
time-consuming, she says.  And because most EBT contracts have a five-year
limit, the agreements have to be constantly renegotiated with new contractors.

Some industry participants, however, believe the council faces a tough task in
creating national operating rules that all EBT participants can agree on.
"The effort is noble, but it's as unattainable as worldwide peace," says
Stephen Cole, president of the Chicago-based Cash Station EFT network.  "Every
ATM network has different rules depending on state and local laws, and coming
up with one set is very difficult.  They said they're going to have the rules
ready by March, but I'd be surprised if they have them out by December."

Skeptics say rules developed by shared EFT networks and state and federal
governments already do the job.  The contradiction of existing rules is one
area of concern.  If an ATM overdispenses $10, for example, a network and bank
are permitted under network rules to reconcile the transaction without the
consumer's knowledge.  With food stamps, however, it is considered an adverse
action under federal law to debit a recipient's account without notice.

"The council is addressing issues that are covered by network, state and
federal regulations, and we're concerned about duplication and conflict," says
Thomas McLaughlin, vice president of Milwaukee-based Deluxe Data Systems.  "If
there are EBT policies that are contrary, who will arbitrate the disputes?"

James McCarthy, executive vice president with the San Diego-based Star System
EFT network and chairman of the electronic benefits council, says the issue of
account adjustments can be resolved.  "As a network, I operate a lot of
gateways with people who have different rules than me.  They're not
conflicting, just different.  We're working with state and federal personnel,
as well as networks and financial institutions, to come up with procedures."

Advantage To Retailers

Retailers stand to gain from the electronic benefits council's efforts.
"Retailers who participate in EBT programs should benefit from the efforts of
the EBT council," says David Bragin, treasurer of Florida-based Winn Dixie
supermarkets.  "If the states adopt these national operating rules, any EBT
cardholder or authorized retailer will be able to conduct EBT transactions no
matter which government entity issued the benefits or in which state the
retailer operates."  Winn Dixie has approximately 1,175 stores in 14 states.

While each state has the option to follow the operating rules, the eight-state
Southern Alliance of States and seven-state Northeast Coalition are
incorporating the rules into their contracts.  The two programs comprise
nearly 50% of all welfare recipients in the U.S.  The rules must comply with
federal requirements that EBT programs not be more expensive to run than
current paper-based systems, says Dan Berry, program manager with New York
State.  "The bottom line is these systems have to be cost-effective," he says.

Although welfare benefits-such as food stamps and Aid to Families with
Dependent Children-are usually redeemed in the state where the recipient
lives, the U.S.  government also plans to use EBT programs to distribute
benefits to a population that is more likely to travel, such as Social
Security recipients.  "These programs will eventually deliver much more than
just welfare benefits," Berry says.  Additional benefits may include military
and railroad pensions and unemployment insurance.

To let consumers know where they can receive their benefits, the council is
negotiating with the owners of the Kentucky-based Quest shared EFT network to
use the Quest logo as a national mark for EBT cards.  The mark would be
displayed on cards, ATM and POS terminals and at merchant locations.  The
Quest network dissolved in July, 1995, after its members migrated to the
Delaware-based MAC regional EFT network.

Buying A Logo

Using an existing logo is cheaper than developing a new logo, Sims says.  "If
you start from scratch, there's a lot of paperwork and forms you must fill out
in developing a logo," she says.  The council hopes to complete the
negotiations by the end of January, she adds.  The logo would be purchased
with funds collected from member dues.  Terms of the deal, including what the
council will pay to use the logo, were not revealed.

In the event the deal does go through, the Quest EBT network would be similar
to the Plus and Cirrus national ATM networks, McCarthy says.  If a recipient
from New York uses his card at a Quest ATM in Florida, for example, the
transaction would be sent to the government-designated issuer in the Southern
Alliance of States who would route the transaction to the Northeast Coalition
for authorization.  The transaction would then be switched by a regional
network or other entity designated by the prime contractor in the Southern
Alliance of States.  Supermarket chains with a presence in both EBT programs
may opt to switch transactions themselves, McCarthy adds.  "We're trying to
allow as much flexibility as possible," he says.

And the state coalitions should bring sizeable volume to regional EFT
networks.  That's particularly true with the Northeast Coalition.  "By
bringing welfare recipients into the EFT networks, we're bringing a huge
volume to the market that was never there before," says William Kilmartin,
Massachusetts comptroller and vice chairman of the electronic benefits
council.  The Northeast coalition, for example, will bring approximately two
million new cardholders into the New Jersey-based NYCE shared EFT network, he
says.  By providing each cardholder with four transactions per month, the
coalition could bring NYCE at least 96 million new transactions each year.
"If [NYCE] is paid per transaction, and we double their volume, it's extremely
significant for them," he says.  The Northeast Coalition plans to announce the
winning bidder later this month.

Some industry participants are concerned the council could impose a licensing
fee on financial institutions and merchants who use the logo.  Elliot McEntee,
NACHA president, says some form of fee may be imposed, but it won't be large
enough to inhibit participation.  "There may be a charge to cover the costs of
distributing the logo, but it's not a money-making venture," he says.

While the electronic benefits council faces a tough task developing rules that
everyone can agree on, most industry participants believe there should be a
national set of operating rules as EBT takes on a national flavor.  "If we
take on a national approach, instead of each state building its own EBT
system, it'll be much easier to bring on additional benefits," Kilmartin says.
"Once we figure out a common ground, it'll be cheaper and better for
everyone."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

Visa Aims For Debit Summit From Plus' Denver Base


His first priority after taking the helm of the Plus System, says David A.
Brooks, was to calm fears of wholesale changes at Visa's national ATM network.
But the rest of his to-do list includes plenty of change, including a broader
role for Visa in debit processing and more prominent use of the Visa name at
ATMs.

Much will stay the same, however, says Brooks, 55, who was named acting
president and CEO last month.  He replaces Denny D.  Dumler who resigned to
head up TransAlliance, a new joint venture between Electronic Data Systems and
the owners of the Washington-based Exchange regional ATM network.  The Plus
board is expected to ratify Brooks' appointment later this month.

For one thing, he has assured Plus members, the team running the network will
remain in place.  "They were concerned Visa not do anything that would give
people concern for their futures and disrupt operations by having defections,"
says Brooks.  Nor are there plans to move the network out of Denver, Brooks
says.

Remote Control

Brooks' own home base and responsibilities also change little.  He remains at
Visa headquarters in San Francisco and retains the title of executive vice
president of market development at Visa U.S.A., a job he took two years ago
after holding retail banking and administrative posts at First National Bank
of Chicago, Crocker Bank and Citicorp.

Some observers wonder how effectively Brooks can guide Plus from afar, as well
as about his limited EFT experience.  "He's a very capable man, but he's not
an EFT guy," says one regional network executive.  "And Brooks remaining in
San Francisco doesn't sound like a strong management move for Plus."

Brooks emphasizes the experience of the Plus team resident in Denver, led by
Ron Reed, senior vice president, as well as the benefit of his remaining in
San Francisco.  "My value is integrating Plus into the mainstream of Visa," he
says.  And, he adds, a major focus of Plus will remain a project that is well
underway:  the deployment of a new debit processing platform of Tandem
Himalaya computers and Deluxe Data Systems software that Visa has installed in
Denver at a cost of "multiple millions of dollars."

The new platform will ultimately support all of Visa's debit products,
including Plus, the Interlink point-of-sale network and the Visa check
off-line debit card.  While Plus is not scheduled to move to the new platform
until 1997, the first Visa check customer will go live by February, according
to Reed.

That will put the Visa/Plus data center into competition with third parties
that handle the bulk of processing for Visa check, as well as for MasterCard's
MasterMoney off-line debit card.  And that's just the beginning of the
competition they'll be getting from Visa, as Brooks says the new platform has
the capacity to offer processing services to regional networks, which would
pit Visa against major processors such as Deluxe Data and EDS, as well as some
of the regional networks themselves.

Brooks calls this a step towards greater EFT efficiency.  "As an industry," he
says, "we have to get rid of redundancies in systems and networks.  Our
strategy will be to offer this functionality to our customers at the lowest
possible cost."

Some network executives applaud the effort.  "The financial industry needs to
respond with processing capability that's superior to what nonbanks can
offer," says Richard Lyons, chief operating officer of Virginia-based Most.

Others point out competition is keen in EFT processing.  "How successful
they'll be depends a great deal on what they offer and at what price," says
Richard P.  Yanak, president of New Jersey-based NYCE.  "That's become a very
low-margin business because competition has driven down the price."

While Visa tried unsuccessfully to enter the processing arena in the early
'90s, several observers say they're not surprised by Visa's new foray into EFT
processing or MasterCard's decision last year to acquire the BankMate regional
network and bring in-house processing for its Cirrus national ATM network

"MasterCard and Visa have got a lock on the credit card side of electronic
payments, but not on debit," says a regional network executive.  "If they can
get a lot of transactions running through their computers they'll have a
toehold that would be difficult to pry loose."

While the battle for transaction volume rages behind the scenes, Brooks says
there may be more visible changes in the Plus logo at the ATM.  He says Visa
is "about 75% of the way through a major brand study" that indicates Plus is
increasingly known by its target audience of people who travel, but still has
nowhere near the recognition of Visa.  While he does not anticipate dropping
the Plus logo, he says he could envision a brand name such as "Plus by Visa"
that would emphasize the connection.

A final change Brooks foresees is the completion in November of Visa's
acquisition of Plus, a deal announced in 1993.  The price was not disclosed.

While some insiders have wondered whether Visa, with its credit card emphasis,
would make the final payment, Brooks says the sale will go through.  "We've
got a total debit strategy, and I don't know why we would want to back away
from that," he says.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

When It Comes To ATM Deposits, Money Talks


For many consumers, withdrawing cash from an ATM is as commonplace as buying a
pack of gum from a convenience store.  By swiping a debit card and entering a
personal identification number, consumers can access funds and be on their
way.

But while financial institutions have succeeded in getting people to use ATMs
to make withdrawals, convincing them to make deposits is another story.
According to a national survey in late 1994 by Atlanta-based Synergistics
Research Corp., 92% of 613 ATM users made cash withdrawals at ATMs, while only
32% of the consumers used ATMs to make deposits.

Industry insiders point to several factors discouraging consumers from making
ATM deposits, ranging from fears a check will collect dust in the bottom of a
terminal to safety concerns about filling out a deposit envelope at a poorly
lit machine.  Worries that a deposit won't be promptly credited-or credited at
all-also contributes to consumer unease.  The ATM deposit slip does little to
calm those fears, they say.

"Many consumers have a fear of the unknown-depositing checks at ATMs is
something they haven't done," says Anne Morgan Moore, Synergistics Research
Corp.  president.

Financial institutions have used a number of strategies to overcome those
fears, ranging from financial incentives that reward ATM deposits to $3 fees
for each teller transaction.  Other institutions have deployed
advanced-function terminals that lift an image of a deposited check onto the
ATM screen to let consumers know their check isn't falling into a bottomless
pit.

Financial Incentives

Cleveland-based KeyCorp is using both financial incentives and penalties to
encourage ATM deposits.  KeyCorp introduced a checking account late last year
that pays consumers 25 cents for each ATM deposit.  The KeyMoney Access
account pays consumers up to $1 a month, requires no minimum balance and
carries no fees.  Consumers are charged $1.50 for in-branch deposits.  The
account is available in Ohio, Michigan and Indiana and will be rolled out to
all KeyCorp branches by March.

Larry Peterson, KeyCorp senior vice president, says the bank saves
approximately 50 cents on each ATM deposit, excluding the price of the
machines.  Consumers that make four ATM deposits per month are paid a maximum
of $1, netting the bank around $1 in profit.  "This is not a tremendous money
maker," he says.  "We're paying customers to learn about the functionality of
ATMs and get comfortable with the machines."

The KeyMoney Access account isn't the first time KeyCorp has used incentives
to change consumer behavior.  The bank launched three 60-day marketing
campaigns in the fall of 1994 that rewarded a consumer with $5 if three out of
five monthly ATM transactions were deposits.  The bank also enrolled consumers
in a $10,000 sweepstakes for every ATM transaction and gave consumers $10 to
sign up for various direct-deposit accounts.  The promotions took place in
Syracuse, N.Y; Columbus, Ohio; and Seattle, Wash.

Easy To Use

Although Peterson was unable to reveal how many deposits were migrated from
tellers to ATMs, the bank issued eight times more ATM cards during the market
launch in Columbus than the comparable 60 days in 1994, he says.  KeyCorp also
opened eight times more new direct-deposit accounts, he adds.

But while KeyCorp was successful with its campaigns, other banks haven't been
so lucky.  First Chicago ran a two-month promotion in late 1994 where
consumers were given $2 tokens they could redeem by making ATM deposits.
While the bank saw a modest increase in ATM deposits during the promotion,
those deposits gradually subsided during the following four months.  "People
eventually went back to the old way of doing things," says Tom Tremain, First
Chicago vice president.

First Chicago has since introduced a plan in which consumers with accounts
requiring no minimum balance are charged $3 for each teller visit.  Customers
with a $250 minimum balance or more have one free teller visit per week, and
customers with a $250 minimum balance and direct deposit have six free teller
visits per month.

Positive Results

And the results have been impressive.  First Chicago witnessed a 125% increase
in ATM deposits during the first four months after the changes were made.  "We
saw a huge increase in deposits, and a corresponding decrease in teller
transactions," Tremain says.  The bank saw a net loss of customers for a few
months, but now is signing up more new customers than it is losing, he says.

But some banks, including Florida-based Barnett Banks, prefer education and
incentives to penalties.  The bank is considering several strategies at its
Tampa and Ft.  Lauderdale branches over the next few months, including
in-branch demonstrations on how to make ATM deposits and $1 coupons that
customers can redeem by making ATM deposits.

"I don't like First Chicago's and KeyCorp's negative approach-you don't take a
customer and slap them on the hand," says Len Ferman, Barnett Banks' director
of self-service banking.  Such pricing structures can give the impression a
bank is only concerned about its bottom line, he adds.  "No one knows what the
long-term ramifications are for charging customers for things they expect to
be free," he says.

Other institutions have opted for high-technology hardware to encourage ATM
deposits.  InterBold and AT&T Global Information Solutions both offer
check-imaging ATMs that display checks on the ATM screen.  InterBold also
offers an ATM that images a copy of the check onto the ATM receipt to give
consumers an extra layer of comfort.

"The ATMs have eliminated the black-hole syndrome," says Robert Morris, vice
president of electronic banking with Bank of America Arizona, which is
piloting six check-imaging machines in Phoenix.  The terminals have made a
modest impact on increasing ATM deposits, he says.  The machines have one
drawback, however.  Because the ATMs can accept checks without envelopes,
checks that are wrinkled are sometimes rejected.  "In some situations, the
teller will have to cash the check," he says.

Some bankers, however, say check-imaging ATMs are too costly.  The ATMs cost
up to $50,000, well above the $25,000 price tag on standard deposit-accepting
ATMs.  "With the results we've seen [from price incentives], the imaging
technology is way too expensive for the added value you get," Tremain says.

Other bankers believe direct deposit is the way to go.  Joseph Pendleton,
senior vice president with Reading, Pa.-based Meridian Bank, says processing
direct-deposit checks via the automated clearing house is less expensive than
processing deposits through ATMs and tellers.  It costs around two cents to
process direct-deposit checks versus 85 cents for an ATM deposit and $1 for a
branch deposit, Pendleton says.

"People are resistant to making deposits at ATMs, and you can spend a lot of
money trying to change their ways," Pendleton says.  "The returns aren't as
great as spending money to convince people to use direct deposit."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

First Fidelity Gets A Charge Out Of Balance Inquiries


While financial institutions are trying to get consumers to make deposits at
ATMs, one bank is focusing on moving balance inquiries to machines.

Beginning Feb.  1, New Jersey-based First Fidelity Bancorp will charge
customers whose deposits fall below minimum balance requirements 75 cents for
balance inquiries from tellers and 50 cents for balance inquiries on a
toll-free number.  Customers receive two free inquiries per month from tellers
and two from the voice response number.  Senior citizen accounts and accounts
with high minimum balances will not be affected.

The aim is to migrate branch inquiries to ATMs and get customers to maintain
larger balances, a First Fidelity spokesman says.  First Fidelity has 715 ATMs
in New Jersey and surrounding states.  The fees are not related to the bank's
merger with First Union Corp.  earlier this year, he adds.

While several banks offer checking accounts that encourage ATM usage by
charging low monthly fees-and for teller transactions-First Fidelity appears
to be a pioneer in imposing fees solely on balance inquiries.  And industry
observers expect other institutions to follow suit.  "There's certainly a
trend in channeling consumers to lower cost services," says Anne Morgan Moore,
president of Synergistics Research Corp., an Atlanta-based banking
consultancy.  "Customers who want face-to-face contact should be willing to
pay more," she says.

Some industry participants, however, are surprised the bank plans to charge
customers for balance inquiries using its voice response system.  Such systems
are usually less expensive than ATMs, they say.  The First Fidelity
spokesperson says a small number of customers were calling the bank up to four
times a day to check balances.  "The fees are focused on a very small number
of people who are making excessive calls," he says.  He predicts less than 10
percent of the bank's 2.5 million customers will be affected by the change.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

What's An ATM?  'Just A Vending Machine That Dispenses Cash'


Many expect the spread of surcharging to attract new nonbank ATM deployers.
They may look a lot like Nationwide Money Services.

Based in Calabasas, Calif., Nationwide has 1,100 orders to place ATMs and cash
dispensers that do not accept deposits, including a contract for 400 Pantry
convenience stores in the Southeast.  Robert Peisner, the company's chief
operating officer, says most of those machines will be deployed by June, which
would make it one of the 20 largest ATM owners in the U.S.

That's fast work for a company that was founded in 1993 by card-processing
veterans Peisner and Jack O'Toole and only owned about 20 ATMs a year ago,
when it got an infusion of capital from California-based Cardservice
International, an independent sales organization that processes credit and
debit transactions.  CSI subsequently acquired a controlling interest in
Nationwide.

Surcharging is central to the company's business plan, and its deployments are
concentrated in surcharging states.  Nationwide charges up to $1 for a
withdrawal, Peisner says.

But the real secret to its fast growth, says Peisner, is low
overhead-processing and other services are outsourced-combined with using the
cash-dispensing terminals to generate revenue in as many ways as possible.

"In essence these are just vending machines," he says.  "One of the products
they dispense happens to be cash."  Nationwide machines also offer postage
stamps, prepaid telephone cards and coupons.  The company charges $50 a month
to issue coupons for up to 12 vendors per machine.

Promotion also is key, Peisner says.  As part of the seven-year contract with
Nationwide, merchants agree to place signs announcing the terminals and to
include in their advertising that the store has an ATM that dispenses coupons
as well as cash.  Peisner says consumers walk away with coupons that, if used,
more than repay them for both the surcharge and the foreign fee charged by the
consumer's bank.

And while the company's original five-year plan called for the deployment of
1,500 machines, Peisner says that's been revised to between 5,000 and 7,000 by
the year 2000.

Such high hopes on the part of new ATM deployers may be dashed by the reality
that the best ATM locations are taken and retailers are expecting a larger
share of revenues, says Tommy Rouse, senior vice president of Dallas-based
Affiliated Computer Services, a leading third-party deployer.  "Over the next
year, we expect 50% of the new players installing ATMs will file for
bankruptcy," Rouse says.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY 8, 1996

EFTA Tries Again To Accelerate Into The Fast Lane


As the EFT industry has matured, competition has grown sharper, profit margins
have grown smaller and the responsibilities of executives have grown heavier.
That makes it harder to lure busy executives away from their desks to
participate in trade associations.

At the same time, the issues have grown more complex, creating a greater need
for trade groups that can help sort them out.  If the agenda is compelling
enough, people will come, as evidenced by the record turnout at last month's
Bank Administration Institute Retail Delivery Conference in Atlanta.

By the admission of its own leadership, the Electronic Funds Transfer
Association hasn't done a good enough job in recent years of convincing EFT
participants that they can't afford to miss an EFTA meeting.  But it's going
to give it another try.

The association has announced its second management shakeup in just over a
year, this one featuring a multi-year agreement with the Benton International
consulting firm, which will provide consultants to help plan meetings and
write reports about them for the association's membership of bankers,
processors, hardware and software vendors and government officials.

Help Wanted

The other major move is the promotion of H.  Kurt Helwig, the association's
director of government relations, to the post of executive director.  He
replaces Wayne Boucher, who resigned in September, less than a year after
taking the post as part of a new management team that included Robert P.
Barone, the retired president of Diebold Inc.  Barone remains at EFTA as
chairman and chief executive officer.

Barone admits to disappointing results in his first year on the job.  "We've
had some success in terms of new membership, but frankly weren't as successful
as I would have liked in terms of increasing the importance of the association
to the industry," he says.  "We couldn't get our hands around good,
content-oriented material, and we weren't following up very well on our
special interest groups and councils and reporting their activities.  We
decided we had to get some people involved who can help us do this."

That's where the Benton firm comes in.  A Benton consultant will be assigned
to each of the EFTA's committees to help chairmen develop strategy, plan
meeting agendas and prepare reports.

Free Advice

John B.  Benton, the CEO of Benton International and a long-time EFTA board
member, says his staff will work for free until the association's revenues
cover budgeted EFTA expenses for the year.  If revenues exceed that budget,
his staff will bill at cost; in future years, he says, any dramatic growth in
revenues would be shared with the Benton firm.  Benton says he does not see
the deal as an income generator as much as an opportunity to revitalize the
association while offering his staff a chance to network with industry
leaders.  "If our people build some new relationships, we'll get out of it
what I want to get," he says.

Helwig says EFTA considered other consulting firms, but "Jack's been on our
board and been very active and that tipped the balance toward Benton
International."  Several EFT insiders applauded the choice.  "Benton's
extremely well-regarded and he's done a lot of high-level work in the EFT
business, so that should help," says Charles Raphael, first vice president of
First Chicago NBD.

Benton's staff will be working with the EFTA's councils and special interest
groups.  There are two councils, which are empowered to take positions without
getting approval of the EFTA board, whose diverse composition makes it
difficult to reach a common stance.  One council focuses on electronic
benefits transfer; the other is a council of regional EFT network executives
formed last year after the Shared Network Executives Association merged with
the EFTA.

Revitalized Board Meetings

The three special interest groups are designed to be educational, and don't
adopt positions.  One focuses on electronic commerce and home banking, another
on point-of-sale and a third on EBT.  The association plans to form a fourth
dealing with regulatory and legislative issues this year, Helwig says.

In addition to upgrading the meetings of these committees, Barone says the
association will change the character of board meetings.  "They've been
basically business meetings, taking up such things as finances," he says.  "We
really need to focus on industry issues and that's what we'll do from this
point forward."  And, in an effort to broaden participation, the size of the
board has been increased from 33 to 50.

The association, which has a membership of nearly 1,300 individuals from 175
companies, also plans a recruitment drive.  As part of that effort, a new
individual category of membership has been created, costing $1,000 a year.
Corporate memberships range from $6,000 to $15,000 annually.

Bankers Wanted

Helwig says there will be an emphasis on increasing participation from
financial institutions, which observers say has been a weakness of the
organization.  In particular, he says, it is hoped the work of Benton and his
staff will help attract more senior bankers.  But Richard Speer, an
Atlanta-based consultant, says that, as a result of bank mergers and the
growth of the EFT business, many high-level managers just don't have the time
for industry meetings.  "It's very difficult right now to get senior bankers
involved in any of these industry forums, it's not just the EFTA," he says.

And it's not just bankers who are busy, says Donald Mauer, senior vice
president of the Pennsylvania-based Gensar processing company, and someone who
has skipped recent EFTA meetings.  Speaking of Benton, Mauer says, "Jack has
to make it more striking and relevant.  I have to believe I'll learn more in
three days at a meeting than I could learn in three months, and that it will
move my business."




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-31</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B022-46</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi70.html 205.156.212.5 19970115004017 text/html 139887
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:37:47 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:19 GMT
Content-length: 139697
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi70.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet <BR>
JANUARY, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>Check Fraud: A Problem That Just Won't Go Away</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(995 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>IBOS Expands Its Ranks</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(966 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>When Servicing Customers, Every Minute Counts</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(345 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Microsoft Shifts Gears</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1062 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>Answering The High-Tech Call</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2275 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>Solving Chicken-And-Egg Dilemmas In Electronic Bill Pay</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2074 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>Wrap-up ...</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(634 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>Electronic Money:  A Legislative Can Of Worms</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2098 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>Find The Bank:</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(84 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>A Card By Any Other Name...</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(238 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>The Changing Physics Of Checking</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1834 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>INTERACTIVE BEAT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1428 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>PRODUCT OF THE MONTH:  Shaping A Competitive Image</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(547 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>An Unbalanced Budget Burden</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1737 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>PRODUCT INTROS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(858 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>Visa Pushes Non-Duality For Internet Purchases</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(422 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>Microsoft Makes Big-Bank Inroads With NT Servers</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(591 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>HP Dresses Up Teller Windows At Wachovia</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(192 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>What Do The Meca Banks Know That You Don't?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(581 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>AOL, Intuit Pave Yet Another Electronic Path</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(505 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>New Directions EDS, The Exchange Create New Network</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(149 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>Mellon Offers Corporate Cards With A Twist</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(78 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>Going Where No Card Reader Has Gone Before</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1116 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Check Fraud: A Problem That Just Won't Go Away


Check fraud is a multi-billion dollar problem destined only to intensify.
Depending on who you talk to, bad checks are siphoning as much as $11 billion
a year from the U.S.  economy.  That's more than the combined yearly totals
for automated teller machine, credit card and wire transfer fraud, according
to industry sources.

Indeed, while the headlines of the business press for years have heralded the
threat of computer hackers accessing and pillaging the bank accounts of
corporate America, a small army of criminals has been amassing wealth by
forging and doctoring corporate America's old standby payment method:  the
check.  Anyone with a few thousand dollars to invest in desktop publishing
software, some scanning equipment and a laser printer, and who has the desire
to commit check fraud can print bogus checks that fool even the most astute
bankers.  (Color copiers are another option, although the bogus checks they
produce typically are not as sophisticated as the desktop variety.)

"The amount of money involved in computer fraud is minimal compared to check
fraud," says Dan McGurl, president, Bottomline Technologies, Inc., a
Portsmouth, NH, company that markets automated disbursement systems to
corporations and banks.  "The ease with which an individual inclined to do
this kind of thing can now rip off corporate checking accounts is astounding."

In a backhanded way, that's good news for McGurl.  His firm is part of an
offensive that has emerged to counter check fraud using a concept known as
positive pay.  A company using positive pay provides its bank each day with an
electronic list of checks issued that day.  The bank then uses the list to
verify the authenticity of checks presented against the company's account.
Bottomline sells software, dubbed Positive PayLink, that lets companies create
these files and transmit the information to banks.  At a cost of about
$10,000, just under 100 companies have purchased the system since its
introduction in mid-1995, according to McGurl.

Tough sell

McGurl sees great promise in Positive PayLink, and in the general trend toward
positive pay services.  "Every check-issuing organization is going to want to
get into positive pay as long as the check system is the way it is today," he
insists.

But it isn't that easy to sell corporations on positive pay.  Most bankers are
doing well if they can convince 10 to 20 percent of their corporate customers
to use positive pay, says Bruce Brett, senior vice president, Signet Bank,
Richmond, VA.  "I guess check fraud just isn't bad enough yet," gripes Brett,
who chairs the American Bankers Association's check fraud task force.

Or, suggests Richard Poje, partner, Treasury Strategies Inc., a Chicago-based
cash management consulting firm, check fraud losses just haven't hit enough
corporate issuers of checks.  "The best time to be selling a positive pay
product is the morning after a fraud has occurred," Poje suggests.

In the meantime, bankers are beginning to shop around for other check fraud
weapons, like online verification services.  Dan Fisher, senior vice
president, Victoria Bank and Trust, Victoria, TX, says a case can be made for
creating an electronic positive file of checks that operates akin to credit
card authorization systems.  "If you can set up a negative file for bad
checks, why can't you set up a positive file of good checks?"  he asks.

Some banks are doing that now through a company known as Primary Payment
Systems Inc., which was founded by Star System Inc., a bank-owned EFT network
based in California.  The company maintains a database of information on
checking accounts at participating financial institutions.  Banks, or check
verification companies, use the information to decide whether checks should be
honored.  As of last fall, the Primary Payment database contained information
on 22 million checking accounts at 20 financial institutions in California and
surrounding states.  Participation is poised to expand, however, as Primary
Payment goes national.  "By the end of 1996, we'll definitely have
participation beyond the western states," says Nikki Waters, Star senior vice
president.

The daily process of uploading account updates and verifying check deposits
against the Primary Payment database takes about five hours for a bank to
complete, start to finish, according to Waters.

Waters says Primary Payment participation makes good sense for banks.  "For
every $1 spent participating in deposit check [the Primary Payment service
that banks use to check on deposited checks], they can realize $9 to $10 in
savings," she relates.  The savings figures, Waters says, are based upon data
provided by some of the larger banks participating in Primary Payment.  These
participants include Bank of America, Wells Fargo Bank and First Interstate
Bank.

Fee opportunity

Bankers and others involved with Primary Payment say it, or similar services,
can help retailers, too, and create new revenue opportunities for banks by
providing a venue for the sale of checking account information to firms that
sell check verification services to the merchant community.  Electronic
Transaction Corp., the Deluxe Corp.  unit that runs the Shared Check
Authorization Network (SCAN), and Telecheck, Houston, have already begun
testing the idea.

Representatives of the merchant community say they like the idea of bolstering
the data available on checking accounts and potential bad checks at the point
of sale.  But they say banks also need to do more to thwart consumers who pass
bad checks at the point of sale.  "These are shared problems," says Judy Cook,
president, Minnesota Retail Merchants Association.  "Trying to identify these
individuals at the outset and not letting them open checking accounts is where
the banks should be focusing their attention."

Cook says the merchant community in Minnesota has been successful in forcing
banks to more closely scrutinize individuals opening checking accounts.  But
the battle against check fraud is far from over, she concedes.

"No matter what you do, it seems the crooks always find another way to get
you," laments Cook.  "Cooperation is the real key."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

IBOS Expands Its Ranks


Chase Manhattan Corp.  has tipped the scales of IBOS (Inter-Bank Online
System), the technology-savvy international payments network, toward the U.S.
Chase's recent purchase of a 24.05 percent stake in IBOS ratchets U.S.
ownership to a majority, rounding out the 24.05 percent held by Electronic
Data Systems, Plano, TX, and the 3.8 percent held by Goldman Sachs.  The
founding institutions, Banco Santander of Spain and The Royal Bank of
Scotland, both also own 24.05 percent of the company.

IBOS is an electronic network that links accounts within all participating
banks, allowing end-to-end international payments at both the retail and
wholesale level.  The network was created about four years ago, in
anticipation of increased cross-border transactions with the formation of the
European Community.  Indeed, increased global commerce has caused IBOS'
volumes to "more than double in the last 12 months," according to Thomas Metz,
director of global business development at IBOS and divisional vice president
of EDS in Dallas, although he would not reveal IBOS' exact volumes.

IBOS basically simplifies international banking for commercial and retail
customers.  Commercial customers who use IBOS-participating banks benefit by
not having to go through agent banks in foreign countries in order to get
certain cash management, securities and corporate banking services.  And
individuals benefit by being able to use foreign branches as if they were
branches in their own country.  For example, Chase customers vacationing in
Scotland could stop in at The Royal Bank of Scotland, identify themselves as
customers of an IBOS-participating bank and conduct their banking as if they
were at their home branch in the U.S.

Seal of approval

"Because Chase is the largest correspondent bank in the world and one of the
leading banks in international payments, they bring a tremendous amount of
credibility to IBOS," notes Metz.  "It's kind of like the Good Housekeeping
Seal of Approval.  Chase has indicated that it wants to create other virtual
banking alliances using its correspondent banks and add the IBOS payment
capability to Chase's broad range of corporate cash management products."

The global virtual bank of IBOS is racking up a bevy of new participants,
including Denmark's Unibank; ING Bank and Instituto Bancario San Paolo du
Torino-the largest banks in the Netherlands and Italy, respectively.  Other
non-equity members are Banco Comercio e Industria of Portugal, Credit
Commercial de France and Belgium's Kredietbank and Credit General de Banque.
Other banks are likely to sign on soon.  The EC Investment Services Directive
requires that all member countries' financial institutions and markets be open
to all EC participants.  When that law goes into effect, there could be a
landslide of banks joining IBOS, says Metz.

And, now that the largest U.S.  bank is in on the deal, others will likely
want to keep up with the Joneses.  "We hope other banks in the U.S.  will
follow suit," says Chuck Mallis, global marketing and strategic positioning
executive at Chase in New York City, who also sits on the Board of Directors
of the Society for Worldwide Financial Interbank Telecommunications
(S.W.I.F.T.).  "We do not believe in exclusivity.  Open access networks are
the way to go."

For 30 years, S.W.I.F.T.  has been smoothing out the cross-cultural kinks and
language barriers that would otherwise impede international transactions
amongst its member banks, which now total 3,000.  "There's been a lot of
confusion over what S.W.I.F.T.  and IBOS are," notes Barry Morse, vice
president of marketing at S.W.I.F.T.  in Lahoulpe, Belgium.  "The two services
are very complementary," he explains.  "When two banks send payments to each
other there's a lot of communications required as intermediate steps.  That is
the S.W.I.F.T component-standardized communications using correspondent
banks."

However, S.W.I.F.T.  is closing in on some of the services offered by IBOS.
S.W.I.F.T.  has arranged to offer foreign institutions access to the U.S.
Depository Trust Company's services, which include securities transfers;
kicked off an end-to-end cross-border account payment service called
S.W.I.F.T.Pay, and launched a service called Accord, which performs
cross-border matching and bilateral netting.

If banks want to conduct multilateral international netting, they can use
S.W.I.F.T.  to access the foreign exchange clearing houses that have been
sprouting up this summer.  "We do communications for Eccho [the London Stock
Exchange's foreign exchange clearinghouse]," Morse says.  "We do not have a
relationship with the U.S.'s [foreign exchange clearinghouses] F/XNet and
Multinet.  But we're all trying to solve the same problems in the industry:
the costs and risks associated with cross border payments and foreign
exchange.  Eventually, we will all be doing much of the same things and
potentially working together."

On a similar note, if S.W.I.F.T.  and IBOS were to pool their resources, "it
would open up opportunities in things like imaging and smart card
technologies," says Mallis.  "IBOS ultimately provides a virtual bank network
capability through multiple associations."  IBOS is currently talking with
officials in Russia and other eastern European countries about helping them
set up payment vehicles for their national clearing systems.  The group is
also discussing setting up a Web service, although that is not considered an
immediate concern.  "There is also potential for industries and their banks to
develop information networks on IBOS because of its broad bandwidth
capabilities," says Mallis.

Both IBOS and S.W.I.F.T.  have seen increasing activity.  "With these new
banks coming online, our volume is going to increase significantly," from the
doubling that just occurred over the past year, says Metz of IBOS.  "That is
allowing us to lower our prices to make it more proportionate to S.W.I.F.T.
pricing."

S.W.I.F.T.  volumes, meanwhile, have risen only 17 percent over last year, but
that represents a larger base number.  Notes Morse of S.W.I.F.T., "The value
of payments that go through the network is about [U.S.] $2.5 trillion every
day, half the annual GNP of America."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

When Servicing Customers, Every Minute Counts


Cost-justifying a call center is getting easier by the minute, according to
Sprint Business.  By mimicking the pay system of an 800 number service, the
Dallas-based corporation has created a call center solution that offers a
creative way to finance customer service requirements-it's a price-per-minute
call center.

With this call center solution, there are no added costs or unexpected fees,
says Kay Jain, Sprint's manager of customer programs.  The package is designed
to ensure operating costs get offset by new revenue.  Total cost to the
financial institutions are a direct result of the activity in its call center.

Sprint's Call Center Connection includes all the equipment needed to outfit a
call center, from the automated call distributor, to the phones, along with
the network services needed to connect it to customers and prospects.  Sprint
teamed up with suppliers Rockwell Telecommunications, Downers Grove, IL, and
Northern Telecom, Chapel Hill, NC, to make the offering.

Each customized per-minute deal includes turnkey installation, on-going
maintenance and full warranty service, plus specialized training and system
upgrades.  Once installed on the bank's premises, bank management takes over
full control of the center to run its day-to-day operations.  If operations
warrant expansion, banks may add agents, equipment or services as needed.

The price-per-minute cost for the call center service is determined by how the
system is configured, the minimal annual usage commitment and the length of
the contract.  The customer's anticipated call volumes provide the basis for a
minimum annual usage commitment, which equals the minimum number of minutes
that agents will be handling calls in the course of a year.

According to Jain, after the number of minutes-per-year is established and the
customer decides on the equipment, the price can be determined for the
duration of a contract.  "We recommend a two to five year contract but there
is no set limit."

To help make it easier to track automated call distributor performance per
month, Sprint sends out two monthly billing statements, indicating long
distance usage and call center costs separately.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Microsoft Shifts Gears


Bill Gates quickly made amends for calling banks dinosaurs back in 1994,
during his keynote address at Bank Administration Institution's Retail
Delivery Systems conference.  Without skipping a beat, he then launched into a
sales pitch for Microsoft's latest offering to facilitate interactive banking.
This time around, bankers were more impressed than threatened.

"I never said banks are dinosaurs," he clarified during his speech, referring
to a quote that appeared in Newsweek.  "I actually said many banking systems
are dinosaurs."

The original dinosaur comment surfaced before Microsoft signed on about a
dozen banks to offer to their customers Microsoft's personal financial
management software, Money.  To many observers, distributing the powerful
Microsoft brand in such a way obscures and undermines the relationships banks
have with their customers.  Others also fear the set-up allows Microsoft to
somehow skim a small percent of fee revenue off transactions that occur
through Money.

Gates's latest interactive banking appeal, unveiled during his speech, is more
in keeping with the type of relationships banks are accustomed to having with
their vendors.  With high-tech fanfare, including a tongue-in-cheek video that
poked fun at the Internet as a "Web of Wealth," Gates introduced a suite of
tools and technologies for building profitable bank applications on Internet
and e-mail platforms.  "The Internet will be the primary connection between
banks and their customers," predicted Gates.

The December 5 speech actually was a preview to an announcement made two days
later in Seattle of a wide-ranging Microsoft commitment to the Internet.  At
that briefing, Microsoft introduced more than 20 products and tools to create
applications that encompass both Windows technology and the Internet.  "I
think most people are going to be surprised at the depth and breadth of our
commitment to integrate the Internet into our products," said Gates at that
briefing.

Just like old times

In exploiting this new delivery channel, Microsoft will follow a business
model of partnering with others, a practice it has taken since its origins,
when it relied on Intel to provide the microprocessors for its systems, Gates
said.  "Over the next five years, we will partner with more companies than we
have in the last 20.  And Microsoft will continue to do exactly what it does
today, which is write software."

Like any off-the-shelf software package, the new Internet tools are
licensable.  Banks will be able to use them to create what Gates terms
"virtual branches," which will be bank-branded and customizable.

Chief among the new tools will be Internet Studio (code-named Blackbird), an
authoring tool for developing Internet interfaces that incorporate multimedia,
such as sound and video.  Also available will be an Internet Information
Server, based on Windows NT.  These products will be available over the course
of 1996, and will join Microsoft's Internet browser, Explorer.  The
combination will support authentication and also embed secure protocols for
payments over the Internet.

Microsoft also has plans to jazz up e-mail.  New tools will make it possible
to transfer more than just text over e-mail connections.  For example, banks
could transmit formatted statements-complete with logos-via e-mail.  "This
will be a key element of what we provide," noted Gates.

During the presentation, Linda Parker, vice president, US Bancorp, was invited
to demonstrate how the bank built a direct link between e-mail and a loan
approval center it created on its Internet site.  US Bank is an early adopter
of Microsoft Money, as well as the new Internet tools.  The bank is well into
the process of using Microsoft's Internet Studio tools to build a
bank-branded, sales and service delivery channel over the Internet that links
to back-office data.

With Microsoft's new Internet-centric approach, the role of Money changes.
According to Gates, Money will become a "core database" or "file cabinet" that
banks will be able to customize and extend by adding, say, a third-party
retirement planning software package to it.  In the near term, Money will
receive various upgrades, including additional back-end processing options
beyond the current one from Intuit Processing Services, and the ability to
connect users to banks' Internet sites via hot links.

Kudos

For the most part, banks put aside their typical skepticism of Microsoft's
intentions and applauded the company's efforts.  "He [Gates] has done a great
job," says Tom Kitrick, vice president, First Union National Bank.  "He's
added more value to the customer interface, and that's the most important
thing."

Robert Hedges, executive vice president, Shawmut National Corp., brought up
the same two words:  customer interface.  "The future world is going to
revolve around the quality of the customer interface," he says.  "We have to
be in the business of knowing how to create a good one."

Shawmut will soon be folded into Fleet Financial Group, which is a part-owner
of Meca Software, Inc., a Fairfield, CT-based outfit that prides itself on its
bank-focused approach to distributing its Managing Your Money personal
financial software.  Hedges says that although the bank is now a part-owner of
Meca, it would be open to working with Microsoft on other projects.  "But only
on an open-systems basis, and only if we retain the customer interface."

In adopting an approach more amenable to banks, Microsoft has, at the same
time, shifted its position relative to its own competition.  Prior to
Microsoft's announcement of its Internet intentions, Intuit Inc.  and its
Quicken program occupied the same competitive terrain as Microsoft and Money.
Now that Microsoft has broadened its approach, it faces a new set of
competitors, namely Sun Microsystems.

Sun's Java, a tool that adds dynamics-such as multimedia-to Web browsers,
squares off against Microsoft's new Internet Studio.  Introduced in August,
Java allows small applications (called applets) to be transported from servers
over the Internet.  These applets latch on to client computers and liven up,
say with animation, Internet interactions of that client computer.  For
example, a client computer viewing the Web server of a bank that uses such
applets might let users to perform dynamic what-if analyses on loan options,
not just apply for a loan.

How the competition will pan out in this next stage of the interactive world
remains to be seen.  "Everything's changing," notes Kitrick of First Union,
who says he wants to see what happens with Java before he decides about
Internet Studio.  "Nothing is staying the same."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Answering The High-Tech Call


There's no doubt call centers are emerging as a popular way to reduce
operating costs while improving service to customers.  To wit, this technology
entrant placed first out of 12 in BTN's annual survey of the Best Of The
Newest banking technologies (see BTN, December 1995).  Today, the question for
many banks-especially medium- to small-sized ones-is deciding at what point,
if ever, they should move from standard voice response systems to full fledged
state-of-the-art call centers.

Most banks already have some type of voice response system in place to allow
for automated responses to routine customer service inquiries.  These
systems-once known for handling only simple inquiries such as savings or
checking account balances-are now equipped with a variety of increased
capabilities.  Integrated voice response applications can now process
virtually any information exchange including account balances, portfolio
information, bill payment, interest rates and mortgage pre-qualifications.

A fully customized, turnkey voice response solution can start at $30,000, and
quickly increases with advanced programming applications.  But despite all the
enhancements with voice response technology, it still has many limitations
compared to a full-blown call center solution.  Most notably missing is the
human interaction with customers.

Making the move

Advanced call centers employ customer service workstations backed by
computer-telephone integration.  Using computer-telephone integration to make
information that's locked away in computer databases available to telephone
systems is an act that's easier said than done.

The basic hardware for incoming call management is a standard set-up comprised
of private branch exchanges, automated call distributors and voice response
units.  The real feature that differentiates one bank's call center from
another's is in its use of middleware.  The middleware provides the connective
data integration link between a customer service representative's workstation
and an incoming call.

"The key to implementing a state-of-the-art call center is integration," says
Julie Fitzpatrick, product marketing manager at Early, Cloud & Co., Newport,
RI.  "Integrating customer information files allows a customer service
representative to access a wealth of information that assists in a variety of
capabilities and increases cross-selling opportunities."

Middleware is actually the doorway to accessing information, managing call and
data information, routing the information, managing workflow and monitoring
the system.  In addition to basic call management and data management
capabilities, more advanced services such as identifying numbers dialed by
callers, a process known as Designated Number Identification Service, as well
as identifying callers' telephone numbers, known as Automated Number
Identification, are available.

The more integration there is between computer and telephone systems, the
longer the list of services that a bank can offer through the phone.  Beyond
retrieving account balances, customers can authorize funds transfers, open
checking and savings accounts, apply for loans, pay off credit card balances
and the list goes on-directly over the phone.

Sky's the limit

Experts say the absolute minimum investment for a fully integrated call center
is $10,000 per seat, with $20,000 per seat not an unreasonable price for
higher configurations.  Basically, there is no definite price cap on the
investment because of all the different options and equipment available.  In
essence, stepping up from standard voice response to call-center
computer-telephone integration requires a significant investment, but it can
also be one with limitless possibilities.

A number of packaged call center automation software applications are
available.  One such package, scheduled for general release next quarter, is
Early Cloud's Call Flow Client.  The new desktop software environment lets
institutions automate telephone-based customer service operations with
computer-telephone integration, message-based data access and enterprise-wide
business workflow within a distributed client/server environment.

Call Flow Client helps retail banks tackle the project of building
comprehensive, completely integrated call centers, all the way from back-end
systems to customer service desktops, and eliminates the need to build every
call center application from scratch.  With its graphical interface
environment, developers can graphically define workflow processing and
individually design their call center environments.  The software package
offers a number of options ranging from historical transaction information;
new account openings for savings, checking, loans, CDs and IRAs; bill
payments, to an ATM locator feature with scanned map retrieval.

Although the costs associated with a full-blown call center versus a standard
voice response system vary, experts say cost is only one of many issues
relevant to the decision to plunge into call-center technology.  "Ultimately,
the decision is one that should be based on your marketing strategy and what
message your bank is trying to convey," says Lisa Stockburger, vice president
at Vanguard Communications Corp., Morris Plains, NJ.  "You have to determine,
'Do I want to be like the big boys or do I want to maintain my face-to-face
image associated with smaller banks?'"

Meeting challenges

For Bank United of Texas, $12 billion in assets, the decision to create an
advanced call center was strategic-the result of a long string of
acquisitions.  In 1990, Houston-based Bank United acquired six financial
institutions that had retail, mortgage and wholesale banking divisions.
Consolidating the different banks into one entity resulted in multiple
operating systems and a very confused customer base.  In addition, the bank
was further challenged by inadequate marketing of its telephone-based
services.

At the time, Bank United had only two small customer service centers located
in Houston and Dallas.  The centers operated during normal business hours and
offered very limited services.  And since they were scarcely promoted, many
customers were unaware of their existence at all.

The need for an improved customer service system was apparent.  According to
Pat Moretti, assistant vice president, the bank redefined is strategy and its
customer service mission statement to its current definition:  to enhance
value by providing an efficient, cost effective sales and service alternative
for existing and prospective Bank United customers on a national level.

Through its acquisitions, the bank had inherited a Syntellect voice response
system, which it is now considering upgrading, and it purchased an Aspect
switch from Aspect Telecommunications, San Jose, CA, for about $225,000 for
the new call center.  In addition, it is working on cost-justifying future
purchases of a TCS Forecaster Scheduler from TCS Management Group, Inc.,
Nashville, TN, which will run about $38,000, as well as an Alltel Customer
Service Platform Workstation from Alltel Information Services, Inc.  Little
Rock, AR, which will cost around $500,000.

Bank United's technology allows calls to be routed among five units within the
call center, including:  loan-by-phone; customer service; deposit sales;
support functions, and a systems administrator.  The bank is also introducing
a financial markets unit as an alternative service for annuities and
securities customers.  The bank maximizes the capability of its voice response
unit whenever applicable but always has a customer service representative
ready to respond.

Before implementing its full-blown call center, the bank's customer service
centers averaged about 126,000 calls received per month, of which 32,000 were
answered by live representatives.  With the telephone banking center, the
number of calls answered has increased to an average of 210,000 calls per
month with about 47,000 answered by representatives.

The call center also has had success with new-account openings, which were not
possible through the original customer service centers.  The current call
center averages about 400 new-account openings per month.  That rate is on par
with the number of accounts opened monthly at the largest of the 67 branches
Bank United operates throughout Texas, according to Moretti.

"We went from nothing to something," says Moretti, describing the call center,
which grew from eight to 41 employees.  At the same time, "we broadened our
customer base by catering to all types of customers."

For some banks, investing in a call center is tantamount to using technology
as a weapon to remain independent.  "Call centers are a major investment for
smaller banks, but one that is necessary if you wish to remain independent,"
says Pat Mackesey, vice president of telephone banking at Dauphin Deposit
Bank.  "And, it can be easily cost-justified if done correctly."

Mackesey was instrumental in the creation of Dauphin Deposit's telephone
banking center, introduced in November.  The Hanover, PA-based bank, with $5.5
billion in assets, owns and operates Farmers Bank, ValleysBank and Bank of
Pennsylvania, and now handles customer service for all those banks through a
single call center.  Dauphin Deposit's telephone banking center, which
currently employs a staff of 17, is projected to employ 50 people by April.
The bank also plans to offer underwriting services through the call center.

According to Mackesey, performance is the turning point in making a call
center a profit center.  He points out that the center creates a myriad of
opportunities for pro-active cross selling.  "There is a major positive
contribution in covering bank expense in a call center," he says.  "You are
able to take advantage of a customer service situation and turn it into a
sales opportunity."

Local flavor

"We took a basic customer service center and turned it into a multi-faceted
service and sales center with an expanded level of service," he says.  "It has
become an alternate delivery channel opportunity to service customers more
efficiently with more cost-effective means of banking."

With the installation of an Argo Platform system developed by Dallas-based
Argo Data Resource Corp., Dauphin Deposit succeeded in centralizing the call
center function, while still retaining the local flavor of each of the three
banks that comprise the institution.  The telephone number listed for all of
the banks is one centralized number.  When calls are received by the front-end
network, they are recognized and routed to the customer service representative
who will then answer with the appropriate branch name.

Mackesey said that the new call center is viewed as a "superbranch" and is
expected to enhance traditional branch production, not replace it.  Before
implementing the new call center, Dauphin Deposit had only one customer
service unit, which was not able to open any type of account.  The new call
center, which he says is already experiencing "encouraging" responses prior to
any advertising efforts has already proven to be effective in cross-selling
new accounts for the bank.

The right number

Similar telephone banking success was found at Oakland, MD-based First United
National Bank & Trust, $500 million in assets.  Its implementation of a new
call center increased efficiencies while offering cross-selling and outbound
telemarketing opportunities.  The bank's call center, which runs the Customer
Service and Correspondence system (CSCS) from Milwaukee-based Fiserv, handles
all transactions, customer needs and inquiries, and allows the bank to
automatically track calls, trends and sales.  Outbound telemarketing calls are
also documented on the system to record the number of sales produced.

Fiserv's CSCS system, with a starting cost of about $10,000 (and up, depending
upon the number of users and feature applications), provides a complete case
history of calls by automatically time- and date-stamping every comment
entered by customer service representatives.  It tracks the effectiveness of
individuals and departments in responding to customer requests.  The system
also provides online instructions and prompts to help solve problems, aid
cross-selling efforts and ensure consistent responses are communicated on
specific inquiries.

First United's call center, now staffed by four people, is expected to triple
by the end of this year.  Introduced last August, the number of calls actually
serviced increased immediately.  Prior to the new call center, calls were
distributed among various departments, which inevitably led to lost or missed
calls.  With the new call center, all calls are centralized and handled in a
standardized manner, increasing the number of calls serviced.

Robin Murray, customer service manager, adds that the telephone banking center
is viewed as a high growth area for the bank because it lets the bank expand
its customer base without having to expand its brick and mortar.

"The telephone banking center allows our in-branch sales force to do more
prospecting and less service-oriented transactions," says Murray.  "Our long
term strategy places a strong focus on our telephone center because of the
flexibility and convenience it provides combined with the personal touch that
satisfies customers."

Customizing your call center will essentially determine its cost.  According
to Jeanne Michelson, marketing representative at Telcom Technologies, Pomona
CA, the size of a call center is one important criteria in pricing it.  But
other variables weigh just as heavily.  These factors include the expected
value of your incoming calls, the general level of competition your business
faces and the experience level of your call center supervisors and managers.

Start-up and small call centers often opt for a private branch exchange, which
is a basic telephone switching system, because it can be inexpensive and is
usually already in place within the company.  Many of the more popular private
branch exchange systems can be purchased for less than $600 per station or
$1,200 to $2,800, along with an automated call distributor hardware/software
package.

A stand-alone automated call distributor, according to Telcom, typically costs
$2,200 to $3,000 per position, depending on the particular application and
configuration requirements.  Therefore, for a cost effective automated call
distributor, expect to see the following price ranges:  $35,000 to $45,000 for
a 15-agent system; $120,000 to $150,000 for a 50-agent system; $170,000 to
$225,000 for a 75-agent system.

Cost justifying a standalone automated call distributor comes down to a
variety of factors.  By determining caller demand, identifying sales
opportunities, calculating revenue losses (i.e., missed calls) and total
operational cost savings-personnel and telephone service usage-a bank can cost
justify its system on paper.  By adding revenue savings, personnel savings and
phone usage savings, a bank can determine eventual paybank in years by
dividing the total system cost by the total savings.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Solving Chicken-And-Egg Dilemmas In Electronic Bill Pay


Trying to get more consumers and merchants interested in electronic bill
payments is like trying to answer the question, "Which came first, the chicken
or the egg?"

The chicken:  many consumers are balking when asked to sign up for electronic
bill payment services because, to a large extent, associated fees still are
greater than or equal to the cost of mailing checks through the tried and true
U.S.  Postal Service.

The egg:  banks won't be able to drop fees any further until more merchants
are able to receive such bill payments electronically.  The irony of most
banks' electronic bill payment programs is that the bulk of payments made to
merchants are actually in the form of paper checks.  The only thing electronic
about them is that they were initiated electronically by consumers using
screenphones, PCs or telephones.

The vast majority of merchants lack the computer capabilities to handle
electronic payments.  Visa International estimates that nearly 60 percent of
"electronic" bill payments actually are converted to paper before they are
passed to merchants.  Bill Burchfield, CEO of Intuit Services Corp., which
handles bill payments for users of Intuit's Quicken and Microsoft's Money home
banking products, similarly estimates that 70 percent of the payments it makes
to merchants are in paper form.

Yet another egg (or would that be a chicken?):  Merchants as a whole are
unenthusiastic about electronic bill payment services.  Those not able to
accept electronic payments get a raw deal, because they end up receiving from
banks cumbersome lists of names and account numbers, accompanied by a single
check that represents many payors.  Generally known as a check-and-list, the
payment represents an exception item for the biller.

Merchants also are dragging their feet because they don't see enough consumers
using bill payment services.  Larger volumes, among other factors, would make
it worth their while to go electronic.  "Every merchant is interested in
moving to electronic payments, but most need to make [systems] changes to do
that," says Mark Johnson, executive vice president of Columbus, OH-based
Checkfree Corp., a leading electronic bill payment processor.  "We need to get
as much [consumer] volume as possible, so that the merchants see it's
worthwhile" to invest in the necessary systems upgrades.

Here's the good news:  Leading payment processors are aggressively pursuing
various strategies that should make electronic bill payments more palatable to
both billers and consumers.  Visa, for example, is tackling the back-end with
its introduction last month of an end-to-end electronic payment and remittance
system.  The Visa system will let billers easily accept more types of
electronic payments, without having to make large investments in new systems.
The bi-directional system even will make it possible for billers to deliver
bills electronically to consumers who want them.

Checkfree is also making major moves to increase the electronic element of
bill payments.  Checkfree's efforts focus on volume-specifically, boosting the
volume of consumers and small businesses using electronic bill payment
services.  With increased customer volumes, large billers should deem it all
the more worthwhile to invest in automated payment receptors.

Even smaller outfits are getting into the act.  An outsourcing service that
specializes in delivering bills electronically to biller endpoints is getting
a higher profile than ever these days.  Princeton TeleCom Corp., Princeton,
NJ, just signed on to provide $68-billion, Cleveland-based KeyCorp with bill
settlement and disbursement services for KeyCorp's newly introduced home
banking services.

Visa adds missing link

Visa collaborated with Dallas-based Sterling Software, a leading vendor of
electronic commerce and electronic data interchage software, in its attempt to
get more merchants into the electronic arena.  Sterling's financial EDI
product, Vector:Connexion, is a key element of Visa's ability to create a
fully electronic, paperless pathway from consumers, through their banks and on
to billing companies via billers' banks.

Sterling's Vector product has been available independent of Visa for a good
eight years, and is now installed at 41 banks.  To accommodate the increasing
flow of electronic consumer-to-biller payments, Sterling simply built a new
module to its Vector:Connexion product, which adds Visa's EDI format, TC09, to
the list of electronic payments it can make, such as ANSI X.12, 820, BAI
lockbox, flat file or customized formats.  The Vector:Connexion for Visa
module communicates payment information from billers' banks to billers via
direct connections, value-added networks, or the Internet.

"Now the huge Visa network, which so many banks are connected to, can feed
transactions to merchant banks," says M.A.  Hancook, manager, marketing
communications at Sterling.  "Merchant banks know that their paper-based
lockbox operations are going to go electronic someday.  What they're doing is
protecting their lockbox businesses, plus saving a lot of money because
they're not processing paper."

Visa also is striving to fill in yet another missing electronic link of the
electronic bill payment process.  Through Visa Interactive, a company formed
by Visa last year to offer PC- and screenphone-based banking, Visa will
provide electronic bill presentment.  In other words, no more envelopes.
Consumers will be able to receive their bills electronically via Visa's home
banking software.  Merchants will be able to transmit bills in a customized
format, complete with logos and marketing information, and also send returns
and corrections electronically to consumers.

Visa already is working with a number of banks, including Banc One, Barnett
Banks and Chase Manhattan, to take advantage of the commercial relationships
these banks have with billers, and get the electronic remittance product,
dubbed ePay, out in the market.  Financial institutions will do the honor of
distributing the application to their biller customers, giving them the
opportunity to add value-and sales revenue-to biller relationships.

NationsBank, for example, is using ePay to add to the cash management service
it already offers its biller customers.  "The biggest benefit is in the way we
can meet our customers' needs," says Ken Wood, vice president of emerging
technologies, NationsBank.  "Our biller customers are seeing an onslaught of
electronic payments coming [from front-end electronic connections to
customers], and they are fearing more paper payments coming through the back
end.  We expect this service to eliminate the chore of having to go through
the long lists of netted payments."

The $170 billion NationsBank signed up for the entire Visa package, including
Vector:Connexion.  Banks are not required to have Vector:Connexion to run
Visa's ePay; however, the set-up makes for more seamless interactions.  Wood
did not disclose how much the bank paid for the package, but said the price of
ePay is "competitive" with the automated clearinghouse and other back-end
systems.  "We have to be under the ball, ready to catch it for our clients,"
Wood says.  "By joining Visa, we're covering more of the outfield.  There are
other parts of the outfield, like ACH or [MasterCard's] Remittance Processing
Service, with whom we'll retain our relationships."

Bills, bills, bills

Checkfree is hoping to sweet talk more merchants into electronic commerce by
focusing on increasing volumes.  In one effort, Checkfree, like Visa, is
striving to electronically present bills to consumers.  In this respect, the
bill payment processor is potentially one step ahead of Visa, since it already
is involved in piloting electronic bill delivery to 500 consumers across the
country.  Participating billers include various telephone and utility
companies.  All of the participating billers are already equipped to receive
electronic payments from Checkfree.  Eventually, Checkfree will diversify its
trial to include credit card, insurance, newspaper and cellular phone
companies.  The goal is a controlled test of some 2,800 households, a fraction
of the customer bases of the participating companies.  When the service goes
live in the third quarter, it could extend to the companies' millions of
customers.

Checkfree sees electronic bill presentment as an important first ingredient
for more electronic bill payments.  "A lot of consumers aren't interested in
paying bills electronically until they can receive them electronically," says
Bill Kitchen, director of product development at Checkfree.  And for
merchants, electronic bill presentment cuts costs, and is more accurate and
timely.

Once the service goes full tilt, Kitchen expects the rest of Checkfree's
electronic merchants will want to get in on the action.  While the service is
de gratis during the trial, Checkfree might impose a per item charge to
merchants when it goes live.

Checkfree is just as busily mounting other efforts to build up the volume of
users of electronic bill pay services.  Recently, it teamed up with Automatic
Data Processing, Inc., Roseland, NJ, to launch a joint marketing program that
will target to small businesses PC banking and bill payment, payroll
processing, direct deposit and other services.  With only one percent of the
12 billion checks cut every year by U.S.  corporations processed
electronically, the potential to spur new waves of electronic bill payments is
huge.  "Small business owners use personal financial management packages at
home, and they want them for their businesses," notes Pete Kight, president
and CEO of Checkfree.  "It's almost criminal that we haven't delivered such
solutions to small businesses."

All in one

The emergence of companies like Princeton TeleCom is yet another hopeful
signal that electronic bill payment volumes are well on their way.  The
privately held company was founded in 1983 by a group of Princeton University
professors.  Originally organized to introduce a PC banking product, the firm
changed its direction in 1987 to focus on bill payments only.

The company specializes in addressing the needs of billers that receive
electronic bill payments.  A number of banks, the latest being KeyCorp, hire
Princeton TeleCom as an outsourcing service for settling and disbursing
electronic bill payments to billers.

"Princeton TeleCom is the only outsource that specifically concentrates on
electronic delivery to the biller endpoints," says Paul Ayres, Key Corp's vice
president for consumer electronic payments.  "We were searching for a partner
who fully understood the need for timely and accurate postings," to biller
remittance centers.

Princton TeleCom accomplishes this task through its flagship els Electronic
Lockbox Service.  With full electronic links to more than 450 billers,
Princeton TeleCom captures the overwhelming majority of payment items banks
now mail out to biller endpoints in the form of nettlesome "check-and-list"
disbursements.

At a set time each day, a file of all the day's transactions is sent into
Princeton TeleCom's main system.  "We go through that file and edit it based
on each biller's specifications about which account numbers are acceptable.
Once files have been cleaned, we sort them into files for each payee.  At that
point, each file is reformatted according to each payee's file specs," says
Martha Davis, marketing manager of Princeton TeleCom.  This process "gives
banks the ability to do customer service, to show their customers that they
are on the ball."

If a payee is not equipped to receive electronic payments, Princeton's Remote
Disbursement Facility prints out individual checks for each consumer payment,
rather than sending out net payments accompanied with a list of payers.  Net
payments "are very labor intensive.  If one of the payments on a bulk list is
wrong, they'll hold the whole list.  It's one payment per check with us.  This
way the quality of the check meets or exceeds the standards of the remittance
stub," says Davis.

The company encourages merchants to go electronic once payments reach a
critical mass, she notes.  Otherwise, the vendor can meet some non-electronic
merchants halfway if they have MICR scanners in their remittance centers.  In
that case, Princeton TeleCom can send payments to a scanning workstation at
the remittance center.  From there, payments are uploaded to accounts
receivable systems, processed and posted.  This is also the option for
electronic merchants not comfortable with the idea of an outsider sending
items directly into their accounts receivable systems, the method Princeton
TeleCom uses for merchants so equipped.

The whole electronic process takes place in a maximum of 48 hours:  two hours
for editing and sorting, and then it's just a matter of catching the billers'
15-minute "payment acceptance window."

Princeton's 2,000 bill payment originators include KeyCorp, Bank of America,
Wells Fargo, Boatmen's Bancshares, Fleet Financial Group, CoreStates, Premier
Bancorp Inc., Washington Mutual, Barnett Banks Inc.  and Union Bank.
Princeton charges billers 10 cents per transaction, while originators, such as
banks, pay 15 cents or less per transaction, based on volume.

The more that ideas to increase electronic bill payments get hatched, the more
that chicken-and-egg problems associated with the task will get smashed.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Wrap-up ...


ACQUISITIONS + AGREEMENTS CFI ProServices, Inc.  of Portland, OR, is acquiring
Dayton, OH-based Culverin Corp., a provider of branch automation and
remittance processing software products and services.  The acquisition, valued
at $4.8 million plus royalty considerations, will boost CFI's ability to offer
integrated branch automation solutions to financial institutions.  In 1994,
CFI had revenues of $32.6 million, compared to Culverin's $4.5 million.

Treasury Services Corp., Santa Monica, CA, acquired Minneapolis-based Worth
Information, Inc., broadening its capability to offer fully-reconciled data
for both profitability analysis and customer relationship management.  Worth's
financial and marketing systems will be integrated with the decision-support
and profitability-management systems of its new parent.

Nova Information Systems, Inc., Atlanta, First Union Corp., Charlotte, NC, and
First Fidelity Bancorp, Newark, NJ, have announced plans to combine their
merchant bank-card activities.  The new partnership creates the eighth-largest
merchant processor, which will handle about $12 billion in bank-card sales.

Affiliated Computer Services, headquartered in Dallas, and Columbia, SC-based
Affinity Technology Group have entered into a value-added remarketer
agreement.  The deal calls for the remarketing of Affinity's automated loan
machines (ALMs) to current and future customers of ACS's MoneyMaker ATM
network, which incorporates more than 3,450 ATMs.

A joint venture between IBM Corp., White Plains, NY, and Risk Management
Technologies, Berkeley, CA, will lead to the development of a massively
parallel processing asset-liability and data warehouse solution.  The two
firms will provide RMT's Radar system on IBM's RISC System/6000 Scalable Power
Parallel system.  Sumitomo Bank in Tokyo, the world's fourth largest bank, is
installing the system.

Lexington, MA-based Logica is linking arms with Santa Clara, CA-based Edify
Corp.  to crank out interactive banking services.  Logica is the U.S.
subsidiary of an international software, systems integration and consulting
firm and Edify vends software geared toward helping firms set up their own
interactive Web sites.

Little Rock, AR-based Alltel Information Services has teamed up with Bankers
Systems Inc., headquartered in St.  Cloud, MN, to develop a new breed of loan
generation software.  The Rembrandt Lending System, to be released in 1996, is
a suite of lending applications developed specifically for Windows 95 and
Windows NT.  Alltel will provide support services.

CONTRACT SIGNINGS

Diners Club International, a subsidiary of Citicorp, has signed on American
Management Systems, Fairfax, VA, to set up a global system and standards for
its international collections activities.  Serving more than seven million
customers in 175 countries, Diners Club International will implement AMS's
Computer Assisted Collection System (CACS) into a suite of standards for
distribution to 50 of its processing centers.

Standard Federal Bank, with $13 billion in assets, has selected Olivetti North
America's Mosaic OA applications and tool set for automating the retail
operations of its 164 branches.  Both Standard Federal and Olivetti are based
in Liberty Lake, WA.

Fleet Financial Group has awarded Wayne, PA-based SEI Corp.  a five-year
contract, selecting SEI's trust and securities accounting software for its
more than $70-billion trust business.

EARNINGS NEWS

Dallas-based Affiliated Computer Services, Inc.  announced record-breaking
fiscal 1996 first quarter revenues of $89.3 million, up 26 percent from the
comparable period last year.  Net income also climbed to a record high of $5.7
million, up from $3.8 million.  During this period, ACS signed a strategic
alliance with Integrated Delivery Technologies, established a bank-card
subsidiary entitled ACS Merchant Services, acquired Dallas-based Intellifile
and added 450 ATMs to the company's MoneyMaker network.

US Order, Inc.  reported more than a 250-percent jump in third quarter
revenue.  The Herndon, VA-based company earned $1.1 million for the three
months ending Sept.  30, 1995, compared to 1994's third quarter revenue total
of $341,872.  US Order's net loss for the quarter decreased by more than 50
percent to $847,528 after 1994's third quarter net loss of $1.7 million.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Electronic Money:  A Legislative Can Of Worms


A vast, unregulated terrain looms ahead as new payment methods-from smart
cards to stored-value cards to electronic cash-hit the marketplace.
Unfortunately, the current laws that monitor these fledgling products are not
new themselves.  Minute amendments aside, the most recent round of electronic
funds transfer rules were written at least ten years ago.  Today, new payment
technologies are stirring up a whole new set of regulatory dilemmas to be
dealt with, not to mention potential fraud pitfalls.

Industry experts and regulators are examining whether existing rules fit the
new environment, whether amendments must be written or altogether new
regulations drafted, and even more fundamentally, which entities have the
jurisdiction to regulate each of the new payment vehicles and write the laws
in the first place.

Fast action needed

Government higher-ups concede that swift action is necessary.  Recently,
Federal Reserve Vice Chairman Alan Blinder told the House Subcommittee on
Domestic and International Monetary Policy, "Clarifying the legal and
regulatory structure that will govern electronic money products is one area
that may need prompt attention from both policymakers and the industry.  In
this case, failure of the government to act may, ironically, impede rather
than facilitate private-sector developments."

In the mind of at least one banker, one aspect of the coming regulatory
playing field is clear.  "Regulation should take place at the national level,"
says Robert Egan, vice president in Chemical Bank's legal department and a key
player in the Financial Services Technology Consortium, a national squadron of
banks, technology firms, consultants and universities working on various
technology projects.  "If you have to deal with local state laws on cards, it
becomes impossible to market a product that can go across state lines."  That
dynamic is especially important for Internet transactions, where buyer,
seller, bank, issuer and online server could all be in different states or
countries.

Egan raises another issue.  Cards jointly issued by groups of companies and
that carry multiple functions "result in an overlap of regulators."  Should
stored-value calling cards, for example, be regulated by the Federal Reserve
or the Federal Communications Commission?  "There needs to be some effort to
coordinate [who governs what]."

Few wheels in motion

So far, the only concrete action taken in this rocky regulatory arena is a
Senate proposal in October to exempt smart cards from Regulation E of the
Electronic Funds Transfer Act.  Led by Senators Robert Bennet (R., Utah) and
Richard Shelby (R., Alabama), the exemption would free card issuers from
having to replace funds on lost or stolen cards and from having to print
receipts for transactions, as stipulated by Reg E.

"With the new technologies, paper receipt generation is not always feasible,"
says Mike Shade, vice president of smart cards at VeriFone, Redwood City, CA.
The company is a key player in the SmartCash venture, a group of 11 banks and
various card technology providers creating the first stored-value card
business that will extend nationwide.  "Electronic receipts may be possible,
but certainly not in the form Reg E asks for.  One of the niches smart cards
are supposed to fill is the vending machine, and purchases of that nature.  It
would be difficult to generate receipts [for purchases of such small amounts]
in a manner that complies with Reg E."

One alternative to producing paper receipts for small-dollar, stored-value
transactions is to generate receipts only when loading value onto a card.
Ending the paper trail at that point would avoid the burdensome expense of
constantly generating paper for small-value purchases.

What about lost or stolen funds on smart cards?  "If I were to go to my bank
and withdraw $100 in $20 bills and then lose one of the bills, I can't go back
to the bank for a refund," notes Paul Seader, an attorney affiliated with the
law firm of Hughes, Hubbard & Reed, and who advises the electronic-cash vendor
DigiCash in New York City.  "But what's the status of an electronic cash
withdrawal in this regard, either via a smart card or the Internet?  These
issues need to be addressed in the contractual arrangements that underlie the
issuance of smart cards or electronic cash."

You say tomato, I say tomahtoe

Much of the regulatory discourse revolves around whether the new technologies
will be seen as resembling their physical world look-alikes, or as entirely
different from their predecessors.  Do Internet credit-card payments, for
example, fit into the current mold of rules for card transactions over the
phone and in retail outlets?  "I think regulators are beginning to change
their approach, to form new categories instead of forcing new technologies
into old categories," says Magdalena Yesil, director of marketing at Reston,
VA-based CyberCash, which is already shooting out encrypted credit-card
payments on the Internet.  "The Internet itself is going to be a whole new
category."

One innovation that appears to diverge sharply from its real-world counterpart
is ecash, Amsterdam-based DigiCash's Internet currency, which made its U.S.
debut on the Internet in October (see December BTN).

Dan Schutzer, vice president and director of advanced technology at Citibank
and director of the Financial Services Technology Consortium, throws out some
interesting questions:  "Will banks exchange ecash for currency, or will it be
the equivalent of currency?  If not, the value of ecash could fluctuate
relative to other companies' electronic money, to the dollar itself and to
other currencies."  And then Wall Streeters would start placing bets on ecash
exchange rates!

An oft-cited concern about ecash is whether a consumer has recourse if a hard
drive crashes, the ecash disappears, and it just so happens the owner did not
make a backup copy on disk.  Would Digicash or the issuing bank be held liable
to replace the ecash, or is the consumer out of luck?  In this case, if ecash
is equated with regular cash, the consumer is out of luck.  But if an
amendment declares ecash to be electronic funds, reimbursement would be in
order.

Digicash currently doesn't have a policy providing for reimbursement, although
it's working on one.  On its Web site (http://www.digicash.com), Digicash
provides this nebulous assurance:  "In case your computer were ever to break
down, if you had written down the secret random seed number you chose
initially when opening your account, future versions would let you use it to
recreate the coins and thereby obtain a free re-issue of the signed coins that
were lost."  St.  Louis-based Mark Twain Bank, the first U.S.  insitution to
issue ecash, notes on its Web site that losing ecash is like losing cash out
of a real-world wallet.  The bank advises consumers to only stash as much
money in the hard drive as one would in the wallet.

Square peg in a round hole?

Unspent funds on smart cards are the subject of numerous regulatory questions.
The funds could be subject to Federal Reserve requirements that 10 percent of
the floating amount be maintained in a non-interest bearing account against
the unspent funds, says Bob Ballen, partner at the law firm of Schwartz &
Ballen in Washington D.C.

For banks involved in smart-card initiatives, such a ruling "would certainly
have an impact on the earning power of those dollars," says W.  Doug King,
executive vice president of consumer credit services at Wachovia Corp., which
is participating in both the Visa stored-value pilot and the SmartCash pilot.
"But we have been faced with Reserve requirements on deposits forever."

In addition, floating funds on smart cards could affect the Fed's ability to
monitor monetary supply by distorting the perception of the amount in
circulation.  This could spur a call for disclosure regulation in the future.
"Having to disclose [floating funds on smart cards] would hinder our desire to
go into smart cards," King says.  In his view, however, disclosure is
unnecessary.  The Visa system, for example "is fully auditable," he says.
"All transactions are routed through a single settlement unit."

Unspent funds on stored-value cards could also fit into current laws governing
escheatment, or abandoned property, although these vary from state to state.
William Keenan, senior vice president of marketing and business development at
NatWest Bank in Delaware and chair of the legal and public policy subcommittee
of the Smart Card Forum, suggests that cards be confiscated if their value is
not used up after two years.  "But who would regulate that?"  Keenan asks.
"The Fed would argue that it should be the one.  Stolen cards, on the other
hand, can be deactivated through card readers."

The Mondex mystique

Once the industry settles all the regulatory issues related to unspent funds
on stored-value cards, it still will have to grapple with Mondex.  This
stored-value card, the brainchild of London-based National Westminster Bank,
is currently being piloted in Swindon, U.K.  If all goes well, the cards will
hit the U.S., Canada and Hong Kong next year.

Mondex cards work just like cash.  Card owners-be they two friends or a
customer and merchant-can transfer funds to one another without going through
a middleman.  Because Mondex does not have a central settlement mechanism,
many argue that it would be difficult to track how much money is changing
hands.

But Mondex's chief executive officer, Tim Jones, asserts, "Point-of-sale
terminals can remember everything they do, making Mondex more auditable than
cash.  It's not a fully accountable system [like some stored-value programs],
but still more so than [cash].  We are in discussions with U.S.  regulators.
They are doing a good job so far."

However, unspent Mondex funds may pose other problems.  "Somewhere, Mondex
dollars, either in a reserve amount or actual dollars representing it, is on
deposit and a bank is making lots of money on the float.  From the Federal
Reserve's standpoint, how do you keep an eye on the currency flow?"  asks
Henry Polmer, a partner at Bell, Boyd & Lloyd in Washington D.C., and legal
counsel to Electronic Funds Transfer Association.

Auditability is a key component of levying taxes, as well as curbing criminal
activity.  "Taxation is not at all difficult with stored-value transactions at
the point of sale," says Bernard David, director of marketing and planning for
the Smart Card Enterprise at DE-based Electronic Payment Services, a
participant in the Smart Cash enterprise.  "But with the anonymity of
transactions on the Internet, will taxable transactions be able to be traced,
as well as enforced by taxing authorities?"

A price for privacy

At the same time that banks face auditability issues with electronic money,
they also must deal with requirements of protecting customer information under
the Bank Secrecy Act.  The Bank Secrecy Act requires financial institutions to
report cash transactions of more than $10,000, as well as "suspicious
transactions," to federal law enforcement agencies.  "The cost of auditability
is a loss of privacy," notes William Binzel, vice president of government
relations at MasterCard in Washington D.C.  "Conversely, the cost of
protecting privacy is not being able to catch people who are doing laundering
or other illegal activities."

When larger chunks of money start changing hands on the Internet, rules and
systems may have to be set up to act as financial police.  For example,
digital signatures and other technologies could authenticate the parties to a
transaction.  Currently, Internet transactions veer toward the $10 to $100
range, which makes money laundering over the Internet as yet inconvenient.

That doesn't mean money-laundering Internet schemes and other crimes won't
crop up.  Stanley Morris, director of the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
(FinCEN) of the Treasury, described the maladies that could plague the
Internet, in a recent hearing of the House Subcommittee on Domestic and
International Monetary Policy:

"Suppose my Internet user is a narcotics trafficker.  Consider the invoices
the trafficker might pay, the supplies he might order and the transactions he
might accomplish if, for instance, he could download an unlimited amount of
cash from a smart card to a computer, and then transmit those funds to other
smart cards in locations around the world-all anonymously, all without an
audit trail, and all without the need to resort to a traditional financial
insitution."

A scary proposition, indeed.  But unlike the woeful circumstances that
ultimately resulted in the formation of the Securities and Exchange Commission
and other regulatory agencies, industry experts say a Depression-like crisis
will not be a necessary impetus to establish electronic-money laws.  Says Egan
of Chemical Bank, "You hope the regulators will be sufficiently on top of
things so that when something [bad] happens they can have the tools to deal
with it."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Find The Bank:


Wachovia Bank recently unveiled the handsome design of the stored-value Visa
cards it will issue during the 1996 Atlanta Olympic games.  Most prominent is
the athelete at the top of the card, in dramatic motion.  Next, one notices
the Atlanta skyline.  Emblazoned at the bottom of the card is the Visa Cash
logo and the chip emblem.  Want to know which bank issued this bank card?
You'll have to turn the card over to find, finally, Wachovia's name at the
bottom.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

A Card By Any Other Name...


It's all in the cards, or is it the name?  Major players in the bank-card
arena are realizing that the skillful naming of new card products has a hand
in their success.  The barrage of new bank-card options-from stored-value
cards, to debit cards, to multi-function smart cards-is increasing the
importance of effective naming.

Hence, Visa U.S.A.  has officially adopted the name "Visa Cash" for its
stored-value cards issued in the U.S., which are currently serving as cash
substitutes for purchases under $10.  The Visa Cash name and logo were
introduced last November in Atlanta, prior to its usage at this year's Summer
Olympic Games.  The prepaid bank cards operate with embedded computer chips
that store money as electronic data.

Visa's competitors have also opted for simplicity in naming their stored-value
cards.  MasterCard International has chosen "MastercardCash," while SmartCash,
the stored value card venture spearheaded by Electronic Payment Services Inc.,
will offer SmartCash cards.

While the naming of these "cash" cards is straightforward, consumers still
have to be sure not to confuse them with MasterMoney or VisaCheck cards.
Known by bankers as debit cards-since transaction amounts are automatically
withdrawn from accounts rather than prepaid-both companies nixed using "debit"
to describe such cards, due to its negative connotation with consumers.
MasterCard surveyed more than 5,000 customers before deciding on the
MasterMoney moniker for debit cards, further proof that the name can say it
all.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

The Changing Physics Of Checking


Quiz those individuals with a stake in the business on their attitudes toward
checking and you're apt to receive a nearly universal response:  Checking is a
business undergoing colossal change.

"It's the new physics of banking," observes Dan Fisher, senior vice president
and cashier, Victoria Bank and Trust, Victoria, TX.  Industry consolidation is
the leading cause of change for the checking business today.  Fisher must
understand this fact first hand:  Victoria Bank, a $2 billion-asset bank,
situated in southeast Texas, about midway between Houston and Corpus Christi,
will soon become part of the Norwest Corp.  family of banks.  Norwest, a
multi-bank holding company headquartered in Minneapolis, tendered a bid for
Victoria Bank in November; the acquisition is expected to be finalized early
this year.

What is to become of Fisher's check processing shop once the acquisition by
Norwest is completed epitomizes the $64,000 question confronting bankers of
every ilk involved in the current consolidation frenzy.  No matter how
efficient a bank's check operation, experts note, it's difficult for an
acquiring bank to justify redundant check processing facilities because they
detract too much from the economies bank consolidations offer.  It's only a
matter of time before merged banks begin consolidating check shops.  "With all
of the merger activity we saw in 1995, we can expect to see consolidation of
greater check volumes into single check shops in 1996," predicts Stanley (Ned)
Miltko, senior vice president, Littlewood, Shain and Co., Exton, PA.

Miltko speculates that, at merging institutions, consolidation will throttle
the processes that support widescale implementation of new technologies, like
electronic check presentment (ECP) and image check processing.  "Technology
initiatives are going to have to wait to some degree for the consolidation
process to shake out," he says.

ECP, the equalizer

Clearly, there is a case to be made for ECP.  In the vernacular of many bank
operations executives, ECP is the great equalizer.  "ECP puts everyone on an
equal footing," explains Fisher.  "Distances don't matter anymore when you're
clearing checks electronically."  Nor does size; a small bank can present
checks with the same ease as its big bank competitor, provided each bank in
the exchange process is ECP-compatible.  "It levels the playing field," says
Fisher.

But there are many issues that must be resolved before ECP can begin to
fulfill its promise of widescale improvements in the efficiency of the check
clearing process.  For example, notes Miltko, in moving away from paper
presentment to a check clearing system that relies more on the exchange of
electronic files, banks will need to develop techniques for the integration of
back office systems, like accounting and statement rendering, with this new
check clearing model.  "It's not as simple as installing ECP receive software;
it's a whole reengineering of the back office that's required," says Miltko.
"That's really a tall order."

Today, ECP is almost always the electronic transmission of check payment
information in advance of the physical exchange of checks.  The idea is to get
a jump start on the processing of paper in hopes of identifying early in the
processing cycle items to be returned.  Clearly, if the paper check never had
to move-if it were truncated at the point of purchase or the bank of first
deposit-the hassles of reconciling paper and electronic presentments would
disappear.

Truncation woes

But check truncation brings with it an assortment of other problems.  Many of
the legal assurances that make the check a preferred method of payment in
America today simply don't translate into the world of the electronic check.
Banks need timely access to truncated checks, or at least to the images of
those items, to mitigate risks such as return item risk.

And then there is the matter of storage-where do banks stow all the checks, or
images of checks, that are truncated and converted to electronic items?  These
important questions must be answered before electronic check processes can
displace a significant share of paper check exchanges.

The Federal Reserve organized a panel of bankers and Fed officials late last
year in an effort to try and address these and related issues.  But before the
Fed's Advisory Group on ECP can begin to make headway, members will need to
agree upon a "common vision" for ECP, notes Paul Connolly, first vice
president, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, and director of retail payment
products for the Federal Reserve Bank System.  "I think all of us would
benefit from developing a common vision for ECP:  ideally, a vision of
paperless collection of checks, and certainly of reduced reliance on paper; a
vision in which checks could be written by businesses and consumers, and then
collected electronically instead of by processing and delivering the paper
checks themselves," Connolly said in a speech to bankers last fall.

Not everyone is optimistic about ECP and truncation, however, even with the
Fed leading the charge.  One of the real sticking points, says Richard Ercole,
Huntington Treasury Management Co., Columbus, OH, is how you support
truncation at the point of sale.  The model most industry executives point to
relies upon the automated clearing house (ACH) to clear the electronic items
created from truncated checks.  And the National Automated Clearing House
Association (NACHA) has gone so far as to create a multi-industry panel, the
Electronic Check Council, to promote this approach to truncation.

But Ercole, who participates on the NACHA panel, says there are many legal and
regulatory issues that get in the way of truncation.  For example, once a
check is converted to an ACH debit, in today's world at least, it becomes
subject to Regulation E, the Fed's consumer electronic funds transfer
regulation.  Reg E, among other things, provides consumers with a 60-day
opportunity to rescind contested EFT transactions.

There also have been questions raised about whether or not consumers should be
required to authorize the truncation of checks tendered at the point of sale.
An initial test plan for POS truncation, involving only return checks, already
has been placed on the back burner because of questions such as these, Ercole
notes.  Any widespread implementation of check truncation at the point of sale
is probably a long way off, he suggests.

Trading in efficiency?

"Quite frankly, I'm not sure we can truncate checks at the point of receipt
without making the payment system less efficient," says Ercole.  "I think
either legislation or regulations are going to have to be changed, at least as
far as forward presentment is concerned."

Another contentious issue raised by truncation is storage.  Truncation of
lockbox items illustrates the situation aptly.  As image technology makes
inroads in lockbox operations, experts say the case for truncating checks
collected through lockboxes becomes even more compelling.  "What do you need
the check copy for if you can have the image of the check?"  asks Richard
Poje, a partner at Treasury Strategies Inc., a Chicago cash management
consulting firm.  But, then, who is to retain the images of those checks for
those situations when a payor or payee needs a copy of an item?

"The absence of an accessible, economic archive is a major impediment to
truncation on a broad-scale basis," says Poje.  To overcome this impediment,
Poje suggests bankers turn to the Fed.  "I think the Fed is the natural
provider" of check image archive services.  "They are the honest broker in the
business; the one party everybody trusts."

But how will the Fed get the images?  Today, only about one-third of the
estimated 63 billion checks written that are tendered for payment each year
clear though the Fed.  "The concept of a repository needs to be developed
around the whole clearing structure," says Jay Simmons, vice president,
Citibank.  "The Fed should be doing it for the items that clear through them."
But to forward to the Fed for storage those check images that are not cleared
through the Fed, would diminish many of the economies promised by truncation,
Simmons suggests.

The more appropriate role for the Fed in the evolution of electronic check
processes, Simmons says, is in rule writing.  As a regulator, the Fed can
implement rules that provide the assurances banks need to overcome the
shortcomings of ECP and truncation.  "I think that's their role in life," he
says.

Putting imaging in its place

And, what about imaging?  After years of promise, imaging has yet to make
major inroads into the labor-intensive proof-of-deposit function.  But imaging
is gaining favor for specialized applications, such as lockbox and return item
processing.  "To me, an imaging system focused on returns makes a great deal
of sense," says Simmons.  "It takes a lot of the risk out of the process."

During the course of a typical month, Simmons notes, a major cash management
bank might return between 4,000 and 5,000 checks that have been presented
against controlled disbursement accounts.  Sending those checks back through
the paper return cycle can take upwards of five days; transmitting images of
the items is a far quicker alternative.

One potential obstacle, Simmons concedes, is the current lack of imaging
standards.  Differences in the way the two major brands of check imaging
equipment-Unisys Corp.  and IBM Corp.-convert paper checks to electronic
images makes broad-scale image interchange an iffy proposition.

At least two groups-the New York Clearing House (NYCH) and the Financial
Services Technology Consortium (FSTC)-are working on projects to perfect the
use of images to support the check return process and check image interchange,
Simmons notes.  (Citibank is a member of both groups.)  If the FSTC and NYCH
projects prove successful, imaging could help the private sector chip away at
the Fed's return item processing business.

Today, the vast majority of check returns are routed through the Fed.  It's
largely a matter of convenience, explains Huntington's Ercole.  The Fed's
prices are such that it is often cheaper to send the Fed a mixed cashletter
than it is for a bank to sort the items itself.  Imaging, Ercole suggests,
makes it worthwhile for a third party, like a clearing house, to fine sort and
capture the images of checks for its members (or clients), thereby enabling it
to compete head-to-head with the Fed.

Online access to check images, he believes, could expedite the return process
by at least a day.  Ercole's parent bank, Huntington, is a founding member of
the National Clearing House Association (NCHA), which competes with the Fed
for nationwide check clearing business.  It's all in keeping with what bankers
like Victoria Bank's Fisher like to refer to as the "changing physics" of
banking, where the evolution of check products and services draws upon the
unlimited power of electronics rather than the physical limitations of paper.
"We have a system that is designed to deal with exceptions," explains Fisher.
"So why not create an image-based infrastructure for return items?"

The conversion of other paper-based check processes to electronics, suggest
Fisher and others, will just follow naturally.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

INTERACTIVE BEAT


Will New Service Send Customers Out The Door?  Whether the newest feature to
be added to the interactive banking package from Online Resources &
Communications, Inc., McLean, VA, will be a boom or bust to banks is entirely
debatable.

Online's Interbank Transfer Service gives consumers an easy way to shop around
for the most competitive banking rates and electronically transfer money into
banks that offer the most attractive options.  At the same time, however,
consumers also have the ability to take money out of their banks more quickly
and easily than ever.  Whether a bank is on the winning or losing end of that
equation will determine just how much value they find in Online's new
offering.

"It seems absurd that banks would want to offer this service," says David
Stewart, consultant at Global Concepts, Inc., Atlanta.  "Obviously, it is
potentially damaging for banks that are looking to maintain and strengthen a
relationship with the customer."  In essence, banks are encouraging a "shop
around" attitude, Stewart says.  The only benefit may be if banks believe it
advantageous to offer as many options as possible, even at the risk of losing
business, he adds.

To use the interbank transfer feature, a consumer need only sign up (at no
added cost) for the service through an Online Resources client financial
institution that is marketing the feature.  Consumers can then access funds in
virtually any U.S.  institution from their home- or office-based PCs or
screenphones.  Three banks that are currently using the service include
Nationsbank, Comstar Federal Credit Union, Gaithersburg, MD, and Richmond,
CA-based Mechanics Bank.

"I'm not sure there's any way to ensure that funds won't leave your bank,"
says Alex Hart, vice president of customer access at NationsBank.  "But, the
best way to keep funds in your bank is to offer customers the services they
want."  As a service provider, Hart concludes that a bank needs to be focused
on offering the type of functionality and services desired by customers.  "You
should not be so proprietary to deny customers the conveniences they want
purely for defensive reasons," he says.

Online Resources contends that its new service feature is as beneficial for
banks as it is for consumers.  Says Lori Stewart, Online Resource's senior
vice president of marketing, the service is a "big benefit" for banks because
it is the first interactive way to transfer new funds into the bank.

12 Merchants Get Smart With First Union

First Union Corp.  is the first to announce merchant commitments to
participate in a smart-card trial during this year's Summer Olympics in
Atlanta.  The First Union Visa Cash card will be accepted by most of the
merchants as early as first quarter of the year.  Two other banks scheduled to
issue Visa Cash cards-NationsBank and Wachovia-had not announced any merchant
agreements as of November.

The 12 merchants signed up with First Union for the test launch include
Baskin-Robbins, BellSouth, Blimpie, Chick-fil-A, Communications Central, Crown
Central Petroleum, Domino's Pizza, the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit
Authority, Pollo Tropical, Star Enterprise, Taco Bell and United Artist
Theaters.  According to First Union officials, several other merchants have
already signed letters of intent for participation.

The prepaid stored-value cards are available in $10, $20, $50 and eventually
$100 values, and may be obtained by anyone regardless of their bank
affiliation or credit history.  There is no fee to buy or use the cards, which
can be purchased with cash, credit or debit cards.  Omaha, NE-based Applied
Communications, Inc.  is providing the BASE24 software needed to load cash
value onto the First Union cards, which can be used wherever the Visa Cash
logo appears.

Visa is officially leading the smart card race in North America, with
London-based Mondex running close behind.  Mondex just announced a 12-month
pilot in the city of Guelph, Ontario scheduled for the latter half of this
year.  Mondex began piloting the system last July in Swindon, England and
reports usage by more than 8,000 consumers.  Plans are also underway for
additional pilots in the U.S., Asia and Europe.

Other competitors include Electronic Payment System's SmartCash (11
participants in this), which is expected to hit the U.S.  market sometime
later this year along with Mastercard International's MastercardCash, already
in circulation in Australia.  Even American Express is making sure it is not
left behind in the dust.  Teaming up with MCI, American Express Special Teams
is planning to market "integrated service" cards for stored-value applications
to college campuses in the U.S.  and abroad for a 1996 release.

All-in-one cards coming

By mid 1996, First Union will introduce reloadable stored-value cards.
Customers will be able to add cash value to the cards by using a First Union
ATM machine to access their checking or savings accounts.  The eventual goal
is an all-in-one card that will function as stored-value, debit and/or credit
card.

Next year, First Union plans to expand Visa Cash cards to other cities,
including the greater Washington, D.C.  area, Richmond, VA, and major Florida
metropolitan areas.  Major cities in North Carolina, South Carolina and
Tennessee are planned for 1998.

MasterCard Bounces Checkfree For Servantis

MasterCard International announced an alliance with Norcross, GA-based
Servantis Systems, Inc.  as part of several enhancements being made to its
MasterBanking program.  The Servantis alliance will eventually override the
existing agreement between Checkfree Corp., the Columbus, OH-based bill
payment processor, and MasterCard that began three years ago with the launch
of the MasterBanking program.  The enhanced MasterBanking program will be
available during the first quarter of this year.  MasterCard contends that
under a mutually modified agreement, the 50,000 MasterBanking customers whose
transactions are currently passed on to Checkfree will be converted over to
the Servantis system.  Full conversion is expected by mid 1996.

Dual role

"There is no problem with Checkfree, it's just a different choice of a
technology partner," says A.  Christian Frederick, MasterCard senior vice
president of remote banking and strategic planning.  "We wanted the dual
functionality offered by Servantis rather than just the bill payment option
offered by Checkfree."

The dual functionality Frederick refers to is Servantis' ability to offer both
home banking and bill payment capabilities.  The Servantis software allows
customers looking for simple, quick access to their finances to check
balances, transfer funds, pay bills and send and receive email messages to and
from their financial institution through Windows- and Macintosh-based
computers.  Servantis will market these products and services as Bank Street
Platinum.

US Order Delivers Smarter Phones At Lower Cost

Available at a cost of about $200 (down from $250), U.S.  Order's smart phones
not only got cheaper, they got smarter.  The Herndon, VA-based company
announced three new interactive features for its PhonePlus line of smart
telephones.

With the introduction of three features-EZPage text paging, EZPost email
service and FastFind visual directory assistance-PhonePlus smart phones now
have the capability to type and send full text messages directly to pagers,
send email messages via the Internet and receive nationwide directory
assistance information visually on the phone's display screen.  These three
applications add to its established functionality, which includes an interface
with Visa's electronic banking and bill payment service.  The screenphones
also provide a personal phone directory, visual caller ID and visual message
retrieval features.

Banc One, headquartered in Columbus, OH, and Memphis-based First Tennessee
Bank have both begun deployment of the Phone Plus Smart Phone while 18 other
financial institutions are planning to deploy the phones for technical
evaluation and trials.  Current PhonePlus customers will be able to download
the new applications directly from the US Order host computer.  New customers
can purchase the new smart phones through GTE and Sprint.

IRE Helps Secure Quicken Online

Baltimore-based Information Engineering Resources is providing Intuit Service
Corp.  with secure remote access products to protect electronic commerce
transactions.  The encryption equipment, now available through Intuit's
Quicken software, is packaged in a small, portable case designed for
convenient use in home banking.

Banks have been up and running with Quicken since Oct.  26, 1995.  The online
Quicken service enables consumers to bank, pay bills and perform other
financial tasks by dialing up their bank and downloading data directly into
the software, which then organizes consumers' records.

Founded in the early 1980's, Information Engineering Resources is a public
company that designs, manufactures and markets secure, encryption-based
communications systems.  The company reported revenues in excess of $4 million
last year, up 60 percent from the previous year, according to company
spokesperson Jill Leukhardt.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

PRODUCT OF THE MONTH:  Shaping A Competitive Image


Shortly after First Commerce Bank of Georgia, $120 million in assets,
installed the PrimeImage Check Imaging System, bank officials had proof they
made the right decision.  With PrimeImage, the bank was able to detect a
fraudulent-check situation that would have resulted in a loss of $160,000.

"Since the system allows instant retrieval of the previous day's deposits, we
were able to substantiate a suspected kite, therefore saving us from a
substantial loss," says Randy Whitehead, group vice president.  "With
microfilm, there is no way we would have been able access our records as fast
to move on the situation."

The PrimeImage Check Imaging System from Carrollton, GA-based Greenway Corp.
is a Windows-NT based check and document imaging software system.  One unique
aspect of PrimeImage is that it utilizes a Redundant Array of Independent Disk
(RAID) system for online, magnetic storage of images.  The online RAID system
reduces statement preparation time by 90 percent over optical storage systems.

With PrimeImage, the front and back of each check and deposit slip is captured
by electronic cameras mounted on an image-enabled check reader/sorter and
transferred to a RAID system for high capacity, online magnetic storage with
fault tolerant safety.  The software system has the capability to assemble the
images and print up to 33 double-sided check-statement pages per minute in
check-number order.  Thus, it streamlines operations by simplifying the
check-sorting process and reducing the number of employees involved.

First Commerce Bank served as the beta site for PrimeImage.  Fully implemented
in June 1995, the system processes all checks for more than 10,000 First
Commerce accounts.  Whitehead points out that the bank has also prevented four
or five other potential losses since installing the complete system in August.
He concludes, "It really has been an excellent overall move for the bank in
terms of time, accuracy, staff productivity and customer service."

Banks using the PrimeImage software report that customers find the new
technology improves the way they balance their checkbooks.  First Commerce's
Whitehead says "customers love it" and reports a 99.5 percent satisfaction
rate with the new laser printed statements.

First National Bank of Griffin, $150 million in assets, installed the
PrimeImage system in November.  Prior to the system's implementation, the
Georgia-based bank conducted focus groups comprised of a variety of
professional and lay people to determine consumer opinion on the new
technology.  The overwhelming majority agreed the system was a quicker and
easier alternative to the "old" checking system.

Elderly customers, in particular, were especially appreciative of the easy to
understand statements, says Bill Homes, senior vice president at First
National Bank of Griffin.  With PrimeImage, checks are reduced to print-outs
that can be stored in a three-ring notebook provided by the bank.  "Our
customers are very comfortable and extremely pleased with our new system," he
says.

Other banks using the PrimeImage software include Moultre, GA-based ABC
Bancorp ($314 million in assets), which installed the system in December, and
Northwest Georgia Bank in Ringgould, GA ($180 million in assets), which will
be up and running with the system in February.

-Joanna Kolor


PrimeImage

Greenway Corp.  1340 North Park Street Carrollton, GA 30117 Price:  $258,000
to $475,000 Release Date:  August 1995 Number of Bank Users:  4





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

An Unbalanced Budget Burden


It's not easy being a medium-sized institution these days.  That's at least
one of the findings of an annual survey of bank and thrift
information-technology expenditures from Mentis Corp., Durham, NC.

The amount of money banks and thrifts of all sizes spent to purchase new
information systems, hardware and software reached $4.3 billion in 1995, up
from $3.7 billion in 1994, a 17-percent increase.  In addition to the $4.3
billion of capital invested in new technology, the industry spent more than
$20 billion on personnel, facilities, external services and other expense
categories associated with running existing systems and equipment.

Interestingly, the extent to which banks increased their capital investment in
technology differed greatly depending on the deposit size of the bank, the
survey found.  With consolidations roiling and churning the industry
practically weekly, such size-based spending suggests banks are using
technology as a tool to either defend, expand or control their turf.

Medium-sized institutions were the most aggressive investors in new technology
in 1995.  For many of them, potent technology-based strategies were the key to
maintaining their independence against ever-bigger banks encroaching on their
territory.  Mentis found that the segment with between $1 billion and $4
billion in deposits experienced an increase in capital IT spending of 41
percent, from $413 million to $582 million.  That hefty increase occurred even
as the number of branches these institutions own and operate went down (from
11,278 in 1994 to 10,765 in 1995).  By the same token, the segment of
institutions with between $500 million and $1 billion in deposits boosted IT
capital spending by 29 percent, from $184 million to $238 million, even though
they too, had fewer branches to maintain (5,765 in 1994 versus 5,107 in 1995).

When examined by branch, average technology spending for institutions with
between $1 billion and $4 billion in deposits increased by 48 percent per
branch between 1994 and 1995 (from $36,620 to $54,064 per branch).  For the
segment with between $500 million and $1 billion, such spending per branch
increased a 46 percent (from $31,917 to $46,603).  These stats lead to the
summary that medium-sized institutions may well be feeling the heat to compete
more effectively-either to keep up with large banks, or at least avoid being
taken over by them.  Clearly, banks and thrifts of this size are using
technology to pursue aggressive business strategies toward those ends.

Aggressive goals

One case in point, among many, is Centura Bank, Rocky Mount, NC.  The $5
billion institution is surrounded on all sides by some formidable big-bank
competition, including NationsBank, First Union and Wachovia.  Over the past
year, Centura has geared the bulk of its bank technology spending toward a
very specific, aggressive goal:  toward becoming the "money manager" of its
customers, says Tom Rogers, executive vice president.  Investing in technology
was virtually the only way to ensure the success of that strategy.

A month or two from now, Centura will wrap up a branch automation project that
should facilitate the bank's goal of better understanding customers' financial
situations, their needs and their profitability profiles.  Centura's
installation of Windows-based SellStation software from Ampersand Corp.  (now
owned by EDS Corp.)  at the teller and platform lines hooks into a customer
information system, from Customer Insight Co., Denver.  Customer Insight's
Analytix Software delivers customer information, including profitability,
directly to salespeople at the platform, helping them to gear product pitches
to the appropriate customers.

All of these systems and features at the platform are helping to build
business in the bank's new brokerage unit, which offers insurance and
investment accounts.  Rogers was not specific about revenues or new accounts
generated in this area, but relates that "from a business plan standpoint, the
new units are making very good progress."

For Centura, technology was the "tool chest" that helped make it possible.
Quite simply, Rogers says, "we need those [technology] tools to compete, and
to achieve our objective of being money managers."

Big banks reign in

Compared to medium-sized banks and thrifts, the biggest institutions spent far
less on acquiring new technology in 1995.  Banks and thrifts with more than $4
billion in deposits increased capital IT investments by only 17 percent, from
$2.3 billion to $2.6 billion.  The increase is even more modest in light of
the fact that the number of branches these institutions own and operate also
increased, from 33,942 to 35,222.

Many large banks and thrifts, having merged recently, are being sidetracked
from new-investment initiatives as they grapple with the huge jobs of
eliminating multiple information systems and paring overlapped branch
networks.  Of course, there's light at the end of the tunnel for these banks
and thrifts.  As these large institutions succeed in eliminating redundancies,
they should be able to redirect future IT expenditures toward capital
investments in new strategic initiatives.

Chase Manhattan and Chemical Bank, to be officially combined as the largest
bank in the land come March, are in that limbo stage right now.  But with the
expectation of eliminating 12,000 positions, consolidating back-office systems
within three years, and saving $1.5 billion in expenses, the combined bank
should be in a position to invest in new technology before long.  The new
Chase is predicting a revenue fall within the first year of merged operation,
a year of break-even growth after that, and finally, revenue gains by 1998.

The objectives and experiences of small banks and thrifts turned out to be
altogether different from those of larger institutions in 1995, when it came
to investments in technology.  According to the Mentis survey, banks and
thrifts with less than $500 million showed a much lower growth rate in their
acquisition of new technology.  Those with between $250 million and $500
million in deposits spent 15 percent less investing in new technology (from
$229 million to $195 million) while those under $250 million increased their
technology expenditures by only 10 percent (from $598 million to $657
million).

These lagging trends in technology budgets make sense in light of the decrease
in the number of branches owned and operated by this segment of the bank and
thrift population.  Institutions with between $250 million and $500 million in
deposits now operate 728 fewer branches (6,767 in 1994 versus 6,039 in 1995),
while those with less than $250 million are dealing with 2,834 fewer branches
(28,425 in 1994 versus 25,591 in 1995).

Despite the overall decrease in technology investment for small banks and
thrifts, the Mentis study shows small institutions are nonetheless beginning
to invest in technology at a level that's on par with their larger brethren.
Mentis examined how capital technology expenditures compare to institutions'
non-interest expenditures-all those expenditures that support a bank's
operations and facilities, such as personnel and technology.

For banks and thrifts with deposits of more than $1 billion in deposits, 1995
capital technology expenditures amounted to 2.5 percent of total non-interest
expenditures.  For those institutions between $250 million and $1 billion,
capital technology spending was 1.9 percent of non-interest expenditures, and
for those with less than $250 million in deposits, it was 2.0 percent.

According to Dr.  James Moore, president and CEO of Mentis, the slightly
higher technology investments of larger banks as a percent of non-interest
expenditures is not a surprise.  "Economies of scale and consolidation in the
large bank segment allow a greater proportion of total dollars to go toward
acquiring new technology," he says, as opposed to managing the current
infrastructure.

The good news is that small banks and thrifts seem to be taking the challenge
of a lack of scale economies in stride, especially as advanced technology
becomes more affordable to them.  If small institutions can't spend as
aggressively as large ones, they at least seem to be spending wisely.  Take
tiny State National Bank of Big Spring, TX.  With $130 million in assets, the
bank has not let its small size get in the way of innovative ideas and astute
technology investments.

Busy, busy, busy

Its list of technology credits include just completing installation of a check
imaging system, developing a debit-card program through MasterCard's
MasterMoney offering, launching an electronic data interchange (EDI)
translation service and offering voice-response access to account balances.
Prior to these projects-most of which occurred in 1995-the bank was busy
installing a fully loaded local area network that runs Windows-based
applications for lending, account openings and other platform functions.  On
the agenda for 1996 is home banking.

Decisive moves

Robert Buckner, first vice president, can't yet quantify the payback the bank
has received, since most of the projects are just starting to have an effect
on customers now.  But State National is moving decisively to ensure its
investments pay off.

In just one example of moving swiftly to offer a service most large banks are
only now just dreaming of, State National will be delivering check images to
its fleet of networked PCs to aid customer service efforts.  Bankers will be
able to print out the front and back of checks in response to customer
requests.  And in a move that some institutions might think radical, State
National will charge a fee to customers who want paper checks returned, but
will offer imaged checking-account statements for free.

State National is not only thinking big, but is thinking creatively about how
to get good returns on technology investments.  Recently, it instituted what
could be a first:  a wake-up service brought to you by a bank.  Through its
voice response system, supplied by Regency Voice Systems, Inc., Dallas, State
National has rigged a wake-up service that sends out ring-a-lings to about 100
people every morning.  The message offers the time, the temperature and a
friendly "Good morning from State National Bank!"

The bank does not feel a need to charge a fee for such calls.  "We figure that
if the first thing you hear every morning is the name of our bank, then pretty
soon that's the only name that comes to mind when banking comes up," notes
Brunckner.

Flexible, free-form thinking like that, in addition to the ever-declining cost
of PC-based banking applications, will help small banks bring much-needed
efficiency gains to technology expenditures.

And once a much-needed calm to the industry's current consolidation frenzy
settles in, perhaps operating budgets will begin following a more steady,
consistent pattern across banks of all sizes





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

PRODUCT INTROS


For An Encore, Culverin Promotes Self-Service

Imagine customers who act as tellers for themselves.  Dayton, OH-based
Culverin Corp.  is doing just that, as it positions the self-service package
for its Encore!  for Windows application system as a labor-saving tool.
Recently, Culverin was acquired by CFI ProServices, Portland, OR.

The self-service package runs on a touchscreen-equipped PC.  With a card
reader and laser printer, customers can get account and product information,
print instant statements and run simple, non-cash transactions.  PINs maintain
customer security.

Although the self-service package can run independently of the Encore!
system, Culverin doesn't plan to market it as such, says Robert Feaganes,
marketing director.  The software package will probably cost $5,000 to $7,000
per workstation, he says.  Add the hardware required to run it, and the system
comes in priced at less than $10,000.  Culverin Corp., (513) 435-2335.


Signatures Go Digital

From time immemorial, signatures have been used to positively identify bank
customers.  With the ID-007, Atlanta-based Cadix International, Inc., brings
signature verification into the electronic age.  A pressure sensitive writing
tablet and Windows-based driver software make up the ID-007 system.

The ID-007 documents not only the shape of a signature, but also the pressure
and speed with which a person signs.  When first registering with the system,
a customer signs three to five times to give a large enough sample.  The
ID-007 software normalizes the signature and creates a 1.5 KB template.
Future signatures are compared to the template.  The system continues to
update the template with each genuine signature, as the template, like a
person's signature, changes gradually over time.

The system operates on either a local computer or over a network.  It costs
$250 to $1000 per unit, depending on desired features.  Cadix International,
Inc., (404) 804-9951.


Identix ID Points A Finger At Impostors

Identix, Inc., of Sunnyvale, CA, began shipping its TouchSafe II Fingerprint
Identification Terminal, which provides a physical method of verifying
personal identities of customers and computer users.

The TouchSafe II consists of two elements.  The first is a fingerprint scanner
"about the size of four average mice," says Anna Stockel, Identix's director
of fingerprint identification products.  The scanner connects to a standard
PC-mounted card.

The company using the system creates a database by scanning the fingerprints
of people it will wish to later identify.  The Identix system creates and
stores digital templates for these fingerprints.  To positively identify a
person, the system creates a second template from a new scan and compares it
with the old template.

Stockel emphasizes that unless the system is specially ordered, fingerprint
images cannot be generated from templates.  This lack, she says, helps calm
customers or users who fear their fingerprints, after they are scanned, will
be compared to law agency records.

Stockel declined to give price information on the Touchsafe II system.
Identix, Inc., (408) 739-2000.


Budgeting Service For Check Customers

For businesses and families on a budget, every check written is important.
Banks using Budget Master software, a product of Wausau Financial Systems,
Inc., can deliver to their budget-conscious customers statements that
categorize cashed checks into various budget areas.

Banks with Budget Master software issue special budget checking accounts.
Checks for these accounts are imprinted with 21 to 35 special symbols, created
by OnTRACK Management Systems, Inc., Downey, CA.  When writing a check, a
customer marks one or more symbols for budget categories into which the
payment falls.  At the bank, these check categories are keyed in along with
the other check information required to process a check.

Wausau, based in Mosinee, WI, also plans to release an image capture version
of the software, says Joe Gregory, product development manager.  The software
price varies depending on a bank's assets, from a minimum of $20,000 to
$125,000 for a $2 billion bank.  Wausau Financial Systems, Inc., (715)
693-5560


UCC Software Prevents Costly Filing Mistakes

A program from Librasoft, Inc., significantly reduces the risk of clerical
errors that might endanger a banks' legal protection under the Universal
Commercial Code (UCC).  UCC Control, a Windows-based program, automates the
completion of the more than 177 varieties of UCC forms.

Santa Fe, NM-based Librasoft developed UCC Control to automate data entry and
track compliance with UCC filing regulations.  UCC Control recognizes
incongruities in data and notifies users of impending filing lapses.

Form update disks for the program are provided quarterly under an arrangement
with UCC Filing Guide.  A single-user package costs $2,495.  Novell network
versions are available.  Librasoft, Inc., (800) 922-4988.


Toolkit Eases Transition To Mortgage EDI

Lenders using FiTECH Lending's Mortgage Lending system will be able to create
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) interfaces on demand using the Greensboro,
NC, company's EDI Tool Kit.

The kit, priced under $10,000, gives lenders the ability to communicate with
multiple vendors that support the EDI standard.  Lenders using EDI improve the
timeliness of business transactions, eliminate redundancy, reduce paperwork,
improve business workflow, reduce processing errors, streamline operational
costs and provide access to additional services.  FiTECH Lending, (800)
753-6633.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Visa Pushes Non-Duality For Internet Purchases


The World Wide Web of the Internet is a whole new world, right?  Visa U.S.A.
sure seems to think so.  Recently, the bank card association staked out a
strikingly bold claim in the still-developing world of Web commerce.

Visa announced it will collaborate with Sony Corp.  of America to build a
slick entertainment- and information-rich Web site-one that will take
advantage of Sony's multiple strengths in filmmaking, music, television,
radio, consumer electronics and video games, among others.  The site, dubbed
Sony Station, will be available for access in spring 1996.  Web surfers will
be able to access loads of new content that Sony is developing for this
medium, such as interactive tours with bands, live dating games and
information sessions with audio experts.

Visa's role in this venture is to act as the exclusive processor of secure
payments and micropayments for those who purchase entertainment or other
products from the Web site.  Visa's bold move excludes other brands of debit,
credit and chip cards for use on the Web site.  In other words, consumers will
not be able to use MasterCard or other card brands to make Sony Station
purchases.  In essence, Visa is attempting to create a new model for Internet
payments where duality-the accepted practice of having issuers and merchants
offer and accept multiple brands of bank cards-is a no go.

"Visa's going in the wrong direction," says David Weisman, analyst at
Forrester Research, Cambridge, MA.  "It's an attempt to say Visa has the only
secure payment system for the Internet, which it doesn't.  Now is not the time
to be staking territory."

Visa's attempt to create a non-dual world on the Internet harks back to its
announcement last September that it had established a secure transaction
protocol for Internet payments.  The announcement caught the industry by
surprise because Microsoft, not MasterCard, shared the podium with Visa.
Prior to the unexpected revelation, Visa and MasterCard had said publicly that
they were collaborating on a single standard for secure Internet transactions.

During the press conference announcing Sony Station, Carl Pascarella, Visa's
president and CEO, said that the differences between the Visa- and
MasterCard-led secure Internet protocols were "minimal."  He added, "We're
working on fast convergence of the standard."

However, resolution of the standard will not change the way transactions occur
on Sony Station.  "Resolving the standard will accelerate acceptance of
commerce on the Internet," said Pascarella.  "But it won't change Visa's
position on Sony Station.  Visa will be the only accepted card."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Microsoft Makes Big-Bank Inroads With NT Servers


A number of financial big leaguers recently pledged their allegiance to
Microsoft's Windows NT as their server operating-system of choice for some of
their more mission-critical applications.  The list of high-profile
institutions to sign up with Microsoft toward the end of 1995 includes
Citicorp, Merrill Lynch & Co.  Inc., Charles Schwab & Co., KeyCorp, Crestar
Bank and Sanford C.  Bernstein & Co.  Inc.

Most of these firms are employing Microsoft Back Office, a set of
next-generation business applications for NT servers.  According to Microsoft,
shipments of the Windows NT Server increased 70 percent between the first and
second quarters of 1995.  Even so, Windows NT, which hit the market in 1993,
still has a long way to go to catch up to the financial-services market share
of server operating-systems currently owned by Novell's NetWare network
operating system, according to a 1995 survey by The Tower Group, Wellesley,
MA.  Windows NT represented only 18 percent of new server operating-system
purchases by banks in 1995, compared to the whopping 52 percent represented by
Novell NetWare.

However, that 52 percent represents a harsh loss of share for Novell, because
it is down significantly from 1994's 72 percent, according to Tower.  NT's
18-percent share, meanwhile, represents dramatic momentum, up from only two
percent in 1994.  Through all this, IBM Corp.'s OS/2 LAN Server maintained an
even 20-percent market share in 1994 and 1995, according to Tower.

Many of the applications being put on Windows NT these days are considered
mission-critical.  New York-based Citibank, with more than $250 billion in
assets, will be rolling out more than 10,000 machines grounded in NT over the
next three years.  The bank will develop its future line of ATMs, in-branch
kiosks and staff workstations on Windows NT.

The $14 billion Crestar Bank, Richmond, VA, also is putting NT to work in
branch automation.  Crestar had been using Bankpro branch automation software
from Dallas-based Argo Data on OS/2 operating systems at all of its branches.
When Argo announced that it would make Bankpro available on Windows NT,
Crestar agreed to be one of the beta test sites for the NT version.

"Many of the other local area networks operating within the organization are
predominantly Microsoft and Novell-based solutions," explains David Holman,
senior vice president and manager of branch operations at Crestar.  "If we are
able to run the mission-critical branch automation on Microsoft, we will have
made a significant step forward in achieving increased compatibility between
operating systems across corporate LANs."

Cleveland-based KeyCorp, with $68 billion in assets, began piloting Windows NT
for branch automation at four branches in Columbus, OH, last September.  By
the end of October, the Columbus branches had a total of about 18 workstations
equipped with NT running Olivetti Corp.'s Mosaic OA branch management
software.

By the end of 1996, full functionality will be realized in 200 KeyCorp
branches.  Ultimately, the NT system will run database marketing programs,
interactive video banking kiosks, telephone banking services, enhanced ATM
functionality and smart card services.  Says Janet Malecki, vice president of
Key Services Corp., the move is part of the institution's "First Choice 2000
Strategic Initiative," a set of goals for the turn of the century.

Merrill Lynch, meanwhile, will implement Windows NT on all its 700 branch
servers and 25,000 desktops.  Sanford Bernstein & Co.  already has migrated 25
servers and 400 workstations to Microsoft Back Office and plans to migrate its
remaining mainframe-based applications, such as portfolio accounting and
analytical modeling, to the Windows NT Server.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

HP Dresses Up Teller Windows At Wachovia


Microsoft's Windows NT is not the only high-powered operating system making
its way into bank branches.  At Wachovia Bank, Winston-Salem, NC, Hewlett
Packard computers will automate teller windows at some 500 branches in North
and South Carolina and Georgia.  Wachovia plunked down $30 million on the
intelligent HP workstations and the AT&T GIS servers that will feed them.  On
the platform side of branch operations, Wachovia uses IBM workstations running
OS/2.  Previously, the bank used an IBM 4700 configuration in its branches and
in other areas.

William Scales, Wachovia's manager of computing and network services justifies
the huge investment as part of a long-term strategy.  "We've put in a base
platform that will give us a lot of flexibility in the future," he says.  The
terminals could soup up customer service and rev up cross selling at the
teller location, for example.

The HP implementation is also an extension of an ongoing relationship with the
Palo Alto, CA-based computer vendor.  HP workstations and servers automate
Wachovia's bond trading, investment operations, auto finance and
asset-liability management departments.  HP Openview, a network management
software, coordinates systems across the bank.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

What Do The Meca Banks Know That You Don't?


Fleet Financial Group, First Bank Systems, Inc.  and Royal Bank of Canada may
know something the rest of the banking industry doesn't.  At a time when
Intuit's Quicken and Microsoft's Money are the bulls in the PC home banking
market, these three banks have bought ownership stakes in Meca Software, whose
Managing Your Money application holds, at best, about 10 percent of the
market.

"The banks that invested in Meca want to be able to offer a full-feature
personal financial management package that's bank-branded, so the relationship
is with the bank rather than with the software package itself," says David
Weisman, analyst at the Forrester Group, Cambridge, MA.  "With Quicken or
Money, the customer relationship is with the package, not the bank."

Besides displaying only bank logos, the Meca software allows banks to
determine which financial services to offer.  Banks also can choose from
various back-end payment systems processors.  "The cornerstone of the bank's
relationship with its customers has been the payment system.  And if you
believe that there's an opportunity to merge the payment system with Internet
commerce, then you would want to make sure that you were in control of that
payment system," says Paul Harrison, president and CEO of Meca.

"Canadianizing" home banking

Meca's flexibility has special appeal for Toronto-based Royal Bank, because
with Meca, it can easily "Canadianize" PC home banking.  Canada's currency and
financial regulations are not fully accommodated by US-oriented packages like
Quicken and Money, points out Dan Maceluch, a spokesman for the bank.  For
example, Canadian retirement plans are called Registered Retirement Savings
Plans, rather than 401(K)s, as denoted on US-made software, and are controlled
by a different set of laws.  Similarly, tax filings are conducted differently
and need to be molded within the software accordingly.

"We would also like to offer the software to the different subsidiaries of
Royal Bank, like Royal Trust, Royal Mutual Funds, RBCDS Dominion Securities
and Action Direct, our discount brokerage," notes Maceluch.  "You have to
create all of those interfaces.  It's not a matter of handing out boxes of
software to customers."  Royal plans on distributing the package for free, and
charging an as-yet undetermined monthly fee.

The three new Meca banks join San Francisco-based Bank of America, with more
than $215 billion in assets, and Charlotte-based NationsBank, with $169
billion in assets, which collaborated to buy the Fairfield, CT-based Meca last
spring.  Each of the five banks now owns 20 percent of Meca.  The ownership
ring is potentially open to a few more bidders-although Harrison asserts he
doesn't want too many owners.

Others cluing in

Ultimately, Meca will offer and tailor the product for non-owner banks.  Other
plans include rolling a wider range of services onto the application, such as
brokerage, loan origination, insurance, and even travel tickets and catalogs.
The three banks' versions of the application will begin appearing on the
market the first half of this year.

These banks are "not the only ones" cluing in to the importance of branding
financial software, says William Randle, director of marketing and strategic
planning at Huntingon Bancshares, Columbus, OH.  "Our view of the future is an
electronic gateway that says 'Huntington.' Microsoft and Intuit have different
views," he asserts.  Randle has faith that "most banks will take action to
protect their customer relationships, so the brand in front of the customer is
their own.  The advantage banks have is they currently own the customer
relationships."





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

AOL, Intuit Pave Yet Another Electronic Path


Now that Intuit, Inc.  and America Online, Inc.  have joined forces to provide
online electronic banking services, consumers have one more entry into the
evolving world of home banking.  The strategic alliance between the two
industry leaders opens the door to electronic banking for the millions of
America Online members.  At the same time, it creates yet another product
detour for consumers en route to banks.

AOL subscribers will have point-and-click access to financial services
including checking, savings, money market and credit card accounts-as long as
these accounts are located at banks participating in the new AOL service.
These banks will charge fees independent of the AOL subscriber fee.

Providing AOL access will be easiest for banks already offering electronic
banking services via Intuit's Quicken.  For these banks, no additional
equipment or programming will be necessary-a single connection to Intuit
Services Corp.  will give these banks the ability to communicate
electronically with the eight million Quicken users and the four million AOL
members alike.

However, experts caution the potential hazards of banks engaging in such an
offering.  "It's a double-edged sword," points out David Weisman, an analyst
at Forrester Research, Cambridge, MA.  "It's a tempting place to be because
Intuit and AOL have such great target customer bases."  But, as more banks
sign on to offer their products through AOL, "you run the risk of becoming
just another computer icon within someone else's financial powerhouse."

Will banks go for it?  "We won't be jumping on this," says Doug Haynes, senior
vice president at $5.1 billion Centura Bank, Rocky Mount, NC, which offers
both Quicken and Microsoft Money to its customers.  "Obviously AOL is one of
the more popular online service providers.  So it's certainly something we'll
be looking into down the road."  Haynes adds that the bank is too busy right
now focusing efforts on its recent rollouts of Quicken and Money.

One more option

First National Bank of Chicago, another adopter of both Quicken and Money, is
investigating the AOL/Intuit service.  "Right now, we can say to our
customers, 'If you don't like Quicken, you can use Microsoft Money' or vice
versa," says Tom Kelly, spokesperson.  "If we were to sign on with AOL, we
would then be able to provide one more option to our customers."

According to Linda Parker, senior vice president at US Bancorp, Portland, OR,
the AOL/Intuit product description is "very attractive."  The real advantage
for banks, she says, is the potential to tap into a customer segment
unreachable through personal finance software.

The collaborative electronic banking service is expected to be launched during
the first half of this year for Windows users and by the end of the year for
Macintosh users.  Nevertheless, no financial institutions had committed
themselves as of press time.

Prior to the alliance, the Vienna, VA-based online service provider had only
one other online banking service agreement, with Bank of America, which had
established a site on AOL's Personal Finance channel last year.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

New Directions EDS, The Exchange Create New Network


EDS and The Exchange regional network are splitting ownership of a new
enterprise, TransAlliance, that will offer electronic funds transfer services
to institutions in the western U.S.  and western Canada.  The alliance
combines The Exchange's more than 300 members with EDS' two EFT network
operations for a total initial customer base of about 700 financial
institutions spanning 13 states and four provinces, with 9,000 ATMs, and
annual revenues of about $50 million.

The bill of fare will include ATM, point-of-sale and interbank transaction
processing, and eventually home banking and electronic bill pay transactions.
Multimedia-based ATM transactions are a possibility as well.

Transactions will be processed on a new platform, called EON, just introduced
by EDS to satisfy requirements for greater uptime and availability.  Denny
Dumler, president and CEO of Visa International's Plus national ATM network,
was named president and CEO of the new enterprise.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Mellon Offers Corporate Cards With A Twist


Company handouts to employees are taking on a new twist with a corporate ATM
card being offered by $38-billion asset Mellon Bank.  The card lets employees
access compensation and incentive funds from special accounts whenever they
feel like it.  And, it reduces costs for employers, as it replaces paper
checks or certificates, and leaves the processing of ATM and debit
transactions to Mellon.  The Pittsburgh-based bank will custom design the
cards according to firms' specifications.





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet
JANUARY, 1996

Going Where No Card Reader Has Gone Before


Gamblers beware.  Off-track betting could end up in consumers' living rooms
through a pilot combining at-home point-of-sale terminals and interactive
television simulcasts of horse races.  This project is one of many that Morris
Plains, NJ-based ISED (International Secure Encryption Devices) is pursuing,
as it attempts to establish applications for a new low-cost point-of-sale
terminal that secures debit and credit card transactions initiated in the home
or small office.

ISED's horse-betting venture with Tulsa, OK-based On Demand Services, a
partner of Churchill Downs, organizer of the Kentucky Derby, typifies the sort
of in-home POS service that ISED is hoping to make mainstream.  Gamblers will
be able to place bets on interactive-TV race simulcasts by swiping cards
through ISED's Secure Encryption Devices and making online or offline debits.
Other ultimate uses for the devices will be to facilitate the $40 billion
worth of home-shopping purchases currently made by consumers via telephone
each year.  Using the secure terminals to transmit home-shopping orders offers
far more privacy and security than reciting one's credit card number over the
phone to a customer sales representative.

$75 a pop

"The little box replicates an ATM in every sense of the word except that it
doesn't dispense cash," says Joseph Favole, vice president of ISED.  At $75 a
pop, ISED is hoping to become the first company to make secure card payments
via telephones and PCs a reality for consumers at home.  The terminals use
regular phone jacks to plug into telephones and modems.  Another version of
the gizmo fits into the keyboard port on a PC.  From these easy access points,
ISED taps into the might of the ATM and credit card networks, allowing secure
online and offline debit and credit transactions to occur from home.

Before reaching the mass consumer market, however, ISED is first targeting the
small merchant market.  ISED estimates six to seven million small merchants
still accept only cash or checks because they deem the POS terminals available
today as expensive barriers to electronic transactions.  Not only are the less
expensive Secure Encryption Devices an inducement for such merchants, but by
getting rid of paper, the typical 2.18 percent interchange rate and $.10
per-transaction fee drop to an interchange rate of 1.3 percent and no fee.  At
least 800 Secure Encryption Devices are already in action at merchant sites,
and there's a huge back order on the little machines, according to Hilary
Thomas, president of ISED.  Thomas hails from a prior post as president of
Minitel USA, a subsidiary of France Telecom, which distributed screenphones
throughout France a few years ago.

Rutland, VT-based Chittenden Bank, $1.2 billion in assets, is the first bank
to test the Secure Encryption Devices.  Daniel Alcorn, senior vice president
of Chittenden's retail credit division, expects the terminal "will enable us
to get more merchants, independent sales organizations and agent banks as
customers.  It's a low-cost solution to paper processing, and a low-cost
entrance into electronic processing, including debit."

Alcorn predicts a surge in merchant processing revenues, thanks to the
low-cost competitive edge the Secure Encryption Devices provide.  "If we
brought in merchants each with an average transaction rate of $10,000 a month,
and we signed on a thousand merchants, that's $10 million a month.  The margin
on that business is usually .0025.  You make $25,000 a month in net pretax
margin, which is $300,000 a year before taxes.  We think we'll be able to
attract at least that many new customers in one year," Alcorn says.

Merchant to supplier

Once the Secure Encryption Devices make headway in the small-merchant market
as low-cost POS terminals, ISED plans to market them as devices merchants can
use to facilitate purchases from their suppliers.  "These first two phases are
happening now," notes Favole.  Finally, the devices will enter into consumer
homes, supplied by merchants through customer loyalty programs, and ultimately
sold to consumers by software companies.

ISED is adopting a different terminal deployment strategy from that of
VeriFone, which recently announced a plan to enable consumers to make payments
from home using PC-based software called Pay Window.  Under VeriFone's scheme,
a device will marry point-of-sale terminals, called Payports, to consumers' PC
terminals.  The solution will let consumers use credit and debit cards,
electronic cash and electronic checks to make Internet purchases.  The plan
includes payment software for merchants and acquirers, and Gateway software to
tap into existing payment and clearing infrastructures.

To pull this off, the Redwood City, CA-based vendor is tapping the resources
of its recent acquisition, Enterprise Integration Technologies of Menlo Park,
CA, which specializes in software and consulting to get companies rolling with
electronic commerce, and Cybercash, Reston, VA, a key player in payment
systems on the Internet.  VeriFone's Internet payment architecture is
scheduled to hit the market in six to nine months.

Flawed strategy?

In the view of VeriFone, ISED's strategy of reaching out to small merchants
may well be flawed.  "Eighty percent of merchants who can afford debit
transactions are well equipped at this point," says Mohammad Khan, director of
marketing at VeriFone's Internet Commerce Division.  "There are only a few
merchants left who don't have electronic card readers, and that merchant
segment is not interested in debit cards at this point."

ISED, nonetheless, is forging right ahead.  "Right now, we're encrypting the
PIN" for ATM and debit card activity, says Favole.  "We can also encrypt the
magnetic stripe information, but we're not doing it yet.  Regulations don't
require encryption for credit card transactions yet.  But in the event that
Visa and Mastercard start offering banks lower rates for encrypted
transactions, we are ready."

A further security measure waiting in ISED's wings is the creation of
one-of-a-kind public and private keys for every missive.  Processors of the
Secure Encryption Devices will be called upon to create and maintain master
keys for security purposes.  Processors of the banks and merchants that deploy
devices to the consumer will have the ability to recognize transactions from
"foreign" Secure Encryption Devices, much like bank ATM processors today
recognize and route foreign ATM transactions between banks.  For example, a
merchant or bank's Secure Encryption Device processor will request a working
key from the processor of the consumer's deployer.  A single-use-only working
key, encrypted under the master key, will be sent back directly to the
consumer's Secure Encryption Device within seconds.

Backed by Electronic Data Systems, ISED congealed some three years ago with
the goal of bringing the Secure Encryption Device to market.  EDS' involvement
in the privately held ISED is strictly financial, and the monetary stake has
not resulted in the Dallas-based company becoming the sole processor for the
ISED terminals.




<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B37-32</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B022-142</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi32.html 205.156.212.5 19970115004221 text/html 265073
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:39:25 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:10 GMT
Content-length: 264883
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi32.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
THE BANKER via NewsNet <BR>
February 1, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>NOTES: FIRST INTERSTATE GIVES IN TO WELLS FARGO</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(359 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>NOTES: NEW LOOK FOR FIRST UNION</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(511 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>NOTES: GANGLAND GAMBLE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(563 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>NEWS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>NOTES: FLAK-FIGHTER STEPS DOWN</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(135 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>NOTES: NCB TAKES ITS PARTNERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(297 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>NOTES: A TRULY BRITISH IDENTITY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(109 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>NOTES: PRIVATE CASH HEADS EAST</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(395 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>NOTES: EMERGING MARKETS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(952 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>FOREIGN BANKS IN LONDON: THE SECRET COST OF TAX</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1560 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>VIEWPOINT: SHAPE UP FOR EUROPE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1469 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#11"><LI>INVESTMENT BANKING: A PURSE IN A WALLET</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(780 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#12"><LI>INVESTMENT BANKING: CATS THAT GOT THE CREAM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3302 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#13"><LI>INVESTMENT BANKING: DIG DEEP FOR DEBT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2153 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#14"><LI>INVESTMENT BANKING: GO FOR THE GILT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1752 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#15"><LI>INVESTMENT BANKING: MOVE OVER</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(334 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#16"><LI>ITALY: LOSERS NOT CHOOSERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1237 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#17"><LI>FRANCE: PROFIT - OR LOSS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(630 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#18"><LI>AUSTRIA: POST-UNION BLUES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2070 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#19"><LI>CZECH REPUBLIC: THE SECOND TIME AROUND</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2212 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#20"><LI>GLOBAL BANKING: HOME AND AWAY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1203 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#21"><LI>JAPAN: HASHIMOTO TO THE RESCUE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1476 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#22"><LI>TAIWAN: GIVE US A SMILE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2120 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#23"><LI>TAIWAN: STORM DAMAGE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1267 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#24"><LI>TAIWAN: SIX FOR THE HIGH JUMP</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(257 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#25"><LI>ASIA NOTES: CHINA'S MARKET LAUNCH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(383 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#26"><LI>ASIA NOTES: INDONESIA WIDENS BAND</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(249 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#27"><LI>ASIA NOTES: WELCOME TO BURMA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(314 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#28"><LI>MACAU: BEIJING BOUNTY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1614 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#29"><LI>LATIN NOTES: ZEDILLO'S BIG BAILOUT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(536 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#30"><LI>LATIN NOTES: BANESPA GOOD HEALTH RECIPE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(271 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#31"><LI>LATIN NOTES: NOW, WHERE WERE WE?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(167 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#32"><LI>MEXICO: NO EASY RECIPE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2115 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#33"><LI>GHANA: RERUN THE GOLD RUSH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1484 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#34"><LI>BARCLAYS TESTS BARCLAYZONE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(211 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#35"><LI>REUTERS LAUNCHES KOBRA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(269 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#36"><LI>PRICE OF LOTUS NOTES CUT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(224 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#37"><LI>NEW DERIVATIVES MESSAGING STANDARDS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(56 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#38"><LI>TELERATE LIVE CHANGES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(227 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#39"><LI>BOLERO CHOOSES SWIFT</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(212 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#40"><LI>TFS PARTS FROM SYNTEGRA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(197 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#41"><LI>TECHNOLOGY: CONVERT OR CRASH</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1491 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#42"><LI>TECHNOLOGY: EUROPE'S IT BOOM</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(575 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#43"><LI>TECHNOLOGY: FRAUD BUSTERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(1594 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#44"><LI>THE BOTTOM LINE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(887 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

NOTES: FIRST INTERSTATE GIVES IN TO WELLS FARGO

First Interstate Bancorp finally gave in last month to the unwelcome
approaches of its Californian neighbour Wells Fargo. The resulting
merger, valued at dollars 11.6 billion, is the biggest in US bank
history and a rare example of a successful hostile bid.

After several months of fighting, when the end came for First
Interstate it came quickly. On Monday 22 January the bank announced
that it had started talking to Wells. By Wednesday, the deal was
agreed.

The agreement left First Interstate's rival suitor, First Bank System
(FBS) of Minneapolis, on the shelf.

FBS had come in as a white knight to rescue First Interstate. As
compensation, the Minneapolis bank receives a dollars 200 million
termination fee.

Two developments appeared to have prompted First Interstate's volte
face.

The potential benefits of the FBS merger had been undermined by a
Securities and Exchange Commission ruling that, because the deal was
structured as a 'pooling of interests' the group would not be able to
undertake any substantial stock repurchases for two years afterwards.

Meanwhile, the strength of the Wells stock price had boosted the value
of its bid and the gap over the alternative. The terms of the offer -
two-thirds of a Wells share for each First Interstate - have not
changed since Wells upped its first bid (The Banker, 12/95, p4), but
its worth has.

At the time of the announcement, in contrast, the FBS offer was worth
some dollars 10.1 billion.

The get-together is expected to lead to some substantial cuts in
staffing and branch networks as Wells gets to grips with the
considerable overlaps between the two groups and creates a new major to
challenge the strengths of BankAmerica in California.

Wells, based in San Francisco, has 983 banking locations in the state,
increasingly focused on supermarket outlets rather than traditional
branches. First Interstate, Los Angeles-based, has a total of 1,140
offices in 13 western states; 406 are in California. The network will
be reduced. So will staff levels; Wells has indicated that around 7,500
jobs would go as part of an dollars 800 million cost cutting programme.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

NOTES: NEW LOOK FOR FIRST UNION

First Union Corporation of North Carolina has acquired a new dimension
as a result of its merger with New Jersey's First Fidelity. As well as
creating the sixth largest US bank holding company, with assets of some
dollars 126 billion and covering 12 eastern states plus Washington DC,
the deal has brought a substantial addition to First Union's
international armoury.

First Fidelity has had a significant presence in London since 1973. The
branch, where Richard Morley remains as general manager, has now been
re-labelled with the First Union logo.

Until recently, the North Carolina bank's international involvement had
been minimal. Andrew Oleksiw, US-based managing director, international
division, explains that the group has focused over the last 10 years on
growing internally and being 'a high performance bank in the US'.

Until the latest merger, First Union's growth to its present position
had been in a rather lower key than that of its immediate neighbour in
Charlotte, NationsBank.

Daniel Mathis, US-based managing director of First Union's capital
markets group, says that over a period of 10 years the group has made
some 60 acquisitions, many of them small and designed to fill in the
coverage. They often produced significant cost savings.

With the First Fidelity deal, he says, there is no overlap and
therefore no great economies. But with the extended branch network in
the US, he sees opportunities to sell existing products to new
customers.

Oleksiw explains that in the home market the group had focused on four
main areas. First, international corporate banking, particularly for US
subsidiaries of foreign companies in its region. Second, trade finance,
where he argues that with its technology the group can offer lower
processing costs on letters of credit, for example, than the money
centre banks.

Third, correspondent banking. And fourth, something of a speciality
because of its acquired presence in Washington, banking for embassies,
which often have procurement and economic development agencies there.

Now the group is looking at a new horizon, supporting US corporations
abroad. Oleksiw says Latin America, which is in the same time zone and
easily accessible, does not require a physical presence; not having one
can boost correspondent banking business.

In the far East, the group established a joint venture company in
Hongkong with the Hong Kong Chinese Bank to support US companies with
trade in Asia.

The company, First Union HKCB Asia, 'is expected to process over
dollars 1 billion annually in trade transactions by the end of the
decade'. First Union has also opened a representative office in South
Africa.

Says Oleksiw: 'That left us with Europe. We were looking here before
the acquisition. The preference would have been to buy a small bank and
tweak it to fit; we weren't able to find the right opportunities. It is
fortuitous that we bought First Fidelity which had an operation with a
London focus.' First Union has identified more than 2,500 companies
based in its home market area with UK subsidiaries. Morley could have
his work cut out.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

NOTES: GANGLAND GAMBLE

Big names on a little list? So it would appear from the furore that has
erupted in Japan with the revelation that a relative few big borrowers
account for over 40% of total loans from the country's seven bankrupt
housing loan corporations (Jusen). The sixty four thousand dollar (or
rather Yen 628 billion) question is, who are these people? It has been
widely believed that the Jusen collapsed because they got in way over
their heads during the orgy of real-estate lending that occured during
Japan's bubble economy. Once asset values collapsed their loans went
bad and that was that.

A more sinister interpretation is emerging, however, that seems certain
to show up prime minister Ryutaro Hashimoto's Liberal Democratic Party
in an unfavourable light - assuming that the full details ever come
out.

The picture that is coming slowly into focus is one of a corrupt
alliance among Japanese bankers, bureaucrats and organised crime
(Yakuza) syndicates to exploit the profits of the bubble economy.

The government has released lists of the leading 50 borrowers at each
Jusen, though no names as yet. There is strong public interest in
knowing who they are because of the growing realisation that in the
case of many big borrowers from the Jusen they are simply refusing to
repay debts rather than being unable to do so. And yet taxpayers are
being asked to cough up Yen 628 billion (dollars 598 million) toward
the clean-up of the Jusen mess.

It has been assumed, too, that the Jusen's Yakuza debtors, nasty enough
as they are to have shot dead one bank manager who tried to collect
debts and to have stabbed another, were on the fringe of the Jusen
problem.

However, the figures show that debts held by major borrowers at the
Jusen amounted in total to Yen 4.4 trillion or 41% of the total loans
outstanding.

In the case of four of the Jusen, the top 50 borrowers include
(anonymous) individuals.

'Public servants are bound by law not to disclose secrets,' declared
prime minister Hashimoto, although the finance ministry said it would
consider releasing names to a closed session of Japan's national Diet
(parliament) upon request.

What makes the affair even more intriguing is that no fewer than 473 of
the total 532 senior executives of the Jusen were supposedly
respectable Japanese bankers.

Banks founded and funded the Jusen, along with hundreds of Japanese
agricultural co-operatives, but they also played a large part in
managing them. A dozen of their executives were also former senior
officials of the Ministry of Finance.

The Jusen affair has an almost uncanny resonance with the great
'compensation' deal scandal that embroiled most of Japan's leading
securities houses in 1991.

At that time, news leaked out that the big brokerages had paid some of
their biggest clients huge sums to compensate them for losses they
suffered when the great Tokyo bull market of the late 1980s collapsed.

The legions of small investors who had to take their knocks in the
market were not delighted to learn of this, though it was assumed that
the favoured few were so big that the brokers wanted to stay on the
right side of them at any cost.

The question now is - were they also gangsters whom the brokers were
terrified of confronting?



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

NOTES: FLAK-FIGHTER STEPS DOWN

Brian Quinn, who is stepping down at the end of this month as Bank of
England executive director responsible for banking supervision, has
lived in interesting times.

During his tenure, two dramatic bank crashes have brought the Bank's
role under the spotlight and created a good deal of flak aimed at the
supervisors, including suggestions that the supervisory role should be
removed from the central bank.

The 1991 closure of the fraud-ridden Bank of Credit & Commerce
International (BCCI), where the Bank played a leading role, led to the
Bingham report and in turn to significant developments in the Bank's
operations. Last year's collapse of Barings brought further criticism
and more reports to be followed up.

That task falls to Michael Foot, deputy in the supervisory department,
who will take Quinn's place.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

NOTES: NCB TAKES ITS PARTNERS

Partnerships may still be in fashion at Goldman Sachs but elsewhere,
from accountancy firms to banks, incorporation is preferred. In Saudi
Arabia, the largest bank in the Arab world, National Commercial Bank
(NCB), has been a partnership since it was established in 1951. But
times may be changing.

In the late 1980s and early 1990s NCB went through a difficult period
where it was forced for various reasons, including involvements with
Bank of Credit & Commerce International (BCCI), to withdraw from many
of its international operations. In recent years, however, the bank has
undergone a reorganisation and last month chairman Mohammed bin Mahfouz
announced another year of record profits with NCB's net income in 1995
up 20% over the SR579 million(dollars 154 million) achieved in 1994 and
an improvement in the net return on partners' equity from 8.3% to 9.9%.

The improved performance is not all that has changed. Early last year
the bank's founder Salim bin Mahfouz died, which focused attention on
the ownership of the bank which was known to be spread among the
Mahfouz and Kaki families.

While the partnership form has been maintained it is understood that
the entire ownership of the bank is now in the hands of former chief
executive Khalid bin Mahfouz, who is no longer involved in the bank's
management.

With Khalid bin Mahfouz now owning 100%, the bank's ownership structure
has been streamlined. But NCB remains unincorporated and not listed on
the local stock exchange like other banks.

Bankers suggest that if NCB wants to expand abroad again and utilise
the growing domestic capital markets then it would need to be
incorporated.

The question now is whether Khalid bin Mahfouz's sole partnership will
go the way of Goldman Sachs or seek incorporation.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

NOTES: A TRULY BRITISH IDENTITY

UBAF Bank, the majority Arab-owned institution founded in London in
1972, is to change its name in early March to British Arab Commercial
Bank (BACB).

The purpose of the change, according to chief executive Peter Taplin,
is to reinforce the bank's identity as a British-based institution
licensed and supervised by the Bank of England.

The bank has six Arab shareholders, including Libyan Arab Foreign Bank
(36.5%), Central Bank of Egypt (7.9%) and Rafidain Bank (4.9%) as well
as a major British shareholder, Midland Bank (24.8%).

The new name will reflect the bank's prime role of conducting business
with banks and other customers in the Arab world.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

NOTES: PRIVATE CASH HEADS EAST

Total capital flows to leading emerging markets in 1995 were around
record levels of about dollars 216 billion despite the Mexican peso
crisis. Total private capital flows to these markets in 1996 are
projected to be robust, demonstrating the substantial continuing
investor interest in emerging economies, says the Washington-based
Institute of International Finance (IIF).

In its 1996 capital flows forecasts the IIF says that private financial
flows to the leading 30 emerging economies may total around dollars 175
billion, much the same as the totals in 1994 and 1995 and comparable to
the 1993 record flow of dollars 192 billion.

Official flows, which increased substantially in 1995 after the Mexican
crisis and reached dollars 41 billion, are expected to decline to
around dollars 11 billion in 1996.

Developments in markets in leading industrial countries are expected to
have a profound impact on flows to emerging economies.

'The continuation of relatively low world interest rates during 1996,
and improving economic fundamentals in many developing countries,
suggest that there will be strong investor interest in emerging markets
this year,' says Charles Dallara, IIF managing director. 'We anticipate
a substantial rebound in bond financing and increased direct
investment, offset by a reduction in short-term lending by banks from
the high levels seen last year.'

Latin America and Asia-Pacific have been the prime areas of capital
flows to emerging markets. The IIF predicts that private flows to Latin
America will reach about dollars 52 billion in 1996 after dropping to
dollars 37 billion in 1995, while private flows to Asia-Pacific will
amount to dollars 87 billion in 1996 compared to dollars 94 billion in
1995. The IIF also forecasts that real GDP growth will average 2.7 % in
Latin America in 1996 after 0.4% growth in 1995 while Asia-Pacific will
again be the powerhouse with expected growth this year of 8.4% after
reaching 9.0% in 1995.

Financial flows to main borrowing countries
(dollars bn)

                          1993      1994    1995(e)   1996(f)

Private flows:
Major borrowers          192.5     174.7     174.9     175.3
of which:
Latin America             75.0      60.5      36.9      51.7
Asia/Pacific              76.8      87.5      93.8      86.9
C/E Europe                13.3      13.4      21.2      12.8
Official flows:
Major borrowers           22.3      23.2      41.2      10.9
of which:
Latin America              1.7       0.0      27.4      -3.7
Asia/Pacific              11.9      13.8       6.9       8.5
C/E Europe                 9.7       3.9       3.6       3.3

(e)= estimate, (f)= forecast

Source:  IIF, Washington



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

NOTES: EMERGING MARKETS

It was a year to forget for emerging markets investors and fund
managers. Many are choosing to bury memories by focusing on a brighter
1996. The markets suffered from foreign investors' confidence crisis
following the Mexican devaluation in late 1994 and early 1995. US fund
managers, in particular, found little incentive to venture beyond the
comforts of home into riskier markets, thanks to the strong performance
of the US equity market, which rose 34.7% in dollars, according to the
Morgan Stanley Capital International US Index.

In 1995, the IFC Investable Composite Index fell 10.3% in dollar terms,
after a 13.8% fall in the index in 1994, in contrast with the MSCI
World Index, which rose 18.7% in dollar terms. Among regional IFC
indices, Latin America dropped 18.7% and Asia 6.9%.

Europe/Mideast/Africa provided a ray of light, with its 19.5% increase,
although the region ex-South Africa registered a fall of 6.9%.

The best performers among the IFC Investable Indices in 1995 were
headed by Jordan, which rose 23.1% in dollar terms, followed by South
Africa with a 14.8% increase and Zimbabwe with 12.3%. The runners-up
were Peru, up 10.6% and Indonesia, which climbed 9.9%.

Jordan was seen as a play on the Middle East peace process by foreign
investors. It also received a boost from a 1995 investment law, which
lifted restrictions on the entry of foreign capital.

South Africa enjoyed an inflow of around dollars 1.4 billion of foreign
money into equities in 1995, says Vikas Nath, emerging market
strategist of UBS, after entrance into several indices, including the
IFC Investable Indices, and return to the international investment
scene.

Macro-economic fundamentals improved and falling inflation, among other
factors, spurred a huge bond rally in the last four months of the year.

South Africa's good performance also boosted Zimbabwe, explains Nath.

Zimbabwe's rise also reflects a slight recovery from the impact of a
drought in late 1994 and 1995, says Nigel Rendell, emerging markets
strategist at James Capel.

Worst performers were Sri Lanka, with a fall of 39.5% in 1995; Hungary
with 35.1%; and India with 34.9%. Pakistan, with a fall of 33.7%, was
close behind.

Foreigners were scared off from Sri Lanka by the civil war and
terrorism; Pakistan was also hit by political turmoil. India came off
the boil after the 1994 euphoria. 'A lot of people are tipping India as
a key market for 1996 after such a disastrous 1995,' says Rendell.

Hungary was tarnished in the eyes of foreign investors by big budget
and current account deficits at the start of 1995, but a stabilisation
plan announced in March 1995 has been quite successful in reducing
them.

Michael Howell, head strategist at ING Barings, projects about dollars
50 billion of cross-border equity flows to emerging markets in 1996
(including Hongkong, China and Singapore), from dollars 15 billion in
1995.

He expects foreign buying in 1996 will be felt strongly by two regions:
Asia-Pacific, specifically Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand and
Indonesia; and the 'embryo' emerging markets, notably Eastern Europe
and Russia.

He forecasts these regions, which comprise around 25% of the emerging
stock market capitalisation, will receive around dollars 20 billion. He
adds that more cash will also go into sub-Saharan Africa: 'This indeed
could be the region to surprise investors in 1996'.

Jane Hakham, investment director of Beta Funds, picks Argentina and
Poland as her favourites for 1996. She believes Argentina did not
deserve the pasting it received in the wake of the Mexican crisis and
is 'definitely due for a recovery'. With 1996 price/earnings ratios of
about 10 times or less for some stocks, the market is 'really very
cheap', she says. She also finds Poland, on a P/E of about 7 for 1996,
good value.

Of new markets, Hakham likes Egypt, which has 1995 P/Es of about 8-8.5.
The market is a 'turnaround story', which will benefit indirectly from
the Middle East peace process. China, Pakistan and Turkey could also be
turnaround stories for 1996, she thinks.

Nath of UBS, for the first half of 1996, recommends overweighting
Turkey, South Korea, Chile, Israel and Thailand; and 'neutral plus'
positions for Brazil and South Africa.

Rendell also favours Poland for 1996 and Brazil, if it can engineer
crucial reforms of the tax system and public sector pensions.

IFC investable indices
Price (in US dollar terms)

                                   % change    % change
                       29 Dec '95   30 Nov      Dec '94

Latin America
Argentina (30)           800.94       8.2          9.1
Brazil (71)              305.30      -2.1        -20.6
Chile (36)               748.49       7.1         -4.6
Colombia (16)            598.06       8.0        -26.3
Mexico (67)              453.19       1.7        -25.5
Peru (19)                197.23       4.3         10.6
Venezuela (12)           334.36      17.2        -32.4

East Asia
China (20)                54.10      -5.3        -28.7
Korea (159)              125.93      -5.0         -7.9
Philippines (25)         259.55       6.8        -12.9
Taiwan (93)              112.77       8.2        -31.5

South Asia
India (101)               80.36       3.8        -34.9
Indonesia (42)           109.68       4.0          9.9
Malaysia (114)           271.16       4.7          0.9
Pakistan (36)            242.64      11.2        -33.7
Sri Lanka (19)           104.07       0.9        -39.5
Thailand (68)            375.83       6.1         -2.0

Europe/Mideast/Africa
Czech Rep (5)             60.01        1.9       -25.2
Greece (40)              241.55        3.8         7.0
Hungary (5)               98.42      -10.8       -35.1
Jordan (8)               184.68        6.0        23.1
Poland (16)              426.35       -1.2        -9.2
Portugal (26)            115.76        3.8        -4.4
S. Africa (64)           258.05        4.6        14.8
Turkey (44)              104.49       -6.8       -13.4
Zimbabwe (5)             274.67        0.9        12.3

Regions
Composite (1136)         275.79       3.3        -10.3
Latin America (251)      471.70       1.8        -18.7
Asia (677)               232.18       4.4         -6.9
EMEA (208)               141.63       3.5         19.5
Comp ex-SAF (1072)       270.00       2.9        -12.2
EMEA ex-SAF (144)        110.35      -1.2         -6.9

Figures in parentheses show the number of stocks.

Note: Regional indices do not include Czech Rep.

Source:  International Finance Corporation



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

FOREIGN BANKS IN LONDON: THE SECRET COST OF TAX

Foreign banks with branches in the UK face complex tax legislation and
a wide variety of taxes. A branch bank operating in the UK has its own
UK corporation tax liability as well as responsibilities for the
collection of tax from its employees and the people with whom it does
business. The Inland Revenue has taken an increasing interest in banks'
proper application of the rules for deduction of tax at source in
recent years, and this has been expensive for banks which were not
aware of their obligations.

Few banks in London have not had to face detailed questioning by the
Inland Revenue before their accounts are agreed. This is due to the
complexity of banking business and the fact that banking business is
often carried out by a branch; branch accounts seldom carry a statutory
audit opinion.

A bank operating in the UK through a branch must pay corporation tax on
the profits attributable to the business carried out in the UK. The
Inland Revenue is concerned that the UK branch accounts accurately
reflect those profits. Recently it has looked in great depth at the
extent to which loans booked in the UK branch are genuinely London
business.

It was initially concerned that loans were being booked in London to
take advantage of the UK's generous tax credit rules. However, in 1987
these were changed and its concern in recent years has been that loans
on which large losses have been made do not belong in London. Loan
losses have wiped out many branch bank profits over the last few years
so it is clearly beneficial for the Inland Revenue to be able to argue
that these losses do not belong in the UK branch accounts.

In deciding where a loan belongs the Inland Revenue uses Organisation
for Economic Co-operation & Development criteria, which look at where
the following took place:

* the offer of the new business;

* establishing the borrower's credit rating and the risk involved in
the loan;

* negotiation of the terms;

* the decision to make the loan;

* conclusion of the contract and disbursement of the funds; and

* administration of the loan.

Of these the first four are the most important. Where a bank makes
large provisions it is likely to face questions from the Inland Revenue
about which country the above functions took place in. The Inland
Revenue does not carry out audits, in the way that the tax authorities
of some countries do, but it may ask to see loan files or loan
documentation in order to establish that loans belong in the UK.

It will not usually accept that the transfer of loans from one branch
to another is effective for tax purposes. If a loan was initially
booked in the London branch its view is that the profits associated
with it cannot be transferred to another branch even if all the risk
and administration of the loan is transferred as well.

Another area of Inland Revenue interest is ensuring that a UK branch
receives adequate reward for work done for other parts of the bank.
This includes the raising of funds on the London markets for other
parts of the bank when the London branch is expected to make a margin
on the transaction.

The other side of the coin is the amounts paid to other parts of the
bank for work done for the UK branch. Here the Inland Revenue wants to
be sure that profits are not shifted out of the UK by the use of
charges for work performed outside the UK. A bank must be able to
justify its intra-group charges by reference to the amounts which would
be charged by third parties.

Two particular deductions claimed by most branch banks operating in
London have been scrutinised by the Inland Revenue in recent years. The
first is the deduction for head office charges relating to the UK
branch.

Under the terms of many tax treaties entered into by the UK, a UK
branch can deduct a proportion of head office expenses, but it has to
be able to demonstrate that the proportion is reasonable by reference
to the functions performed at head office for the UK branch.

The second is the deduction for interest payable to other parts of the
bank on funds advanced to the UK branch. The Inland Revenue view is
that an element of this interest should not be deductible, representing
the interest on the capital which the branch would have needed if it
was a subsidiary.

Many banks have argued vigorously against this disallowance but,
unfortunately, a test case has not been taken to clarify the legal
issue.

To settle their tax affairs, many banks have accepted a disallowance of
interest deduction based on a notional capital amount, often equal to
the cost of funding the branch's fixed assets.

The Inland Revenue has been criticised in recent years for the
complexity of its tax legislation. The 1993 legislation on the taxation
of foreign exchange transactions was a case in point, and this has a
big impact on banks due to the international nature of their business.

Particular features of this legislation which will be of interest to
banks are the election for accounts to be prepared in a non-sterling
currency for tax purposes, the deferral provisions for tax on
unrealised exchange gains on long-term capital assets and liabilities
and the transitional rules which take certain balances outside the new
rules for six years.

These new rules have become applicable to many banks from 1 January
1996 and important elections have to be made before 2 April 1996.

The UK banking community has been increasingly complaining that it is
being used as a tax collection agency for the government. This is
partly due to the vigorous approach of the Inland Revenue in recent
years in checking that banks are fully carrying out all their
withholding tax obligations.

Except in restricted circumstances, banks operating in London need to
withhold tax:

* from interest paid to individuals;

* from interest which is not paid in the ordinary course of banking
business;

* from interest on quoted Eurobonds, foreign interest or foreign
dividends collected as agent for UK residents (individuals or
companies);

* from foreign interest or foreign dividends where the bank is a paying
agent; and

* from salary payments.

The main area to which the Inland Revenue has devoted resources in
recent years is in checking the first of these; that banks are
correctly deducting income tax from interest paid to individuals.

Broadly, income tax must be deducted from payments of interest to
individuals unless it is on a qualifying certificate of deposit or a
qualifying time deposit of at least pounds 50,000 or the beneficial
owner of the interest has notified the bank in writing that he is not
usually resident in the UK.

In many cases the Inland Revenue has found the documentation in respect
of not ordinarily resident accounts to be inadequate and large
settlements of tax have had to be paid.

The Inland Revenue is now turning its attention and audit resources to
ensuring that the paying and collecting agent rules, items three and
four in the list above, are being correctly applied by banks.

The current legislation on this is outdated and new legislation will be
included in the 1996 Finance Bill. The indications are that, although
it has been announced as a deregulatory measure, it will more clearly
define the scope of the rules and set out the practicalities of
applying them, rather than greatly restricting the number of
transactions which fall within them.

The position is broadly that a bank must deduct tax from interest on
quoted Eurobonds, foreign interest or dividends where it obtains
payment of these amounts. This is particularly relevant to custodial
and private client business.

The main exception to the rules is where the person entitled to the
proceeds is not resident in the UK, and it is here that Inland Revenue
audits have brought problems in the banks to light.

The documentation supporting gross payment to non-residents has often
been inadequate or out of date. It is likely that the new legislation
will set out more clearly the documents which must be kept to support
gross payment but banks need to be sure that they do not have exposures
under the old rules as well.

Many banks in London employ expatriate staff and the Inland Revenue is
increasingly looking at their salary packages to ensure that the rules
for deduction of tax at source are fully complied with. A common area
for error is payments made in the home country. If these payments are
for work carried out in the UK tax should be deducted at source even if
payment is made outside the UK.

In a competitive environment, where cutting the cost base is paramount,
tax must be given due consideration to ensure that it does not become a
large cost.

Emma Lubbock is the lead tax partner in Price Waterhouse's Banking,
Capital Markets and Treasury group in London and jointly leads the
European Financial Services Tax Practice.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

VIEWPOINT: SHAPE UP FOR EUROPE

Europe has embarked on a historic endeavour of economic integration,
with the final goal of a political European Union. One important step
is the Maastricht Treaty and European economic and monetary union
(EMU).

No one should be surprised that the debate has become more noisy and
intense as deadlines draw closer. Important issues should be discussed
publicly and open dialogue and fair debate can only help this process.

There are two demands on European economic and monetary union: it
should be a union of stability, and it should not become a transfer
union. Only if these two preconditions are met can members reap the
benefits of a single currency in Europe. Only then will the new
Eurocurrency have a chance to gain broad acceptance.

There is a clear European consensus, formalised in the Maastricht
Treaty, that EMU can only be based on stability. Stability must not
only be created after the union begins, it must be brought into the
union by every country wishing to become a member. To ensure this, the
Maastricht Treaty contains a set of entry criteria in the areas of
inflation, interest and exchange rates as well as fiscal performance.

In our opinion all entry criteria, including the fiscal reference
levels, should be strictly met. Hence, there is a growing likelihood
that we will have to consider a small stability union comprising about
one half of EU members, for example Germany and its neighbours which,
however, account for a substantial share of total EU product.

The UK, with its stability and its economic role in Europe, would be a
natural part of EMU from the beginning. We hope that political
obstacles can be removed by the time the decisions have to be taken in
1998.

Stability from the outset is more important than initial all-inclusive
membership. We think of European integration as an ongoing process.
Each EU member country must be part of this process, but we have never
thought that entry at a later date should carry the outsider's stigma.
As long as the rules are the same for each member country and as long
as they are clear, we are all (the word may be allowed in this context)
insiders.

This has nothing to do with German 'power play' or with monetary union
'on German terms'. The issue is much simpler: the Deutschmark is one of
the world's three key currencies. Stability on world financial markets
is only possible if the issuers of the key currencies - US, Germany,
Japan - ensure responsible monetary policy and low government deficits.
The new European currency will be the successor to the Deutschmark and
must satisfy the same quality standards if the world financial system
is not to suffer.

Hence, each country joining EMU must realise that it is assuming the
rights and duties of a key currency country. The prime requirement in
this respect is financial discipline, not only when joining EMU, but in
the long run as well.

How successfully the European Central Bank can preserve the stability
of money will depend a great deal on the choice of monetary policy
instruments.

Instruments and operating procedures must be efficient and convincing,
in particular in the starting phase, when the European Central Bank
will not have any monetary policy record. It is essential that it can
rapidly prove its ability to contain inflation. This will be decisive
for the financial markets' view that the new currency is a 'high-
quality currency'.

In respect to the mechanics of the monetary changeover, financial
markets need to know which steps of the conversion are regulated by
administrative measures and which are left up to the market itself.

Competition between banks will help advance the process of monetary
union.

The banks will pay close attention to the interests of their customers
and respond to demand for products in the Eurocurrency by making
available an appropriate range. In offering Europroducts, all banks
within the monetary area will compete with each other. The emerging
single EU financial market will no longer be hampered by national
borders. Regulations and market entry barriers are being removed.
Intense competition will compel banks to act and react rapidly.

Deadlines drawing closer have a special meaning for banks since it will
be up to them to actually and practically handle first the transition
and then the new money. As banks, we will have to explain to our
customers that, at least, their economic future will not be jeopardised
by European monetary union and that we will be able to handle all
technical matters competently.

This means preparations have to start now, though there remains
considerable uncertainly about exactly what we must prepare for. In a
wider sense, this is not unusual, because dealing with an uncertain
future is just another expression of risk-taking. This is the banks'
business.

Banks must prepare themselves well and in good time for monetary union.
They must review their place in a monetary area that is caught up in a
process of convergence and explore the strategic options offered by a
large economic area with a single currency. Now that the single
European market has prompted them to reshape their business strategies
for Europe, financial institutions have to work out the implications of
the single currency for their own houses.

First, banks must adjust to a new authority in the field of monetary
policy - the European Central Bank - and to a different set of monetary
policy instruments. The heterogeneous national instruments we have
known are being unified and will be subject to unified handling as
well. Many familiar national monetary policy instruments may now
decline in importance.

Again, banks will have to examine the possible impact on their business
policies, specifically in the areas of liabilities management, currency
trading and securities.

The range of money market products is likely to converge EU-wide. Here,
banks will have to do some thinking, above all about the associated
rise in the costs of refunding as markets become more transparent.

Currency trading in future will centre round three main currencies (the
Eurocurrency, dollar and yen), and this reduction in the number of
currencies and the cessation of currency risks will mean a loss of
business for banks in the areas of money changing, hedging, swap deals
and arbitrage operations.

Monetary union will also have an impact on the securities business,
involving a far-reaching convergence of interest rates in the member
countries. This effect is already leading to portfolio shake-up in the
run-up to monetary union, and that is adding considerably to the
counselling needs of private and corporate customers.

Credit institutions must also adjust to meet technical requirements,
most of all in the areas of organisation and data processing, payments
and accounting. The introduction of a common European currency will
inevitably entail converting all accounts and all balance sheet items
to the new currency unit. Banks' software, too, must be converted - all
the way from their own accounting systems, via customer databases, to
electronic cash and voucher dispensing systems. All systems in the
areas of deposits, credit and securities must be adjusted.

The transition to new bank notes and coins will call for a huge
logistic effort. In payments, too, customers and banks must tackle the
conversion of all systems: from SWIFT and inter-bank payment systems,
automatic bulk transfers and payments, all the way to the electronic
links between banks and their corporate customers.

Banks would be adopting too shortsighted an approach if they only saw
the costs and drawbacks of monetary union. We must not lose sight of
the opportunities and the earnings potential for an agile institution
that is being created.

The best practical example is the US. Americans use one currency in a
country, which is in some ways more heterogeneous than the group of
European countries that will form EMU. No-one in the US would even
think of using more than one currency when travelling from New York to
Miami or to Los Angeles or doing business there.

Demands that transition to monetary union be managed without so-called
'competitive distortions' in the financial sector have entered the
debate with little challenge. Europe is all about competition, and
competition does not become distorted if some are seen as likely to
perform better than others.

The field of competition among banks will be service for customers who
will require products in the new Eurocurrency. Should some banks be
able to offer their new products better, faster and cheaper than their
competitors, then this is the kind of competition which is designed to
make Europe more productive. It is the mainstay of the single market.

Jurgen Sarrazin is chairman of Dresdner Bank, Frankfurt.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "11"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

INVESTMENT BANKING: A PURSE IN A WALLET

The cashless society may be some years away, but an increasing number
of schemes are trying to bring it closer.

In Europe, one of the most interesting is Mondex, based on a smart card
which is being tested in the UK town of Swindon by two clearing banks,
National Westminster and the Midland Bank. The CSFI recently invited
the project managers to describe its progress and discuss the
implications.

The heart of Mondex is a silicon chip embedded in a plastic card which
can be loaded with electronic cash from the holder's bank account via a
special terminal attached to a conventional telephone. It thus becomes
a 'purse' whose contents can be spent through terminals in shops (or
even transferred to other cards).

The transaction is authorised by the holder's PIN and takes only a few
seconds. Each card has an 'originator', which would have to be an
institution approved by the banking authorities, to bring the card
within the bounds of monetary control.

According to Mondex's promoters, the advantages of the card for the
consumer are its convenience, control and security (cards are
'lockable'), though anyone who loses their card would also lose the
money on it if they were uninsured. It also enables the holder to
withdraw 'cash' from his or her bank account from the comfort of their
home - something that home banking cannot do. For the retailer, the
benefits are better cost management, security, and the possibility for
value-added functions such as customer loyalty schemes.

The Swindon experiment went live in July with 1,000 consumers. There
are now over 8,000. More than 700 retailers, or 70 % of the total, had
signed up, car parks had been added, and buses would join soon. Mondex
payphones have now been installed on most street corners, and
cardholders can obtain cash through them 24 hours a day. This provides
the 'missing link' of home banking. There are now 50 payphones, rising
to 300, plus 1,000 in private homes.

About pounds 500,000 changed hands over Mondex in the first five
months, or some pounds 25,000 a week, which the promoters said was very
satisfactory even though it only amounts to pounds 3 per cardholder a
week.

The aim behind Mondex is to make it practical for everyday
transactions, even buying a bus ticket or a newspaper, which means
driving down the cost of producing it and running the system.

The aim was also to make Mondex 'democratic' - or separate it from
considerations of credit standing. Anyone should be able to have a
Mondex because it need not even be linked to a bank account. You could
buy a fully charged card in a store and give it to someone as a gift.
However, the facility to charge the card from your bank account would
be subject to status, and would cost money, about pounds 1.50 a month.

The sense of the CSFI meeting was that Mondex could bring clear
advantages to the retailer through improved cash management, but it was
less obvious how the consumer would benefit. They would have the cost
and bother of managing their cards, essentially to make transactions
which could more easily be done with cash. Unless it replaced cash
completely, Mondex would become yet another piece of plastic to keep in
an already crowded wallet.

Also, for larger purchases, the consumers would still do better to use
their credit card and enjoy the interest-free credit period, so if
Mondex had a future, it would have to be in the small transaction end
of the market.

Some participants were worried about the potential for money laundering
on Mondex cards. Could they not be used to spirit money out of shady
accounts? The money could not be 'tagged' in the way that numbered
banknotes are.

The scheme also has potentially profound implications for banks if
'originators' can be non-banks. This means that a whole sector of the
cash economy could operate without the help of banks. And there is no
reason why originators should be banks, though Mondex is in close touch
with the Bank of England over how 'originators' should be defined and
authorised.

Mondex's backers intend to run the Swindon experiment for another year
or two before deciding on a national roll-out. NatWest will not say how
many customers it will need to turn Mondex into a profit-making
proposition. What is important, it says, is to see if Mondex works, and
how it can be turned into a money spinner.

The Centre for the Study of Financial Innovation. 18 Curzon Street,
London WIY 7D. Tel : (0171) 493 0173.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "12"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

INVESTMENT BANKING: CATS THAT GOT THE CREAM

The right people, the right place, the right time - that sums up the
experience of the leading players in international mergers and
acquisitions work based in London in 1995.

It was the year when the big investment in M&A professionals made in
particular by the US investment banks over the last five years paid
dividends - and bonuses.

The boom in cross-border and other international M&A was only part of
the story: the volume of domestic transactions in the US and the UK
also soared.

As a result, fees from M&A received uncharacteristically prominent
mentions in the year-end statements of a number of the investment
banks.

At Lehman Brothers, chairman and chief executive Richard S. Fuld Jr
reported that fourth quarter 'merger and aquisition fees increased 50%'
compared with the same period of 1994. At both Morgan Stanley and JP
Morgan, merger advisory work got more than a passing reference.

Some idea of the scale of the increase in international work can be
gleaned from our tables. In 1994, the top 10 firms in cross-border work
racked up a combined dollars 104 billion worth of deals. In 1995, the
equivalent figure was dollars 215 billion. In both cases the figures
include some double counting, since as many as four or five advisers
may get credit for the same deal. Nevertheless, the trend is sharply
upwards.

For confirmation, look no further than the table of cross-border deals
worth dollars 1 billion or more (see page 18).

In 1994, The Banker tracked 27 such deals (either announced or
completed during the year) worth a combined dollars 52 billion. Last
year there were 39 deals in the same category, worth more than dollars
95 billion.

The big question is: can the boom last? Are there fundamental factors
at work that will continue to drive the world's big corporates into
each others' arms? Is the consolidation ongoing, or has it run its
course? Is the merger boom just a by-product of falling world interest
rates combined with the extended bull run in US and, to a lesser
extent, UK equities? The surge in takeover volumes in 1995 provokes
tempting comparisons with the previous boom at the end of the 1980s.

In the UK, according to figures from stockbrokers James Capel, the
value of deals announced or completed topped the pounds 41 billion mark
last year - or roughly twice the previous record year, 1989.

A similar pattern is apparent in the US, thanks mainly to an explosion
in multi-billion dollar bank mergers last year.

One leading investment banker in London points out that the bare
statistics reflect accidents of timing. 'If you look at UK transactions
last year the numbers are influenced by a couple of very large
transactions. I tend to think of deals happening on a much more
consistent basis. If you plot the activity over the longer term, the
trend is a lot smoother than the data suggests.'

That said, he also confirms that current business levels are way up on
those for the same period a year ago. 'If you look at our existing
backlog of transactions - projects on which terms are either agreed or
where there is a better than 50% chance of success - the total today is
already equivalent to about 60% of what we completed in 1995.' The
normal backlog is between 20% and 30% of a year's business.

One thing is certain. The deals done in 1995 were of a different order
to those done in the last boom.

In the peak year of 1989 the name of the game was leverage. The two big
deals of the year were the dollars 29.6 billion takeover of RJR Nabisco
by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts (KKR) and Sir James Goldsmith's unsuccessful
dollars 21 billion offer for Britain's tobacco giant BAT Industries.

There was unlimited cash available to fund almost any big proposition -
or there was until the banks turned their backs on the proposed buyout
at United Airlines, Washington and the US courts got obstructive, and
the junk bond boom collapsed.

'Compared to the last boom cycle, this one is a lot less financially
motivated and much more strategically driven,' says Ed Annunziato, head
of international M&A at Merrill Lynch (whose cross-border deal volumes
placed the firm just outside the top ten in The Banker's league tables
last year).

'The strategic push is coming as a result of big changes in a handful
of industries. Regulatory change, technological change and cost
pressures associated with one or both - these have been important
drivers in the growth of M&A activity.'

But not the only ones. As important has been the need to squeeze out
the scale economies necessary if a business is to compete globally.

'We saw unprecedented levels of activity last year - almost a feeding
frenzy,' says Jim Downing, managing director and co-head of corporate
finance at Lehman Brothers in London. 'That was partly driven by the
desire to create global positioning on the part of big businesses. But
there was also a defensive quality to it: if your competitor takes out
one of the few remaining targets you can't afford to sit back and
watch.'

Having spent the first half of the 1990s streamlining their operations,
many big corporates are having to live with the prospect of limited
growth, he argues.

The answer is to acquire it. For those acquisitions, 'companies have
been focusing on those sectors where they're choosing to be global
businesses,' says Downing. 'And, in contrast to the 1980s, they're
doing it in a very targeted and surgical way.'

The ready availability of cheap money has played its part, too, he
accepts.

But, again, comparisons with 1989 would be misleading. Having rebuilt
their balance sheets over the course of the 1990s, UK companies, for
instance, are funding deals not from funny money but from internally
generated cash, or from justifiable bank borrowing.

According to the James Capel analysis, two-thirds of the consideration
paid in UK takeovers last year was in the form of cash. Buying other
businesses is a better bet than sticking the cash on deposit.

So long as interest rates remain low by historical standards, activity
on the part of UK companies will remain high, predicts Piers von
Simson, a managing director at SBC Warburg.

'Our projections envisage the generation of very substantial cash
surpluses in corporate UK this year,' he says, 'particularly in what
might broadly be defined as the consumer and service groups.'

Companies such as Tesco, Marks & Spencer and Reuters are generating
huge amounts of cash, he points out. 'The combined Glaxo Wellcome may
be highly geared at present, but the potential cash generation over the
next couple of years tops pounds 2 billion.'

The importance of the UK's contribution to Europe-wide M&A activity
cannot be overstated, says Klaus Diederichs, co-head of M&A for JP
Morgan in Europe. 'Eight out of every 10 big deals had a UK component
last year.

France was in second place, but a long way behind.'

Diederichs sees a number of risks in predicting another record year for
the international M&A business.

'First, if equity markets take a tumble, that will dent confidence.
When confidence goes, deals don't close. Second, there is a danger that
prices get driven too high. Third, there is a limit as to how many more
deals can be done in the most active sectors.

'For instance, a year ago there were 12 independent regional
electricity companies (RECs) in Britain; now there are just five.' For
these reasons, Morgan's team is working on the assumption that total
market volumes in the UK could fall by anything up to 20% in 1996.

CSFB professes itself similarly cautious. Stephen Hester, co-head of
investment banking in London, says 'our internal budgets suggest a 15%
decline in the market as a whole - but that would still leave 1996 the
second most active year in history.'

His concern is that M&A activity tends to peak when the economic cycle
is at or just past its peak. With the cycle turning down across much of
Europe, it is more than possible that M&A activity will turn down with
it.

One thing is certain: the outlook hangs crucially on three key
industries which generated a disproportionate amount of work for M&A
specialists in 1995. They are finance, pharmaceuticals and the world of
telecommunications and media.

No fewer than 23 of our 39 dollars 1 billion-plus deals fit into these
these sectors. 'In terms of those industries,' says Merrill's
Annunziato, 'there is going to be a lot more of the same - though in
pharmaceuticals the restructuring is clearly further advanced than in
the other two sectors. As far as financial institutions and the
telecoms/media sectors are concerned, the restructuring could last
another ten years. Certainly, in US banking, it's not remotely close to
being over.'

The deal lists of the leading investment banks bear testimony to the
frenetic activity in those three sectors over the past year.

In US banking, the size and value of deals expanded sharply,
culminating in the first big hostile takeover bid - Wells Fargo's
dollars 10 billion offer for First Interstate.

There are still 11,000 banks in the US, and plenty of scope for the
deal-makers to be creative. But the process is not confined to the US.

In Europe, for instance, CSFB was involved in 27 banking or insurance-
related deals last year (either completed or pending) and acted for
financial institutions in France, Switzerland, Sweden, Norway, Italy,
Germany, Austria, Spain and the UK. The consolidation of banks in Italy
and Scandinavia is proving a fruitful source of income for several of
the M&A specialists.

So too is the gradual sell-off of Credit Lyonnais' peripheral assets,
some of them banking outposts, others non-bank assets.

Neither of the two investment banks responsible for putting together
the restructuring of some dollars 26 billion worth of CL assets - now
placed into the Consortium de Realisations (CDR) - gets credit in our
league tables for a deal that will take 20 years to complete: Paribas
acted for the French government, Lazard Freres Paris for CL.

But hunting down buyers for the various assets is proving a lucrative
occupation for most of the players in our tables. CSFB sold off Banque
Colbert's regional operations in France to Financiere Meeschaert, its
Paris-based asset management operations to NatWest and its Luxembourg
offshoot to Staal Bankiers, an offshoot of the Dutch Achmea Holding.

Merrill sold CL's Peruvian and Chilean operations (to Banca Commerciale
Italiana and Dresdner respectively) and JP Morgan advised CL Bank
Nederland on its sale to Generale de Banque. Warburg found buyers for
the CL-owned MGM cinema chains in Britain and the Netherlands.

The prospect of more big banking takeovers in the US looks a racing
certainty. But what about Europe?

Morgan Stanley's head of European investment banking operations, John
Studzinski, comments: 'If you look at the UK, there is both
demutualisation and the consolidation of retail services in progress.'
There is also plenty of scope for deals around Europe. 'The conclusion
must be that the process of integration will continue.'

Much the same can be said about the pharmaceuticals industry, where
Morgan Stanley had a hand in the year's two biggest cross-border deals
(acting for Marion Merrell Dow in its takeover by Hoechst of Germany
and for Sweden's Pharmacia in its dollars 13 billion merger with Upjohn
of the US).

It also acted for Chiron of the US in its dollars 2 billion tie-up with
Switzerland's Ciba-Geigy. Says Studzinski: 'There are at least three or
four more consolidations of a similar size to take place in the
industry. The only question is when they will happen.'

In the telecoms and media sectors it was the Lazard houses that put in
the most impressive performance, racking up a string of big deals. The
four it did for MCI Communications Corporation and the one for Seagrams
(the takeover of Hollywood studios group MCA) were alone worth a
combined dollars 10 billion.

Goldman, which acted for the Japanese vendor in the MCA sale, also did
its share of big deals in this area and Reimers is in no doubt there is
more to come.

Lehman's Downing points out the bulk of the media and telecoms deals
have been in the US: 'There is scope for a lot more consolidation in
Europe.' One-off factors were nonetheless apparent in one sector last
year. That was UK utilities, and especially the RECs.

Again Goldman did well, thanks to its acknowledged role as a defence
adviser, picking up four advisory mandates. While there may still be
some unfinished business, there is a finite number of deals to be done.

'There may be more consolidation to come, though lots of companies
appear to be running into domestic monopoly constraints,' says SBC
Warburg's von Simson. The firm acted for America's Southern Electric in
its successful bid for SWEB.

One counterbalancing factor that could sustain UK takeover activity -
particularly in the utility sector - is the threat of a Labour election
victory in a year or so's time.

'If you are an international strategist, the pressure is probably on
you to slip a UK deal in before the election,' says von Simson. 'Under
Labour, the onus is likely to be on the buyer to prove that a deal is a
good thing, rather than on the regulator to show there is nothing
damaging to it.' Be that as it may, M&A specialists expect to see
continental Europe pick up the baton. 'In 1996 you're more likely to
see a restructuring among utilities in Germany, Spain and Italy,'
predicts Morgan Stanley's Studzinski. Merrill's Annunziato agrees.

'German utilities have traditionally been conglomerate-owned. Deals are
likely as part of the refocusing of industry generally.' Or so
investment bankers would like to believe. The trouble is, the long
mooted 'deconglomeratisation' of Germany is proving a patchy affair.

Hoechst and Viag have both shown a willingness to prune peripheral
businesses, but few other German corporates have followed them.

One reason for this is that anti-avoidance provisions in the German tax
statutes could penalise a vendor if 10% or more of a demerged company's
shares subsequently change hands within a short space of time -
something that is highly likely if the demerged company is publicly
floated.

Von Simson argues that this ruling tends to be used as an excuse for
inaction by German industrialists.

'European Union members have all signed up to the concept of tax-free
demergers. I suspect that, if enough pressure were applied, the
legislation might be clarified or the tax authorities might give a
ruling that the anti-avoidance provisions did not apply.

'Pressure from the international investment community will translate
into action sooner or later. There will be disposals that have the
effect of deconglomeratising German industry - though perhaps not a
direct demerger along the lines of ICI/Zeneca.'

CSFB's Hester agrees. It is all part of what he sees as a long-term
trend: the 'Anglo-Saxonisation of continental Europe'. The impact of
new takeover codes, the harmonisation of accounting standards, the
appearance of international investors on local share registers - all of
this is helping to cement a change of attitude. The upturn in European
M&A activity last year looks no fluke.

But it will still take an enormous acceleration in the process to
compensate for a slowdown in UK merger activity - were that to happen
this year.

Morgan's Diederichs points to the fact that the value of French and
German deals combined last year was no more than a quarter of the total
recorded in the UK. 'If the pace of activity in the UK falters,
continental Europe cannot take up the slack,' he argues.

The caveat is well taken; and few of the main players in this game are
prepared to look beyond the next three months. But, right now, they
simply cannot believe their luck.

Top cross-border advisers

                        1995
                        No of      dollars bn
                        deals

Morgan Stanley           41          32.51
Goldman Sachs            40          28.97
CSFB                     50          28.82
SBC Warburg              66          23.61
Lazard                   46          23.42
JP Morgan                34          20.96
Rothschild               32          18.00
Lehman                   36          15.09
Schroders                34          12.68
Deutsche MG              58          10.84

All deals
(ex UK and US domestics)

                        1995
                        No of      dollars bn
                        deals

Goldman Sachs            52          37.66
Morgan Stanley           44          35.84
CSFB                     58          30.32
Lazard                   57          28.49
JP Morgan                42          25.48
SBC Warburg              79          24.20
Rothschild               50          21.96
Deutsche MG              70          17.78
Lehman                   36          15.09
Salomon                  43          15.06

Only deals completed by 31/12/95 are counted. No credit is given
for joint ventures or minority stakes.

Billion dollar cross-border deals 1995
Announced or completed

Buyer                          Target                       Value
                                                          dollars m

Hoechst (Ger)                  Marion Merrell Dow (US)      7,133
J P Morgan                     Lehman
                               Morgan Stanley
Upjohn (US)                    Pharmacia (Swed)             6,300
Goldman Sachs                  Morgan Stanley
                               Enskilda Secs
                               JP Morgan act for
                               28% shareholder Volvo
Seagram (Can)                  MCA (US/Japan)               5,600
Lazard                         Allen & Company
CSFB                           Goldman Sachs
Crown Cork & Seal (US)         Carnaud Metalbox (Fr)        5,200*
CSFB                           Lazard
                               JP Morgan
Allianz (Ger)                  Vereinte Magdeburger/        4,995
                               Elvia/ Lloyd Adriatico
                               from Swiss Re (Switz)
                               CSFB
RTZ (UK)                       CRA (Aus)                    4,340
Kleinwort Benson               Morgan Stanley
Cazenove                       Macquarie Bank
Fleet Financial (US)           NatWest Bank NA (UK)         3,260*
Merrill Lynch                  Goldman Sachs
Swiss Bank Corp (Switz)        S G Warburg                  3,060
Hambro Magan                   Schroders
                               SBC Warburg
                               JP Morgan
                               Lazard (adviser to MAM)
Cable & Wireless (UK)/         Vebacom (Ger)                2,800
Veba (Ger)                     NatWest Mkts
BZW                            Lehman Brothers
Grand Metropolitan (UK)        Pet Inc (US)                 2,652
Morgan Stanley                 Lazard
SBC Warburg
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer (US/Fr)    Fisons (UK)                  2,620
Lehman                         SBC Warburg
Hambro Magan
Deutsche Bank (Ger)            ITT Financial Corp/ITT       2,610
                               Commercial Finance (US)
                               Goldman Sachs
Cie Fin Richemont (Switz)      Rothmans Intl (UK/Neths)     2,585
Hambros                        Rothschild
                               SBC Warburg
Central and SW Corp (US)       Seeboard (UK)                2,520*
CSFB                           Kleinwort Benson
Cadbury-Schweppes (UK)         Dr Pepper (US)               2,366
Goldman Sachs
Kleinwort Benson
Demerger                       US Industries/Hanson (UK)    2,200
                               Rothschild
                               Goldman Sachs
MCI Communications (US)        13.5% of News Corp (Aust)    2,200
Lazard

Buyer                          Target                       Value
                                                          dollars m

Ciba-Geigy (Switz)             49.9% of Chiron Corp (US)    2,100
CSFB                           Morgan Stanley
Zurich Insurance (Switz)       Kemper Corp (US)             2,000*
CSFB                           Goldman Sachs
Softbank (Japan)               Ziff-Davis (US)              2,000*
Morgan Stanley                 Lazard
Wasserstein Perella
Nippon Oil (Japan)             Caltex Petroleum's 50%       2,000*
Wasserstein Perella            of Nippon Petroleum Refining (US)
Interbrew (Belg)               John Labatt (Can)            1,960
Lazard
Wolters Kluwer (Neths)         CCH (US)                     1,900*
CSFB                           Goldman Sachs
YPF (Arg)                      Maxus Energy Corp (US)       1,840
Salomon                        CSFB
Southern Electric (US)         SWEB (UK)                    1,719
SBC Warburg                    Schroders
                               Goldman Sachs
Dresdner Bank (Ger)            Kleinwort Benson (UK)        1,600
Fleming                        Schroders
National Aust Bank (Aus)       Michigan National Bank (US)  1,560
Morgan Stanley
CSFB
Pfizer (US)                    Animal health business       1,450
Lazard                         of SmithKline Beecham (UK)
                               Wasserstein Perella
Luxottica (Italy)              US Shoe Corp                 1,400
CSFB
ING (Neths)                    Barings (UK)                 1,375
Fleming                        Barings
BASF (Ger)                     Boots pharmaceuticals (UK)   1,335
Lehman                         CSFB
National Health Labs (US)      Roche clinical lab ops
                                (Switz)                     1,300
Morgan Stanley                 CSFB
Lyonnaise des Eaux (Fr)        Northumbrian Water (UK)      1,275
                               Lazard
                               Kleinwort Benson
Sodexho (Fr)                   Gardner Merchant (UK)        1,180
Schroders                      SBC Warburg
International Paper (US)       Carter Holt Harvey (NZ)      1,140
CSFB                           Salomon
Rupert/Al-Waleed/              25% of Fininvest (It)        1,118
Kirch consortium (intl)        Morgan Stanley
Lehman
SBC Cablecomms (US)            Telewest (UK)                1,078
Salomon                        Morgan Stanley
                               Kleinwort Benson
Mission Energy (US)            First Hydro (UK)             1,077
                               Kleinwort Benson
                               BZW
Warner Lambert (US)            50% of Warner Wellcome JV    1.050*
                               from Glaxo Wellcome (UK)
                               JP Morgan

* Pending at 31.12.95.

Source:  The Banker



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "13"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

INVESTMENT BANKING: DIG DEEP FOR DEBT

In January, in what looked like a last act of desperation, Eurotunnel,
the crisis-stricken operator of the Channel tunnel, called on the UK
and French governments to guarantee a substantial bond issue to help
refinance its pounds 7.8 billion (dollars 11.8 billion) debt. The plan
proposed that the bond issue would involve a 'zero coupon' structure in
which there would be low or no interest payments for about 10 years.

But, far from being a miracle cure for the Chunnel operator's financial
difficulties, a closer look at the proposal showed it would merely
delay the pain and add to the company's bulging interest bill. Both the
French and the UK governments swiftly ruled out the plan.

The move follows Eurotunnel's announcement in September that it had
suspended interest payments on its debt mountain and was starting
negotiations with its banks to rearrange its finances. Eurotunnel's
four agent banks - National Westminster, Midland Bank, Banque Nationale
de Paris and Credit Lyonnais - were to report to the rest of the
banking syndicate, comprising 225 members, mainly UK, French and
Japanese banks, by 17 March.

Until then, both sides were bound by a pact of secrecy from commenting
publicly on the negotiations.

Traders and brokers in the UK and European corporate debt market will
have been watching keenly. Promising a record-breaking restructuring,
Eurotunnel's plight could provide a feast for the UK distressed debt
market.

The crisis comes when the UK market is facing a famine in the supply of
new names to trade, as the recovery of the UK economy continues. Many
UK companies which have been big debt trading situations are having
their difficulties resolved or recovering, for example, GPA and
Cordiant (Saatchi and Saatchi), while prospects for resolution for
others in the coming year are brightening, for example, Signet and
Somerfield.

While traders have been talking for some time about the possibilities,
and hindrances, for a market to develop in continental European
countries, the dwindling supply in the UK, barring Eurotunnel, may give
extra impetus to their efforts there and in trading of UK near-par,
good quality loans. Some are looking further afield, to the Far East
and Latin America.

But while Eurotunnel debt and derivatives of debt could prove to be a
bonanza for the corporate debt trading market, some traders admit to a
worry that the market could be swamped by big pieces of debt looking
for a home, which would depress the price. Few banks are willing to
sell at the mid-January price of around 37 pence in the pound, but an
upward move in the price is likely to provoke more trading.

Tony Tucker, senior director of Bank of America in London, argues that
Eurotunnel is big enough and diverse enough that the 'primary
principles of demand and sources of supply could work,' bringing about
an equilibrium in supply and demand.

Despite the uncertain outlook for the UK market, in 1995 volumes in UK
and European distressed and impaired loans appear to have continued to
increase, but estimates vary widely.

Bank of America estimates dollars 10 billion for 1995, up from about
dollars 6.5 billion in 1994. Of this dollars 10 billion, Tucker
explains that debt sales by original lenders in regularly quoted names
such as GPA account for about one third; other original sales account
for about another one third; while retrades among participants account
for the remaining third.

Other estimates are more modest. Don Pollard and David Newport, vice-
presidents of Citibank, estimate around dollars 8 billion was traded in
1995, including retrades.

Richard Brennan, director of international loan sales and trading at
Merrill Lynch, estimates only about dollars 2 billion of original debt
was traded in 1995, and says the original debt can trade as much as 10
to 15 times.

The increased volume reflects the greater number of traders and
investors in the market. There are now at least 10-12 serious
participants which have each committed capital of around dollars 100-
250 million and people to the market, points out Tucker. These have
brought more liquidity and competition to the market, and spreads in
the more liquid names have narrowed.

Besides these new players, two inter-dealer brokers have also entered
in the last year to 18 months, Patriot Securities in New York and
Canter Fitzgerald, which only deal with dealers, enabling them to
retain their anonymity until the deal is done. Pollard and Newport
observe that longer term local investors, mostly foreign banks in the
UK, have moved into the UK market, such as Standard Bank, Banco
Santander, West Merchant Bank and ING Bank, as well as some of the UK
clearing banks.

They have seen a flow from the US 'vulture' type high-yield investors,
to these local investors, which are looking for less risky plays and
are willing to make more moderate returns. This trend has provided US-
based investors with buyers for debt bought earlier in the
restructuring cycle.

'We probably do about half of our trades into local buyers, whereas the
year before we probably did about 80% of our trades back into US
buyers,' says Pollard.

In 1995, Brennan of Merrill Lynch noticed a growing acceptance of the
market as a viable way of managing the risk contained in a bank's
portfolio of assets by a number of UK clearing banks, which have become
actively involved both on the buy and sell side. Tucker adds that
portfolio analysis is exerting a growing influence on banks' management
of loans.

A notable exception is Barclays Bank, which has not bought or sold any
of its impaired debt. Terry Bond, lending services director, explains
that the bank has been a strong supporter of the Bank of England's
informal philosophy on financial workouts, the London Approach, which
aims to create and maintain stability during a workout. Barclays has
been anxious to continue to give a lead in stability, says Bond.

On the effect of debt trading on a standstill and financial
reconstruction, he says: 'We still have a sense of nervousness'. The
bank would also like to see how the market develops before it positions
itself as a player.

However, given the right circumstances, it might in the future consider
debt trading as an option. 'We have seen the emergence of a large
number of responsible players in the market. There isn't necessarily a
free for all which some people feared might happen; and if you have a
responsible market then it's something that you can actually learn to
live with,' Bond comments.

A fertile source of original distressed debt has been the debt-ridden
Japanese banks, which have been coming into the market more in 1995,
driven by a need and desire politically and commercially to clean up
their balance sheets, says Tucker. Pressure from the Ministry of
Finance (MoF) and the Bank of Japan (central bank) for more realism on
their balance sheets, along with the Daiwa scandal and the admission
that some of the housing loan subsidiaries were under water, is forcing
the Japanese banks to look to write off as much of their bad debts as
possible at their fiscal year end in March 1996.

Many of the Japanese banks have sold out of GPA, Signet, Somerfield and
Isosceles, says Tucker, but not yet out of Eurotunnel. Leading Japanese
banks, which have almost dollars 2 billion in outstanding loans to
Eurotunnel, were reported in January to have said that they had no
plans for an early disposal of them.

It is estimated that the Japanese banks have sold more than half of
their European distressed debt, excluding Eurotunnel, over the past
three years.

In October, a series of damaging revelations, including the Daiwa
scandal, led to a premium being put on lending to Japanese banks, which
increased their cost of capital and was the catalyst for some of them
to sell thinner-priced, near par loans.

Traders have had mixed success at tackling the potential of continental
Europe. Bank of America sees France as a growing area: it opened an
adjunct office in France in 1995 and has traded the debt of all but one
of the French companies named in its price list.

These include: Air France Partners Leasing; Aluminium Dunkerque, the
aluminium smelting company partly owned by Pechiney; Groupe Bull, the
partially privatised computer company; and Orlyval, the tunnel between
Orly and Paris. There are plenty of obstacles to trading in French
loans, however, particularly when real estate or secured mortgage or
security of assets are involved, which are difficult and expensive to
transfer under French law. Bank of America has traded a Spanish credit,
but has not done any trading in German company debt.

Large syndicate deals such as Aluminium Dunkerque are unusual on the
Continent; 'club deals', involving a smaller number of banks than in a
syndication, are more common in continental Europe than in the UK.
There are also many bilateral deals, where a company has a separate
contract with each bank, for example, in Germany, which accounts for
the difficulty of trading there, says Tucker.

Pollard and Newport of Citibank observe that the UK and European market
has followed their expectations in all respects except one: trading has
been slower to take off in Europe than they envisaged. 'The market has
not performed as expected with respect to geographic diversity,' they
comment.

While France seems to be the next area, they admit that they have not
seen the holders of French loans prepared to accept what they think is
fair price. Of Germany, Pollard comments: 'The German banks seem to be
reluctant to let the loans go'.

Traders have also been eyeing with a certain relish recent banking
debacles for debt trading opportunities, such as Credit Lyonnais, Daiwa
Bank and Banco di Napoli of Italy, which are under pressure to reduce
their size.

But, so far, the few deals done have been to other members of the
lending syndicates in these names, rather than through intermediaries,
because of a reluctance to sell loans at less than par. Tucker of Bank
America admits: 'There is a frustration because we have put a huge
amount of effort into it.' The hope is that new management or stronger
directives from government will force these banks to take the hit and
to sell the loans at a discount.

Looking ahead to 1996, Tucker expects distressed volumes to flatten out
next year, while Pollard and Newport expect the volumes to be flat or
even down.

Besides Eurotunnel, a rare potential new big name at the start of 1996
was Trafalgar House, the troubled property company, but the jury was
still out on whether it would go into a restructuring.

Brennan of Merrill Lynch still sees plenty of opportunities, for
example, in convertibles and pure bonds: 'It may not be bank debt; it
may be other portions of the capital structure that will be traded.'
Pollard and Newport are planning to spend more of their time this year
trying to buy into situations on the Continent and are also hopeful
that the near-par market will continue to develop.

Some traders, undaunted by limited opportunities closer to home, are
looking even further afield to the Far East and Latin America. Bank of
America, for example, has been looking around Hongkong and Singapore.
In these countries bank debt is still quite healthy at the moment,
because yields are high and maturities are short, but Tucker believes
that sooner or later there is bound to be an oversupply.

He also sees potential in Thai, Korean and Indonesian debt. At the
moment he thinks Asian convertibles are interesting. He predicts that
'South East Asia could be half again the size of the UK and European
market in the next three to five years.'

For the more fearless, China is also potentially an enormous, but
complicated, market. In Latin America, Mexico holds potential because
of the numbers of defaults, but again is only for the more aggressive
brokers and traders with a high risk to return profile. It promises to
be a challenging ride for traders and investors.

Loans for sale

                                             Indicative
                                             Bid/offer*
Borrower                                     11 Jan '96

Air France Partners Leasing                     70-83
Aluminium Dunkerque                             80-90
Anglo Cold Storage/Union                        50-75
Brent Walker (3rd Pref)                         32-36
Chancery                                         8-10
Cordiant (Saatchi and Saatchi)                  95-97
Euro Disney - Theme Park                        70-74
              Hotels                            67-72
Eurotunnel                                      37-42
GPA-CCF                                   98.25-99.25
Groupe Bull                                     93-98
Isosceles Strip                                 60-62
Landhurst Leasing                               5.5-7
LEP                                              5-10
Maxwell                                      8.5-9.25
National Home Loans                             95-97
Omnicorp (guaranteed)                             7-9
Orlyval                                         12-20
Polly Peck Int. (Loans)                      0.75-1.5
Powercorp                                       25-35
Premier Portfolio                               14-16
Provincial Bank                                   5-8
Queens Moat Snr Term                           1.5-83
Houses      Jnr Term                            25-28
            Convert                               5-7
Rosehaugh                                       44-46
Signet (Sterling Inc)                       92.5-94.5
Somerfield                                      88-91

* Percent of par value

Source:  Bank of America



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "14"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

INVESTMENT BANKING: GO FOR THE GILT

Two recent developments in the London financial markets have increased
investor awareness of money market funds as a viable alternative for
the management of short-term cash reserves.

The collapse of Barings almost one year ago sparked a debate among
financial institutions concerned about the safety of their overnight
cash balances.

Asset managers, pension fund administrators, corporate directors and
other fiduciaries have begun to question traditional deposit
arrangements which potentially expose their cash to a significant level
of credit risk.

The second development supporting increased interest in money market
funds is the introduction at the beginning of this year of an open
market in gilt (UK government securities)repos.

The emergence of a broad-based gilt repo market will provide money fund
managers with a fully collateralised instrument which will greatly
enhance their ability to meet investor liquidity needs.

A money market fund is essentially a stand-alone investment vehicle
operated much like other collective investment schemes. The fund is
invested in a diversified portfolio of high-grade short-term
instruments with the objective of protecting the principal value of
investor capital while providing liquidity and a reasonable level of
current income.

Money market funds are typically subject to regulatory controls
designed to protect principal value, including minimum quality
thresholds for investment, minimum diversification requirements and
maximum maturity levels both for instruments held by a fund and for the
fund's portfolio as a whole.

There are important differences between money market funds and
traditional bank deposits. A money market fund's assets are invested
solely for the benefit of its investors. Management is provided by an
outside investment adviser which is paid a fee for this service but the
fund receives the full benefit of the income earned net of this fee.

Banks, by comparison, are in the business of re-investing their
customers' deposits. A bank may charge a fee for specific cash
management services but this fee is in addition to the favourable
spread which the bank earns on the deposits themselves.

A second difference between a money market fund and a bank deposit is
that the fund is structured to separate completely asset management
from asset custody. Unlike a bank which accepts deposits from its
customers, the manager of a money market fund does not itself receive
or hold investor funds. All of the fund's assets are separately held in
a segregated account at a custodian bank where they are 'ring-fenced'
against claims of the bank's creditors.

The manager's job is to direct the day-to-day investment of these
assets in accordance with the investment objectives and policies set
forth in the fund's prospectus furnished to investors.

The most important distinction between money market funds and bank
deposits is that investors in a money fund receive the benefits of an
actively managed portfolio.

A bank deposit requires the commitment of investor monies for a set
period of time in order to earn a quoted rate of return. By contrast, a
money market fund pools investor subscriptions and actively manages the
pool to provide both daily liquidity and a market rate of return. An
actively managed portfolio is continuously invested in a variety of
high-grade short-term instruments selected by the manager to achieve
the fund's objectives. Through active management a money market fund in
effect 'securitises' its investors' cash.

In the US money market funds have achieved broad acceptance as a
valuable cash management tool for both institutional and individual
investors. Total net assets of money funds are now more than dollars
750 billion, with annual sales in excess of dollars 2 trillion.
Approximately 48% of money market fund assets are held for benefit of
institutions such as retirement plans, corporations, foundations and
charities, and a variety of fiduciary accounts.

In the US banks are major investors in money market funds and often
serve, through non-bank affiliates, as sponsors and advisers to funds.
Money market funds have also become accepted cash management vehicles
in other countries, notably France, where money market fund assets now
total in excess of dollars 250 billion, and Germany, where money funds
were first permitted in 1994 and have already attracted considerable
interest.

A money market fund industry has not developed in the UK quite simply
because, until now, there has been no need for one.

The establishment and growth of money funds in the US was in direct
response to a series of developments within the banking community in
the 1970s and early 1980s when regulatory limits on the level of
interest that could be paid by banks prevented them from giving
depositors market rates of return.

This period also witnessed the failure of a number of prominent banking
and savings institutions. Money market funds were created in response
to investor demand for a safe alternative that could provide
competitive returns.

Recent developments in the UK financial markets, though perhaps not as
dramatic as the events giving rise to the US money fund industry, are
nevertheless significant and could fuel a demand for money market funds
in the UK. The increased acceptance of such funds in major European
markets should also stimulate the use of money market funds by UK
institutions.

The collapse of Barings needs to be placed in context. It is important
to emphasise that Barings did nothing fundamentally wrong in the way it
handled its investors' overnight cash. Barings' decision to place
approximately pounds 500 million of such cash on deposit with its
affiliate bank conformed to the cash management practices of other
asset managers.

The problem was more systemic. Unlike securities held for its
customers, which were properly 'ring-fenced', overnight cash deposited
with the bank was reflected on its balance sheet as an unsecured asset
subject to the claims of creditors. When Barings failed it was only by
virtue of the ING acquisition that investors avoided a total loss of
their overnight cash then on deposit with the bank.

In the wake of Barings' collapse market participants have searched for
alternative solutions. As a 'stopgap' remedy UK asset managers and
other fiduciaries early last year began diversifying their deposits by
taking cash balances away from single institutions with which they
enjoyed an affiliation or other longstanding relationship and by
spreading those assets among a number of high quality banks.

Diversification clearly reduces the extent of exposure but it does not
address the core credit risk issues. There is also the problem of
locating a sufficient number of high-grade institutions to ensure an
adequate level of diversification.

Money market funds take a different approach to diversification and in
the process substantially reduce credit risk exposure. By investing
assets in a range of money market securities such as repos and
commercial paper, investor cash is 'securitised' and thereby
effectively protected against any potential creditor claims that might
otherwise be asserted.

Within a money fund credit risk is addressed as an investment matter
through proper portfolio diversification and compliance with minimum
quality guidelines. By carefully managing its portfolio maturities a
money market fund provides its investors with both overnight cash
liquidity and a market rate of return. In this way the fund serves as
an effective substitute for traditional bank deposit arrangements
without exposing investors to any significant degree of credit risk.

To work effectively money market funds must have access to a range of
investment vehicles that will enable them to achieve their safety,
liquidity and yield objectives. A key issue for a money market fund is
the ability to obtain overnight liquidity for a significant portion of
its assets in order to meet redemption requests of its investors.

In the US, as well as in France and Germany, liquidity has been
provided to market participants through a broad-based and highly liquid
'repo' market. A repo, or repurchase agreement, involves the short-term
(including overnight) sale of securities to a cash provider such as a
money market fund, coupled with a commitment to repurchase the
securities at an agreed-upon time and price, thereby determining the
yield during the purchaser's holding period.

Repos constitute among the lowest risk means of improving short-term
yields as the lender or buyer of repo can take advantage of both the
credit worthiness of its counterparties (the sellers of repo) and the
availability of high quality 'collateral,' which are the repo-ed
securities. In the US more than dollars 1trillion of repos is traded
each day. In the European repo markets, centred in London, annual net
purchases of repos had increased to a level of over dollars 7.3 billion
by the end of 1994.

From 2 January of this year there are no longer any official
restrictions on anyone repoing or lending and borrowing gilts, either
directly or indirectly through intermediaries. The removal of these
restrictions means that investors may now freely use gilt repo to
invest their cash balances.

As of mid-January, open market trading in gilt repos had not yet
resulted in a fully liquid repo market as participants and their
advisers were still working to resolve some lingering systems and
documentation issues. Yet it is probably safe to say at this early date
that there is widespread interest in the development of the repo market
as a short-term investment alternative.

If money market funds are to achieve the safe and liquid goals of their
shareholders it will be essential that a broad-based gilt repo market
becomes established. In advance of this development the alternatives
for money fund portfolios are to hold time deposits of a number of
highly rated banks, to invest in commercial paper of high-grade
corporate issuers and to engage in other strategies such as short-term
fully hedged swaps into liquid instruments denominated in other
currencies.

Thus far only a handful of sterling denominated money market funds have
been launched, and these have endeavoured to preserve maximum
flexibility in their investment programmes. Most have not been able to
assure investors of absolute liquidity, or 'same day' settlement on
redemption of their fund shares. The advent of gilt repo, therefore, is
an important step in the future development of actively managed money
market funds designed for UK institutional investors.

William Kleh is Managing Director of AIM Global Advisors Limited
(London)

Total US money market assets(1)
(dollars bn)

Year

1974                              2
1979                             46
1984                            234
1989                            428
1990                            498
1991                            543
1992                            546
1993                            565
1994                            611
1995 (Nov)                      750
(1) incl. taxable & tax-exempt funds

Source:  ICI (Investment Company Institute)



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "15"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

INVESTMENT BANKING: MOVE OVER

International bankers remain concerned about competition from the World
Bank's government-funded private sector finance arm, the International
Finance Corporation (IFC), for business which they consider could be
handled by private sector banks.

A report(1) last month from the Institute of International Finance
(IIF), the Washington-based group representing nearly 200 private
financial institutions from around the world, acknowledges that IFC has
taken on board the criticisms. But it argues that it should go further.

Last year IFC issued new guidelines on Collaboration with Private
International Financial Institutions. This is welcomed by IIF, which
emphasises the continuing 'strong interest of most private banks in
working in partnership with IFC'.

Nonetheless, IIF stresses the substantial change in the emerging
economies which, previously dependent on official financing, now
increasingly have access to commercial sources.

'Most of the private flows are .. concentrated in the more advanced
developing countries. These are the same countries where IFC is doing
most of its business. As a consequence, the potential for IFC
activities to displace services provided by private banks has increased
measurably.' Among nine recommendations for further action by IFC, the
report argues: 'IFC should adopt an active and transparent graduation
policy as part of a basic reorientation away from countries that have
access to international capital markets toward those that do not.
Generally, there should be a presumption that IFC will not support
transactions in countries designated as having substantial access to
international capital markets, especially transactions involving large,
well-known companies.' On underwriting; 'IFC should continue to limit
its underwriting of international securities to exceptional cases where
it is clear that the transaction cannot be completed without IFC's
presence.'

Pointing out that IFC has adopted a policy of not competing for
privatisation mandates awarded through bidding procedures, it argues
that a further step should be taken to 'adopt a policy of not competing
for any advisory mandates awarded through a bidding procedure.'

(1)Strengthening Collaboration Between the International Finance
Corporation and the Private Financial Community.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "16"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

ITALY: LOSERS NOT CHOOSERS

When Banco di Napoli declared a 1995 half-year loss of L1,561 billion
(about dollars 1 billion) last autumn, it confirmed its capacity for
exploring the financial outer reaches. It had shocked markets earlier
in the year by declaring a loss of almost L1,000 billion for 1994, then
revised upwards to L1,147 billion.

Yet Banco di Napoli's awful performance should not have been a
surprise.

Other large southern banks had extended loss-making frontiers over
recent years, and Banco di Napoli operates in the same difficult
environment of the mezzogiorno's almost comatose economy and the
tenacious grip of politicial interference for which the south is
notorious.

The truth about the dismal quality of its loanbook could not be hidden
forever.

On its beam ends, the Neapolitan bank started 1996 in search of rescue.
It was thrown a line at the end of November, when the treasury ministry
and a group of banks agreed a L2,500 billion loan at market rates, a
move suggesting that the bank was suffering an awkward liquidity
shortage.

The loan only allows temporary respite, however, when what is needed is
radical restructuring both of its capital base and operations.

Indeed, a drastic re-shaping has been sought by Federico Pepe since his
appointment to the chief executive's hot seat last summer.

Heavy cuts are needed in the branch network, both to reduce losses and
slim assets. But this will not be enough, and a massive injection of
fresh capital, upwards of L3,000 billion, is also needed to put ratios
in order.

Though believed to enjoy central bank support, Pepe's plans have not
been taken on board by all fellow directors, some of whom have
vigorously opposed disposal of branches.

There is opposition also to dilution of the equity owned by the bank's
foundation. Seemingly unaware of the adage that losers cannot be
choosers, Neapolitan politicians want to continue controlling the bank
and calling the shots, and imagine that there are gullible white
knights ready to put their cash into a southern Italian bank that has
given no satisfaction to investors.

Banco di Napoli's shares were traded at L658 on 15 January, against a
1995/1996 high of L1,480.

A big headache for the supervisory authorities, as well as its
shareholders, Banco di Napoli is far from being the only problem in
Italian banking, however.

Associazione Bancaria Italiana (ABI, the Italian banking association)
published a review of the 1995 half-year results of a sample of 91
commercial banks, including all the major institutions, at the end of
last year.

The overall picture was gloomy. Although there was a slight increase in
interest margin for banks with nationwide operations, from 1.09% of
total assets in the first half of 1994 to 1.12% in the January to June
period last year, this is considered to have resulted from transitory
improvements in conditions.

Reviewing 1995's first-half results, Stefano Preda, professor of
economics at Milan's Bocconi University, noted that, faced by
difficulties in maintaining interest margins, many banks have tried to
boost earnings from services.

'Diversification is the typical strategic response to crisis in core
business. However, results do not at the moment seem comforting.' Preda
noted that Italy's banks have until now diversifed into sectors that
are similar to banking, mature and offering low margins and high risks.
He pointed to asset management where commissions of only L250 billion
were earned on more than L115,000 billion under management.

Preda considered that while Italy's banks must improve revenues, they
must also cut costs further. At more than L110 million, the average
annual cost per employee is far higher than in other sectors. The ratio
of operating costs to deposits and loans has been declining since 1991,
but this is not enough.

Fragmentation of the banking system prevents economies of scale.

'Concentration is the right path, and is obligatory in many cases where
size is insufficiently competitive,' said Preda.

ABI's figures show that while there was a general improvement in gross
operating results, and improvements in net profit for regional and
provincial banks, the large national banks' aggregate bottom line was
written in deep red.

Thanks to increased provisions and lower extraordinary gains, Italy's
large national banks showed an aggregate post-tax loss of L866 billion
in the first half of last year, compared with a profit of L445 billion
in the same period of 1994. Clearly Banco di Napoli's awesome losses
were influential, but other big banks hardly shone.

Even after booking L44 billion extraordinary gains, Credito Italiano
could report a post-tax end-of-June profit of only L91 billion (less
than dollars 60 million).

And while Istituto Bancario San Paolo di Torino showed a bottom line
surplus of L214 billion, it fell short of past achievements and what
might be expected of Italy's biggest bank.

Troubled Monte dei Paschi di Siena (MPS), whose former general manager
Vincenzo Pennarola is appealing through legal channels against his
dismissal in November, is another of Italy's faded banking glories.

It was able to report a half-year net profit of L77 billion (on total
assets of L100,174 billion) only thanks to booking L152 billion of
extraordinary gains.

And Milan's Cariplo, apparently still hopeful about making an initial
public offering of its shares, returned a half-year profit of L135
billion (on total assets of L131,271 billion) that is unlikely to
encourage queues of eager prospective shareholders.

There are no signs of joy at Banca di Roma either. Formed from the
merger of three unsparkling institutions (Banco di Roma, Banco di Santo
Spirito and Cassa di Risparmio di Roma) in the late 1980s and early
1990s, the bank has yet to shine.

Half-year profit of the bank (total assets of L153,665 billion) was a
meagre L53 billion. Moreove, the recent acquisitions of Banca
Mediterranea (L2 billion profit at 30 June) and Banca Nazionale
dell'Agricoltura (L17 billion loss) have done nothing to strengthen the
Rome bank.

Notwithstanding disappointing results and dodgy loan books, Italy's big
banks nevertheless seem to seek problems.

Perhaps it is because most (Cariplo, MPS, San Paolo, Banca di Roma and
the large southerners Banco di Napoli and Banco di Sicilia) still
belong firmly in the public sector.

That may also explain the apparent enthusiasm with which IMI (the
investment bank and financial services conglomerate), its three
controlling shareholders (Cariplo, San Paolo and MPS) and Banca di Roma
bought into the equity of the Mediaset television company owned by
former prime minister Silvio Berlusconi , in spite of enormous and
evident conflicts of interest.

At least Banco di Napoli was not among the banks which put up L400
billion to take a 6% stake in Mediaset at the end of December, though
its name does appear among the shareholders of Italy's TAV high speed
train project.

But that investment was made when the bank was reporting profits.
Survival is now the issue, rather than the collection of political
points that still seems to preoccupy many banks.

Professor Preda sees a trend that presents ample risks and a difficult
future if decisive structural intervention is not undertaken both in
individual banks and the system overall. Indeed, some bankers refer to
a crisis situation.

As Italian banking enters 1996, many questions remain unanswered, not
least, which of its members might go the way of Banco di Napoli.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "17"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

FRANCE: PROFIT - OR LOSS

As expected, Paribas chief executive Andre Levy-Lang was officially
ified last December that he is under investigation by a French
magistrate looking into a case of falsified accounts at a Paribas
subsidiary, Ciments Francais.

This procedure, on which Paribas refuses to comment, allows the
magistrate to interrogate Levy-Lang. The magistrate is obviously trying
to determine if Paribas and its chief executive knew about the
falsified accounts, something that Paribas, which has instituted a
civil action in the case, has always denied.

Given the circumstances of the case it would seem highly unlikely that
Paribas was aware of the problem at Ciments Francais.

Perhaps the bigger question raised by the case is the degree to which a
holding company, like Paribas, can control its subsidiaries. And
whether a French holding company can control a French subsidiary - even
with five representatives on the board of directors of the subsidiary -
given the passive nature of boards in France vis a vis the executive
chairman. Ciments Francais' executive chairman, Pierre Conso, was a
respected member of the business community.

The case dates back to 1991 when one of Paribas' major shareholders,
the AXA insurance group, decided to get rid of its shares in Ciments
Francais, a cement group. After a bid Paribas ended up with 86% of the
group headed by Pierre Conso. Ciments Francais reported profits of
FF401 million (dollars 77.4 million) for 1991, a year when Paribas
posted a loss of FF200 million, the first in its history.

In April 1992, after trying unsuccessfully to fit the new activities in
with another industrial group, Paribas announced it was selling a
controlling shareholding of 54.7% of Ciments Francais to Italcementi,
part of the Pesenti family group, one of the most important family-held
groups in Italy.

The FF6.6 billion deal, arranged for the Pesenti by Mediobanca, made
Italcementi the largest cement company in Europe and the second largest
in the world.

In July 1992 Ciments Francais raised FF500 million in equity on the
market, guaranteed by Mediobanca and Paribas, both of which reportedly
ended up stuck with the paper.

At first this looked like hard luck but in the light of following
events was perhaps a stroke of good fortune since no big international
investors became mired in the deal.

In October 1992 an audit of Ciments Francais commissioned by
Italcementi uncovered FF2.7 billion in off balance-sheet activities
that had gone unreported in its official balance sheet and which
accounted for FF655 million of the FF740 million in losses for the
first semester of 1992. Conso was fired and later arrested.

Mediobanca, which has a small shareholding in Paribas, was infuriated.

Paribas deducted FF500 million from the purchase price and later took
off another FF325 million. It also took over some of the off balance-
sheet activities of Ciments Francais.

The FF800 million capital gain originally announced turned into a loss
for Paribas. A report ordered by the investigating magistrate concluded
that in 1991 Ciments Francais should have posted a FF120 million loss
instead of a profit.

One of the ironies in the story is that Giampiero Pesenti, head of
Italcementi, is also chairman of Gemina, the investment and financial
services group of Fiat, in which the Pesenti group as well as
Mediobanca also have shares.

The recent Mediobanca-concocted plan to merge the activities of Gemina
with the financial and industrial activities of the Ferruzzi group to
create a super-Gemina foundered, due to surprise losses at a Gemina
subsidiary, Rizzoli. This would have created the second largest group
in Italy after Fiat.

Now Gemina executives are under investigation for falsified accounts
and false corporate reporting. Paribas was to have taken a 5% stake in
the super-Gemina deal.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "18"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

AUSTRIA: POST-UNION BLUES

Austria has a headache, or several. Sobered up after the excitement
which accompanied the overwhelming vote in the 1994 referendum in
favour of joining the European Union, the country is now coming to
terms with the implications of membership, a year after joining.

After the second election in just over a year, the once stable
political structure is in disarray.

The government still badly needs to tackle the budget deficit, the
issue which caused last year's breakdown of the ruling left/right
coalition.

The point has been made more urgent by commitment to meeting the
Maastricht criteria for membership of economic and monetary union
(EMU).

Rather than being marginalised as just a small country on the eastern
fringes of the EU, Austria aims to be a senior player in the big
league, while at the same time retaining a role as a gateway to the
emerging economies of central and eastern Europe. That objective is in
doubt.

A slowdown in economic growth is not helping. Nor is it providing a
promising background for the banks, already suffering in their home
market from slow loan growth and pressure on margins in a seriously
overbanked country.

Meanwhile, the political shenanigans have yet again put into abeyance
plans for privatisation of the government's stakes in the two biggest
banks. First in line is Creditanstalt, where the voting majority has
been up for grabs for nearly five years now; but the biggest, Bank
Austria, could also be affected.

That is one of the problems facing the new finance minister. Viktor
Klima, a Social Democrat (red) and former minister of transport, was
appointed by chancellor Franz Vranitzky (red) after Andreas Staribacher
resigned.

The move was widely welcomed in the banking sector as clearing the way
for another attempt at the planned privatisations and, possibly, for
sorting out the problems with the budget.

Staribacher, a tax consultant, had been brought in last April to
replace longserving (red) finance minister Ferdinand Lacina, who
stepped down after problems in negotiating the 1995 budget. (Last month
Lacina was named to succeed Herbert Lugmayr, who is retiring, as
chariman of GiroCredit, central clearing organisation for the savings
banks.)

Now the new finance minister faces the same problems as his
predecessors in 1996; the junior coalition partner, the People's Party
(black), has been pushing for cuts in the generous spending on social
security rather than tax increases.

The election in December had been brought on by the collapse of the
coalition over the budget argument after the People's Party's new
leader, Wolfgang Schussel, took a chance on improving the party's
representation in Parliament.

His gamble failed; the reds increased their seats from 65 to 72, the
blacks edged up from 52 to 53. The far right Freedom Party headed by
the populist Jorg Haider, which had previously been gaining ground and
challenging the established political set-up, stood still with 41 seats
against 42.

That leaves the government where it started. At the time of writing,
talks were still going on to renew the coalition.

Whatever agreement is reached between the parties, they have to tackle
the budget issue. The deficit was expected to reach 5.3% of gross
domestic product (GDP) last year. It needs to be cut to 3% to meet the
Maastricht convergence criteria. Until a budget is agreed for this year
predictions further ahead are shaky.

Some contribution is expected from the proceeds of privatisation of
extensive state holdings in industrial and commercial companies -
including the banks. But the fundamentals, which caused the previous
split, need to be sorted out.

Getting the deficit under control is not being helped by the economic
slowdown. The latest forecasts from GiroCredit indicate that GDP
growth, which hit 3.0% in 1994, slipped to 2.0% last year and could
fall to 1.7% this year.

The bank results have reflected the slowdown in the economy.
Preliminary indications for the full year from the biggest banks show
that, while business at home was quiet, international activities helped
to produce reasonably good results.

Bank Austria reported in late December that operating results for 1995
should be up by 16.8% at about S4.9 billion (dollars 485 million). The
bank has been working on cutting costs: 'The domestic branch network
was further streamlined through the closure or merger of branches.

'The number of branches and business units fell from 320 to 306, and
the bank plans to merge 20 more branches in 1996.'

In the home market: 'Demand for personal loans remains depressed due to
slow growth in disposable income, but is stronger than in 1994.
Business loans experienced growth, especially those granted to small
and medium-sized companies.'

Outside Austria 'international business has surpassed expectations. In
1995, the performance of all the bank's foreign offices was either good
or outstanding based on a comparison of the results posted for 1994'.

Bank Austria has been working to take advantage of the fact that it is
now under the same holding company which holds a majority of GiroCredit
(which is however fighting to avoid losing its its separate identity).

The asset management activities of the two banks have been merged. And
'agreement was reached with GiroCredit to direct external public
accountants to examine the possibilities for merging some of the
foreign offices of Bank Austria and GiroCredit'.

The bank has also been developing its external links. Cariplo of Italy
has agreed to increase its holding from 4.3% to 5.6% this year.

And last year Bank Austria formed a strategic link with Germany's
Westdeutsche Landesbank.

'The co-operation agreement .. foresees a participation of WestLB in
Bank Austria in the order of about 9.1% in Bank Austria's share capital
through a capital increase. The two banks moreover mutually declare
themselves to be preferred partners for cross-border financial
transactions.'

Creditanstalt has been particularly helped by foreign business.
Chairman Guido Schmidt-Chiari reported a rise of 16% in the CA Group's
after-tax surplus to about S2.2 billion.

'One dominant characteristic of the 1995 business year was the
favourable earnings situation in international business. While
accounting for some 50% of the consolidated balance sheet, foreign
business generated about two-thirds of the group's surplus for the
year.'

In contrast: 'Domestic business was under heavy pressure in 1995.

'The reasons for this development are to be seen in the extremely weak
credit demand during much of the year, the shift to short-term loans
with low interest rates and a general squeeze on the interest margin.'

GiroCredit, which as well as being the central institution for the
savings banks is a commercial bank in its own right, had a good year
with operating profit up 56% at S1.53 billion. The year was eventful,
including a reorganisation of risk management, restructuring the equity
investment portfolio and 'going public'.

To achieve this, the bank converted the whole of its outstanding
participating capital, with a nominal value of S300 million, into
preference shares which were offered to the public. 'Despite the
unfavourable market climate at the time, the issue was oversubscribed.
The preference stock is widely held, having been placed with private
and institutional investors in Austria and abroad.'

The problems of the banks were highlighted by rating agency Moody's in
its December 1995 review. The agency pointed to five challenges:

* Widespread overcapacity within the domestic banking system;

* Aggressive retail fund pricing coupled with relentless pressure on
loan margins which, together, continue to define the generally poor
profitability of Austrian banks;

* Slack loan demand for the foreseeable future as the Austrian economy
itself shows renewed signs of slowing down;

* High overhead ratios that are the product not only of underlying thin
core operating revenues but also of relatively high cost structures;

* The need, at least for some of the major banks, to rebuild their true
economic capital that, to an extent, had been impacted by the release
of hidden reserves (either through the sale of assets or reductions in
overprovisioning) during the recession.'

Moody's added: 'Looking ahead, the Austrian banking system as a whole
may have difficulties in pursuing any further far-reaching and more
painful restructuring after a number of years of targeted and
moderately successful cost containment measures.'

The agency highlighted the excessive number of banks. 'From a retail
banking point of view, Austria remains overbranched. With the exception
of Belgium, its banking system is the most overbanked in the European
Union with any one bank or bank branch serving, on average, a mere
1,384 people. Germany comes relatively close with 1,533 people served.'

Consolidation and restructuring within the banking system are needed.
Some progress has been made in the savings sector. But at the end of
the day developments depend on political influence and convincing
entrenched interests of the need to adapt to the new open environment
of EU membership.

Sorting out the privatisation programme would be a good starting point.
It would help to shape the future direction of the banks, as well as
making a significant, if one-off, contribution to cutting the budget
deficit.

Bank Austria is majority owned by the (historically red) City of
Vienna; but the Federal government has indicated its intention of
selling off its 22.8% voting stake. That has not prevented chief
executive Gerhard Randa from making long-term plans.

The greatest uncertainty is over Creditanstalt, where the long-running
saga of the sale has made it difficult for the management to plan
ahead.

While he was finance minister, Staribacher had called in JP Morgan to
put a value on the Federal government's stake - just under half the
capital but holding 70.5% of the votes.

Morgan determined that, while the bank was worth some S28-30 billion in
total, the government's controlling stake should command a premium.
That implied a valuation of some S18 billion, a useful contribution to
cutting the deficit (The Banker, 8/95, p31).

The coalition's collapse and the election meant that the sale was again
put off (The Banker, 11/95, p4). Now Klima has the chance to start the
process again. As usual, politics intervenes.

The sale offer had progressed as far as inviting indicative offers for
the Creditanstalt stake. It is believed that the consortium including
First Austrian Bank and Italy's Generali insurance group (known as the
'Austrian solution'), which has been showing interest for some time,
put down a marker. It is not known whether there were any other firm
approaches.

The nub of the issue is whether Austria will be prepared to allow a
traditionally black bank which goes back to the old Habsburg empire to
pass out of Austrian control.

Germany's Allianz insurance group had shown an interest, but backed
off; Switzerland's CS Holding group pulled out of a firm offer when it
met an increasingly xenophobic reaction.

Lacina, finance minister at the time, is believed to have at least
initially favoured the CS Holding approach. Klima is understood to have
opposed the deal, believing that the bank should stay in Austrian
hands.

Now he is in the driving seat. The problem will be to reconcile
national pride with giving value to the purchaser(s) of the
Creditanstalt stake and at the same time realising as much benefit as
possible to help cut the budget deficit.

There is a strong belief that the sales of the Federal government's
bank stakes will go ahead this year. That will be some relief to
everybody.

Austrian banks' interim results June 1995
(schillings million)

                           Capital &  % change    Total   % change
                           reserves    (12/94)    assets   (12/94)

Creditanstalt-Bankverein     25,778     -1.5     637,159     3.2
Bank Austria                 22,965      0.0     670,243     5.3
GiroCredit                   16,740      0.0     328,550     0.4
Raiffeisen Zentralbank
 Osterreich                  11,700      1.7     224,300     3.4
Bank fur Arbeit & Wirtschaft  9,376      2.2     225,258     0.9
PSK Banking Group             8,770      3.4     250,156    16.5
First Austrian Bank           8,532(1)   0.0     210,896     2.2

                              Net-      Non-                   %
                            interest  interest   Operating   change
                             income    income      result

Creditanstalt-Bankverein      4,544     3,211      2,237      -6.6
Bank Austria                  5,778     2,345      1,966      17.4
GiroCredit                    1,445       766        678     227.5
Raiffeisen Zentralbank
 Osterreich                     763       519      1,282      25.2
Bank fur Arbeit & Wirtschaft  1,575       407        620      12.5
PSK Banking Group             1,517       853        847      20.3
First Austrian Bank           2,014     1,082        744      -1.2

(1) excludes supplementary capital

USdollars = 9.7337 schillings (6/95)

Source:  The Banker



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "19"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

CZECH REPUBLIC: THE SECOND TIME AROUND

Parliamentary elections at the end of June are already casting a
shadow. Not that anyone expects the present coalition government led by
prime minister Vaclav Klaus and his Civic Democratic Party to lose. Nor
is there likely to be any disruption of the economic and political
stability which has characterised the Czech transition to a market
economy, easily the smoothest and most successful in post-communist
central and east Europe.

As Klaus has recently observed, his government, in office since June
1992, is already the longest serving since the collapse of the Austro-
Hungarian empire in 1918 led to the creation of an independent
Czechoslovakia - and ultimately to the emergence of the Czech republic
in 1992, when Slovakia split away.

This does not mean that this year's elections for the 200-seat chamber
of deputies (and later in the year for the newly-created 81-member
senate, or upper house) is likely to see another Klaus walkover.
According to the opinion polls, the main opposition group, the Social
Democratic Party, led by Milos Zeman, has moved up from 6.5% of the
vote at the 1992 election to around 20% support against 25-27% for
Vaclav Klaus's Civic Democratic Party.

By contrast, the two junior partners in the present coalition, the
Civic Democratic Alliance and Christian Democratic Union/Czech People's
Party, look like mustering around 6-8% of the vote, just about
sufficient to satisfy the 5% minimum to secure representation in the
new house. So do the communists, which makes the Czech republic the
only country in the region where former communists (reformed or
unreformed) have no prospect of being voted back into power.

But, while the elections are unlikely to see an upset, they are
nonetheless having an influence on the local political debate. Issues,
such as reform of the health service, education, pensions, and public
transport, which have tended to be neglected amid the broad political
consensus about the reform process, have been moving up the pecking
order.

So have questions arising from what prime minister Klaus has himself
described as the 'early post-transformation stage' to which 'Czech
society has now progressed'.

Longer-term questions about industrial policy, financial sector
regulation, and the role of banks and investment funds in corporate
governance have been prompted by a series of takeovers of companies and
investment funds and by several bank failures.

Last year's yawning trade deficit has underlined a growing debate about
Czech competitiveness. Can a country of 10 million people offer a home
market large enough to support industrial companies and financial
services groups capable of competing successfully in today's global
market place? Differences between the government and the central bank
over exchange rate policy have become increasingly public. The trade
deficit appears to strengthen the case for the Czech crown to be
devalued: the heavy, continuing inflow of foreign capital creates a
strong argument for revaluation.

The investment inflow is one measure of the international recognition
the so far successful transformation of the Czech economy has been
receiving.

Foreign direct and portfolio investment has been flooding in, bringing
the cumulative total since the transition began in 1990 to well over
dollars 5 billion.

In October the government fully liberalised all current account
transactions and also freed many capital account transactions, thus
achieving convertibility in terms of the International Monetary Fund's
Article VIII.

Then, in November, the Czech republic chalked up a notable double. The
country became the first in post-communist central and east Europe to
be accepted for membership of the industrial nations' club, the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation & Development.

In the same month, the country was the first in the region to be
awarded an 'A-stable' investment grade rating by Standard & Poor's, the
US credit rating agency.

The Czech economy, meanwhile, is expected to grow by another 4-5% this
year, for the third year running. Prime minister Klaus prefers to call
the downturn in the early 1990s not a recession but 'a transformation
shake-out' - a 'shake-out of the non-viable economic activities which
could exist only in protected Comecon markets, with distorted price
structures and huge subsidies'.

Unemployment never rose by very much, and is now less than 3% and still
falling. Productivity is rising. Inflation has fallen to single
figures, and is still declining. The Czech crown has been holding
steady on the world's exchanges. And, as Klaus is keen to point out,
Czech living standards (using purchasing power parity) are already back
to or above the level of the poorer member countries in the European
Union.

The only possibly worrying feature in an otherwise impressive record is
the trade deficit. Last year it looked set to reach dollars 3.5
billion, up sharply from dollars 470 million in 1994. But here, too,
Klaus sees this as natural in the early post-transformation stage of
the Czech economy.

Not only are imports likely to increase as the pace of industrial
output and construction quickens. Exports are also likely to be
diverted to the home market as the growth of investment and consumption
accelerates. With the country's overall international credibility
standing high, and investment pouring in, financing the trade deficit
poses no problem, at least for the present.

Vaclav Klaus goes further. He sees no reason to change the exchange
rate, unlike Josef Tosovsky, the able central bank governor, who has
been worried by the impact of heavy monetary inflows, especially short-
term speculative capital, upon the domestic money supply, and thus upon
inflationary pressure. According to Klaus, a devaluation would not
solve, at least in the short run, the balance of trade deficit, while a
revaluation - especially a small revaluation - would not discourage
monetary inflows.

Instead, the two may settle for a more modest change in exchange rate
policy. This would be to widen the band within which the Czech crown
trades against the dollars/DM currency basket. At present the band is
limited to 0.5% either side of parity.

Changing the band to as much as 3%, or possibly even 5%, either side of
parity could help to deter speculative flows as well as provide some
scope to promote competitiveness.

Competitiveness has already been improving to some extent. Industrial
productivity has risen. The low level of unemployment, despite large,
continuing lay-offs, indicates that the manpower shake-out in some
sectors has been absorbed by the fast growing small business and
services sectors.

'The low level of unemployment is a bottleneck to higher growth,' says
Josef Tosovsky of the National Bank; 'manpower and other resources are
still being hoarded by inefficient firms'.

Lubomir Soudek, chairman and chief executive of Skoda Plzen, the
country's largest heavy engineering firm, makes a similar point.

'Czech industry faces several competitive disadvantages. We still lag
behind in technology. There are still big problems over working methods
and ethics, including lower labour productivity because of outdated
management methods.

The general lack of capital is a major hindrance.

'Short-term loans from local Czech banks are not on as good terms as
those offered by western banks to their clients. Finally, a drawback
that cannot be overlooked is the relatively low level of direct
government support for Czech industry.'

As Soudek indicates, prime minister Klaus is inclined to leave things
to the market. But, for a long while, banks and other creditors
appeared reluctant to enforce the bankruptcy laws.

These were considerably strengthened in 1993 and another amendment to
quicken liquidation proceedings is in preparation now. It is only
recently, however, that the rate of enforcement has picked up. Between
late 1992 and May 1995 a total of 4,500 bankruptcy petitions were
filed, but only 600 bankruptcies were declared.

There are other indications that the pace of restructuring in Czech
industry may be about to quicken. Last year the second and final wave
of the Czech republic's voucher privatisation programme was completed,
raising the share of the country's gross domestic product generated by
the private sector to more than 70%. The flow of foreign direct
investment also boomed in 1995, in part boosted by the partial
privatisation sale of SPT Telecom to the Swiss and Dutch
telecommunications groups.

As Lubomir Soudek of Skoda Plzen says, many Czech companies are too
small to compete with the largest multinationals.

In October Stratton, a US investment company owned by Michael Dingman,
a Bahamas-based industrialist, announced that it had bought stakes in
eight leading Czech companies (in shipping, glass-making, pulp and
paper, and oil and gas exploration) from Prague-based Harvard Capital &
Consulting, the big privatisation investment fund group.

Stratton proposed to inject marketing, management, and financial
expertise into the eight firms, regarding itself as a medium-term
investor.

Eventually, it would sell its shares on to strategic investors or float
them on the market. Meanwhile, Stratton and Harvard (which had
subsequently bought in the market further shares in the same companies)
would vote their shares jointly.

This was followed by a move against other big privatisation investment
funds by a little-known Czech firm called Motoinvest acting in concert
with Plzenska Banka and Agrobanka, two local banks. In a series of
stock market raids, Motoinvest bought blocks of shares in six
investment funds run by established local fund managers, saying that it
would dispense with the existing management and run the funds itself.

Shortly afterwards, Bankers Trust bought by agreement 40% stakes in two
investment funds run by Ceska Sporitelna (Czech Savings Bank),
intending to sell the stakes on to Western institutional investors.

Each of these moves, but especially Motoinvest's, sent a shock wave
through the relatively staid world of Czech fund management.
Motoinvest's ploy demonstrated the funds' vulnerability as long as
their own shares trade at big discounts to net asset value. The obvious
conclusion was that fund managers need to generate much better returns
on their portfolio of investments in privatised companies.

The government was also prompted to act more speedily to tighten up the
regulatory framework. The lack of transparency on the Prague Stock
Exchange has long been criticised as a major shortcoming and a source
of weakness. In future, acquisitions of stakes of more than 10% in a
company will have to be disclosed.

At the same time, the law is being changed to allow investment funds,
which have hitherto been restricted to a maximum 20% holding in any one
company, to elect to become managerial funds permitted to acquire
majority stakes in Czech companies.

Big changes also appear to be impending in the banking sector. Foreign
banks were becoming a major force in the local corporate and investment
banking markets when the National Bank temporarily stopped issuing new
banking licences in late 1993 and set about trying to encourage the
emergence through mergers of a tier of middle-sized local banks.

Now, with the failure of these hopes (despite the impending merger of
Banka Hana and Zemska Banka) and with the Czech government about
formally to announce its bid for European Union membership, the
National Bank is thinking of lifting or easing the ban on new licences,
with the UK's Midland Bank apparently heading the list of possible new
arrivals.

Meanwhile, two of the four large local banks, Ceska Sporitelna and
Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka (the former foreign trade bank), are at
'the very preliminary stage' of discussing the possibility of a merger.

These talks may never come to anything. But they point to one possible
way forward. The big local banks in the Czech republic (like those in
Hungary, another country of 10 million people) are relatively tiny
compared with the foreign banks with which they increasingly have to
compete, such as the big German, Austrian, American (including now GE
Capital), Swiss, and Dutch banks building up key positions in the
region's banking and financial markets.

Sooner or later, the 'big' local banks will have to follow their major
corporate clients as they expand abroad, just as Western banks had to
in their day.

As competition builds up in the run-up to European Union membership,
the big Czech (and Hungarian, Polish and other) banks will need to seek
strategic partners of their own or, alternatively, try to outgrow the
limitations of their own local home market by making acquisitions
elsewhere in the region.

In banking, as in other sectors, the second and perhaps the harder
stage of the transformation of the Czech economy is getting seriously
under way.

Czech Republic: Key indicators

                                         1992  1993  1994 1995* 1996**

Private sector: % GDP                    27.7  45.1  56.3  70.0    na
Growth: % GDP change                     -6.4  -0.9   2.6   4.0   4.8
Unemployment: % end year                  2.6   3.5   3.2   2.8   2.8
Inflation: % end year                    12.7  18.2  10.2   9.1   8.0
Budget balance: % GDP                    -3.3   1.4   1.0   0.0   0.0
Trade balance: dlrs bn                   -1.0   0.3  -0.4  -3.8    na
Current account: dlrs bn                  0.6   0.4   0.3  -1.9  -2.3
Net external debt: dlrs bn                8.6   3.9   2.8    na    na
Foreign direct investment: dlrs bn        0.9   0.5   0.9   2.0    na
Exchange rate: koruny to USdlrs end year 28.9  30.0  28.2  26.7    na
               koruny to DM end year     17.9  17.3  18.0  18.6    na

*  latest or end year estimate
** projected

Source:  EBRD & others



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "20"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

GLOBAL BANKING: HOME AND AWAY

The world's Top 50 global banks appear to have slowed their expansion
abroad as the trend towards consolidation in domestic banking sectors
takes hold.

The Banker's latest survey of global banking suggests that, while some
have expanded their percentage of overseas assets, others have returned
their focus to domestic markets.

The top ranking continues to be headed by the UK's Standard Chartered
with its percentage of assets abroad remaining above 70%. However, for
the second year running, the bank has relied on Hongkong for more than
50% of its pre-tax profits. Nevertheless, it does have an extensive
network throughout the high-growth region of Asia; predators with
ambitions in the area would find Standard Chartered a tempting
acquisition. In January, rumours were circulating, with the UK's
National Westminster Bank, ranked 13th globally, as a potential bidder.

One new entry into the top five is ABN-Amro Bank, whose overseas assets
figure this year of 61% includes those assets domiciled overseas booked
through the Netherlands. This figure looks set to increase further for
in 1994, the number of the bank's overseas branches increased from 461
to 540.

The Netherland's second largest bank, ING Bank, is also a bank that
focuses on international activities, having entered obscure foreign
markets such as North Korea and Cuba before its rivals. Its acquisition
of failed Barings will enhance its international activities. However,
the lack of information provided by the bank on its overseas assets
makes a comparison with ABN-Amro difficult. It is not surprising to
find the Dutch banks venturing abroad, given their saturated home
market.

The top players continue to include the 'Big Three' from Switzerland,
but their position in the global rankings has changed as they vie to
gain control of their domestic market.

Swiss Bank Corporation expanded domestically in 1994 through
acquisition, co-operation agreements and minority stakes, losing seven
places in the rankings as the percentage of its assets held abroad fell
from 53% to 47%.

Union Bank of Switzerland also expanded domestically by acquiring five
regional banks, resulting in a drop in its ranking to fourth from
second. CS Holdings made its large domestic acquisition of Swiss
Volksbank in 1993, followed in 1994 with the absorption of
Switzerland's largest regional bank, New Bank of Argovie.

However, such actions at home do not represent a change in overall
global strategy. Swiss Bank Corp took over the UK's SG Warburg in 1995
and CS Holdings has risen to second place in this year's rankings. Its
assets in the US through investment banking subsidiary CS First Boston
represent 30% of group total assets.

Other strong European representations come from the five French banks
which hold more than 40% of their assets abroad. Surprisingly, troubled
Credit Lyonnais, under pressure to dispose of assets to pay for its
overexpansion in the 1980s, now leads the French pack with 53.6%.
According to the controversial rescue plan announced in early 1995,
Credit Lyonnais was ordered to sell off 30% of its foreign assets.

Deutsche Bank leads the four German banks in the list, with 43% of
assets abroad as of end December 1994. Deutsche Bank's chairman Hilmar
Kopper said in November that the bank was only 'half German' and has
designs to become a global player in wholesale operations. With a 2.7%
share of the European Union market, it is the market leader and is
strengthening its investment banking operations in London through
subsidiary Deutsche Morgan Grenfell.

Better disclosure from Dresdner Bank indicates that 33% of its assets
are held abroad, and this figure looks set to rise further with last
year's acquisition of the UK's Kleinwort Benson.

Other developments among the European banks include a drop in Banco
Santander's assets abroad, from 38.6% to 29.7%, as a result of
absorbing failed Banesto. Banco Bilbao Vizcaya now assumes the position
of top global Spanish bank. In December, the UK's National Westminster
Bank sold off its US retail and commercial banking operations as a
result of competition arising from the rapid pace of consolidation in
the US banking market.

However, one of the bank's strategies is to build up NatWest Markets
internationally and it has recently expanded its futures operations in
Asia.

Outside Europe, Japan continues to be represented by 10 banks with two
newcomers, Mitsubishi Trust & Banking and Sumitomo Trust & Banking, in
this year's list through better disclosure of their overseas
activities. Their annual reports indicate ambitions to expand abroad,
especially in China and the Asia region. This is not surprising, given
the prolonged recession at home. However, a merger on 1 April between
Bank of Tokyo, the most international of the Japanese banks, and the
domestically stronger Mitsubishi Bank will create the world's largest
bank, but with a higher proportion of the new banks' assets residing at
home.

Of the three Australian banks in the list, a contrast of strategies
exists between National Australia Bank and Westpac. National Australia
Bank continues to expand abroad with its acquisition of Michigan
National Corp of the US, increasing its overseas assets figure to 47%.
This will be reflected in next year's survey. Meanwhile Westpac is
continuing to refocus on its domestic market after reckless over-
expansion in the 1980s, resulting in 1992 in a loss equivalent to one
third of its then Tier One capital.

Of the six US banks in the ranking, JP Morgan, Bankers Trust and
Citicorp all hold over 45% of their assets abroad. However, with
possible new regulations regarding interstate banking, US banks may
take advantage of the new opportunities to expand domestically.

Indeed, a process of consolidation is under way within the US banking
sector and in 1995, the biggest bank in the US was created by the
merger between Chemical Banking and Chase Manhattan. Now they hold
23.6% and 29.8% of assets abroad respectively, with the merger creating
a more powerful domestic than international franchise. For the moment.

Where they come from

Europe                  (25)
North America           (10)
Japan                   (10)
Asia excl. Japan         (5)

Source:  The Banker

How we did it

The Banker's annual listing of global banks ranks the Top 100 largest
banks in the world according to their percentage of assets based
overseas. They all have a presence in London, New York and Tokyo.

Figures have been obtained from the banks or from their annual reports.
The ideal measure consists of assets booked through overseas offices as
well as overseas assets booked through domestic ones.

In some cases, through lack of information, estimates such as income
generated abroad have been used as the next best indicator.

To enable a comparison of global reach, asset figures in seven leading
financial centres are provided. However, in most cases the given
figures will exclude those assets domiciled in those overseas centres
which have been booked through domestic offices. Nevertheless, they do
provide an indication of the relative sizes of foreign banks'
operations.

Owing to the lack of information for London, employee totals have been
used, drawn from the November 1995 issue.

For Hongkong figures include the banks' subsidiaries but not their
branches.

For Singapore, figures also include contingent liabilities and
commitments.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "21"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

JAPAN: HASHIMOTO TO THE RESCUE

History cannot record many cases of a country swapping prime ministers
for the sake of its banks and yet this is what has happened in Japan.

With the fate of the bankrupt housing loan corporations (Jusen) hanging
in the balance, and thus that of the banking system too, political
tough guy Ryutaro Hashimoto has taken over from mild-mannered Tomiichi
Murayama the role of premier and also that of defender of the financial
system.

Hashimoto would have become prime minister sooner or later - his
election last year as president of the majority Liberal Democratic
Party (LDP) ensured that. But Murayama's sudden resignation in early
January was precipitated not so much by a process of natural selection
as by fears that the parliamentary opposition would make mincemeat of
him over the Jusen affair. If he is to save his own political skin, and
the reputation of the parliamentary coalition in which he served as
trade and industry minister, Hashimoto has to champion the Jusen
rescue.

The issue is extremely important, not only for Japan but equally for
international financial markets. The fragile Japanese banking system
could be plunged back into turmoil if the Jusen scheme is turned into a
political football. The so-called Japan premium would reappear in
interbank markets, the Tokyo stock market would likely reverse its
recent gains and a dangerous downward economic spiral could result.

With so much at stake it was small wonder that Murayama, who is 71
years old and weary from the burden of 18 months in office, should
shrink from facing what threatened to be a full frontal challenge once
Japan's national Diet reconvened on 22 January. The Shinshinto
opposition party now has at its head Ichiro Ozawa, a man every bit as
ruthless politically as Hashimoto and who will seize any opportunity to
bring down the ruling coalition.

In a country like Japan which loves to hate its bankers, Shanshinto has
nothing to lose and everything to gain by capitalising on the Jusen
issue.

Japanese voters are often assumed to be docile but there is a
surprising degree of popular outrage over the scheme devised last
December by the Ministry of Finance (MoF) to rescue the mortgage
lending firm - using Yen 685 billion or dollars 6.8 billion of taxpayer
subsidies in the process .

Even now, some five years after the collapse of Japan's bubble economy,
bankers are still being berated by politicians and the public for
causing the bubble. That banks were forced into financing speculative
assets in the late 1980s after financial deregulation sent many former
clients in search of capital market finance rather than bank borrowings
is overlooked.

Virtually everyone is baying for the blood of the bankers and Ozawa is
an astute enough politician to exploit the popular ire and try to bring
about the downfall of the Hashimoto government over the Jusen issue.
Few in Japan would argue with Shinshinto's right to force the coalition
to seek a popular mandate after its unseemly power grab in 1993, but
the few who realise what is at stake wish the opposition had chosen
another issue on which to go to war.

The Jusen scheme represented the coping stone of an elaborate edifice
constructed by the finance minister under its former political head
Masayoshi Takemura, who heads the minority Sakigaki party within
Hashimoto's coalition. Under initiatives announced late last year, the
MoF arranged first for banks to come clean on their bubble-economy bad
loans, to beef up their management systems and to agree to a Resolution
Trust-type body being set up, financed by a steep hike in deposit
insurance premiums.

The ministry also promised to thoroughly overhaul itself and to render
its opaque supervision of Japan's financial system more transparent and
accountable in future.

But it was the Jusen scheme (which involved a considerable financial
sacrifice on the part of Japanese banks) that finally tipped
international confidence back in Japan's favour. Now, this could be in
jeopardy once more.

The Jusen problem is big by any measure. Out of total loans of around
Yen 13 trillion the seven firms (which began with residential mortgage
lending before splurging on commercial real estate financing in the
bubble economy) have seen some Yen 6.3 trillion worth go bad. Most is
attributable to banks and it represents one-third of the Yen 18
trillion in loans which the MoF says is now irrecoverable in the
Japanese financial system.

The public has selected the wrong target in pillorying the banks over
the Jusen scheme. Taxpayers' money is needed not so much because banks
(which founded and financed the housing corporations) have proved
unwilling or unable to shoulder the full burden of writing off bad
loans, but because hundreds of agricultural co-operatives which also
lent to the Jusen are shirking their share of the burden.

The co-ops, with formidable deposit-gathering powers through their
trading connections with farmers, have agreed to accept only a
fractional part of the Jusen loan write-offs relative to the size of
their exposure. Such is the co-ops' political influence, (especially
with Hashimoto's Liberal Democratic Party which depends heavily upon
the rural vote), that few politicians are prepared to attack them
publicly .

Banks are easy meat by comparison and even though there is risk for
Japan in jeopardising again the health of the banking system the
temptation to make political capita}il out of the Jusen issue appears
irresistible. If the Jusen scheme were to unravel, banks would be
forced to follow lengthy legal procedures in order to liquidate these
institutions and to crystallise their losses. The banking system would
see its international credit ratings sink even lower than they have
done already and more banks could suffer runs as the failed Hyogo Bank
did.

This cannot be allowed to happen, not only because of the systemic risk
it implies but also because Japan's fragile economic recovery will
almost certainly stall if banks do not soon become engines of credit
creation again. One reason why Japan's economy has been so weak for so
long - real GDP has grown by under l% on average over the past four
years - is because what little recovery has taken place has been
financed by a run down of savings and by tax rebates. Bank credit has
been absent.

Loans outstanding at Japan's 11 commercial or 'city' banks actually
fell by 1.4% from a year earlier to Yen 218.03 trillion by the end of
December, according to the Federation of Bankers Associations of Japan.

While loans at the three long-term credit banks and seven trust banks
have risen marginally, banks in general simply are not confident enough
about their balance sheets to engage in the kind of aggressive consumer
and business lending needed to underpin a substantial rise in demand.
Japanese banks badly need more generous tax treatment in writing off
bad debt but the quid pro quo for this was that they agree to shoulder
a heavy part of the Jusen rescue burden. If the scheme falls through,
so too presumably do the tax concessions.

Despite the critical importance of restoring the banking system to full
health in Japan, few people are prepared to sacrifice themselves for
this cause. This became painfully obvious when Hashimoto began casting
around for a new finance minister to replace Takemura, who himself was
only too eager to take theoopportunity offered by Murayama's
resignation to jump out of the hot seat.

Finally, Hashimoto had to turn 66-year-old Wataru Kubo, secretary
general of the Social Democratic Party (SDP), the second largest force
within the ruling three-party coalition to make the 'sacrifice' of
offering himself up as finance minister. What is normally regarded as a
plum job would have gone to an LDP man but all the likely candidates
declined it.

Although Kubo's appointment assures Hashimoto of socialist party
support for the controversial Jusen scheme, political analysts say that
by putting the SDP stalwart in the direct firing line the new prime
minister has provided himself with a sacrificial lamb in the event that
a senior minister has to resign to take responsibility for the Jusen
scheme.

Hashimoto will insist that taxpayer's money being put into it should
prove at least partly repayable, if the Resolution Trust-type
institution being set up as part of the scheme succeeds in collecting
bad debts and realising collateral.

A significant part of these bad debts is owed by organised crime
(Yakuza) syndicates which borrowed from Jusen during the bubble but are
now refusing to repay loans. Bankers try to collect at their peril -
sometimes literally on pain of death. The bad debt issue could well
prove to be fatal for the aspirations of some Japanese politicians too,
to say nothing of its impact on Japan's financial system and economy.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "22"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

TAIWAN: GIVE US A SMILE

Service quality and conservative management appeared to be the keys for
success in Taiwan's rocky financial market last year and may well
continue to be the formula in 1996, according to local bankers and
analysts.

Even though Taiwan maintained a 6.4% rate of real economic growth and
20% growth in exports, the island's domestic economy remained cool.

Financial markets were hit by the continued depression in the property
market and a stock market that lost about 27% of its value during the
year, factors which also slowed expansion of private consumption.

The outbreak of a number of financial scandals, a rising number of
bankruptcies and intensification of tensions with mainland China in the
second half of the year added to the perception of gloom in the
domestic economy, despite the strongest export sector performance in
years.

Indicators of the sluggish financial environment included soft growth
in the M2 money supply, which slowed from 13.1% in January to 8.4% by
November.

More critical for bankers was the relatively cool growth in loans and
investments, which rose by only 12.1% over the first 10 months of 1995,
compared to 15.1% during the same period in 1994. Moreover, the
percentage of non-performing loans rose to a high 3.1% by November,
according to Central Bank of China data.

Taiwan's major state-owned banks, which are particularly vulnerable to
exposure in loans to the property market and small enterprises, looked
likely to just barely meet earnings targets for the first half of the
1996 fiscal year (which began 1 July 1995).

Earnings for the top three state-owned commercial banks suffered from
the impact of a rising share of non-performing loans and losses in
securities investments.

During the first five months of their fiscal year (from July to
November) compared to the year-ago period, the pre-tax earnings for
First Commercial Bank slipped 14% to NTdollars 2.8 billion, while Hua
Nan Commercial Bank suffered a 22% decline to NTdollars 2.7 million and
the Chang Hwa Commercial Bank's pre-tax earnings reached only NTdollars
2.4 billion, about 5% off the year ago period.

On 31 December, the First Commercial Bank had deposits of NTdollars
614.1 billion and loans of NTdollars 499.9 billion, followed by Hua Nan
Commercial Bank with NTdollars 604.5 billion in deposits and NTdollars
480.4 billion in ordinary loans, and the Chang Hwa Commercial Bank with
NTdollars 593.3 billion in deposits and NTdollars 460.1 billion in
loans.

Despite the soft conditions, the island's 16 newer private banks
(mostly established in 1991-92) continued to attract a rising share of
deposits and loans. With NTdollars 11.3 billion in total deposits and
NTdollars 10.6 billion in loans, the combined weight of the new banks
approached the scale of a major state-owned bank.

But the pace of growth of the new banks slowed markedly from previous
years and their ranks showed more signs of differentiation in business
performance.

E. Sun Bank emerged as the leader in deposits for the first time with
NTdollars 82.7 billion, up 37% over last year, followed closely by
Cosmos Bank with NTdollars 82.6 billion and Taishin International Bank
with NTdollars 80.6 billion.

Six other banks reported deposits over NTdollars 70 billion. But the
fastest growth was tallied by En Tie Commercial Bank, the newest
entrant, with 46%, followed by Bank Sinopac with 42% expansion in
deposits.

Growth in loans was clearly far slower than for deposits last year for
the new banks. Only five had extended over NTdollars 70 billion in
loans by the end of 1995, led by Cosmos with NTdollars 75.9 billion, E.
Sun Bank with NTdollars 73.9 billion, and Taishin International Bank
with NTdollars 73.5 billion.

Indeed, virtually all banks faced difficulties in finding outlets for
rising deposits. None of the 16 new banks listed more loans than
deposits by year-end, averaging 94%.

Still, the new banks were more effective in this area than the three
state-owned commercial banks, among which the highest ratio was tallied
by First Commercial with a year-end 81.4% ratio of loans to deposits,
according to data published in the Commercial Times (8 January 1996).

More significantly, only five of the 16 newer private banks tallied pre-
tax earnings over 7% on revenues in what was the fourth year of
operation for most of them.

Overall, the new banks earned an average of NTdollars 630 million last
year and tallied a profitability rating of 5.88%, according to early
data collected by the vernacular Economic Daily News (5 January 1996).

Bank Sinopac was the most profitable bank with 7.83% of pre-tax
earnings compared to revenues with a reported NTdollars 807 million in
net earnings, followed by the Asia Pacific Bank, E. Sun Bank, Taishin
International Bank, and the Dah An Commercial Bank.

Four other banks scored pre-tax profitability rating over 6%, but seven
failed to reach this mark, with Bao Dao Commercial reporting the lowest
profitability ratio with 3.52% on NTdollars 352 million in pre-tax net
earnings.

Noted Professor Yin Nai-ping of the banking department of Taipei's
National Chengchi University: 'We are now beginning to see the
polarisation of the new banks into those that are well managed and
efficient and those that have less healthy management practices,
including excessive dealings with affiliates of associated business
groups.'

Banking insiders indicate that banks that played it safe by reducing
investment in securities and high-risk lending and those that turned to
consumer loans in 1995 came out with more positive results on the year-
end balance sheets.

The earnings of several new banks were hit hard by the end to write off
non-performing loans, particularly banks that focused lending
strategies on smaller enterprises and the property sector.

According to the Commercial Times (3 January 1996), Union Commercial
Bank wrote off close to NTdollars 200 million, the Dah An Commercial
Bank took a hit of about a NTdollars 100 million, and Pan Asia suffered
a NTdollars 80 million in bad loans, mostly to corporate clients.

On the flip side, a number of banks improved their balance sheets
markedly by shifting the focus of lending strategy to individual and
consumer loans.

Huang Yungjen, general manager of E. Sun Bank, said ESB's share of
loans to corporations and individuals had shifted from about 60:40 in
previous years to 55:45% last year and that the target is half-and-half
in 1996.

'The consumer lending market is mature here given the per capita income
of over USdollars 10,000, and in relatively poor economic conditions,
extending more consumer loans is a good way to disperse risk,' Huang
noted, adding that 'we can put more effort on corporate loans when the
economy improves'.

Huang said ESB also gained through a management priority on loan
'quality over quantity.' While the non-performing loan ratio for the 16
new banks averaged 3.15% by October 1995, ESB had a 1.9% ratio, thanks
in part to diversification to consumer lending and close risk
management of major clients with loans over NTdollars 50 million with
assigned staff and a headquarters computer database.

Huang also noted that ESB gained by playing the stock market
cautiously. 'We held down the investments by our trust department to
between NTdollars 100-200 million and ended up losing only about
NTdollars 30 million, compared to other private banks that lost as much
as NTdollars 200 million,' Huang said.

Yet despite the growing scale of the new banks, Chien Hung-Tao, general
manager of Hua Nan, maintains that they do not yet pose a major threat.
'As the new banks are under strong pressure from shareholders to turn
profits and as they bear higher costs, they cannot use low lending
rates to compete with us nor can they compete in terms of foreign
exchange services,' Chien noted.

Where the state-owned banks are feeling the heat from the new private
banks is in personnel. 'Service attitude at the new banks is clearly
better because they steal good employees from us,' complained another
executive in a top three state-owned bank. A key concern for state-
owned banks is whether a draft law allowing them greater flexibility in
personnel management will be passed this year.

For the new year, local bankers express cautious optimism. A forecast
issued by the Central Bank of China in late December anticipates that
consumer and investor confidence will revive after Taiwan's first
direct Presidential election on 23 March, and with continued strong
export growth and accelerated public infrastructure spending in the
second half, maintain a moderate 6.48% economic growth rate in 1996.

But analysts note that the new year contains a number of major
political uncertainties, mostly focused around the Presidential
election. While incumbent President Lee Teng-hui of the ruling
Kuomintang is favoured by most pundits to win the poll, the process
will also entail two potential cabinet reshuffles.

As a new legislature was elected in early December, Lee has to appoint
a premier in February for approval by the new Legislative Yuan, but the
winner of the presidential poll will also need to name a premier as
well, probably by May.

Moreover, as the Kuomintang's majority in the 164-seat Legislative Yuan
was reduced to a handful (85 seats), the new legislative environment
will be less predictable and the weight of the grassroots opposition
Democratic Progressive Party (53 seats) and the right-wing New Party
(21 seats) on financial policy more evident.

Not the least of bankers' concerns is whether mainland Chinese leaders
will move to moderate the current hard-line stance toward Taipei,
particularly if Lee, who has been pilloried in the controlled mainland
press, is elected.

ESB's Huang Yung-jen noted that his bank's targets for 1996 are set
conservatively 'as there are a large number of uncertainties'.

'As the government tries to implement the plans to turn Taiwan into an
Asia-Pacific regional operating and financial centre, the pace of
internationalisation will accelerate as will the competitive pressure
from foreign banks,' Huang noted.

'Expectations are that the economy won't be worse than last year, but
also not much better,' Huang said. 'Many say that conditions may
improve after the Presidential election and that relations with
mainland China will settle down afterward, but this remains to be seen.

'So we will retain a conservative approach and work to maintain the
quality of loans, improve the effectiveness of capital use, and put
more stress on consumer loans and other products for the individual
market to lower overall risk.'

1996 will be a key year for a number of new banks, particularly as
three, Grand Commercial, Dah An and the Chinese Bank, will become
eligible to apply for listing on the Taiwan Stock Exchange next year.

But TSE regulations also require that companies hoping to list as a
first grade stock must maintain pre-tax earnings to revenue ratios of
over 6% during the two years before application and that the latter
year's profit rate must be higher.

Of the three, Dah An and the Chinese Bank both attained earnings over
6% (7.2% and 6.41%, respectively), and plan to better this performance
in 1996.

However, Grand Commercial, which only tallied a 4.2% profit rate on
NTdollars 530 million in pre-tax earnings, will only be able to apply
for second-class listing, even if it attains its ambitious target of
NTdollars 988 million in earnings this year. The remaining banks are
under no less pressure to attain this earnings rate during the coming
two years.

Roger Chuang, executive vice-president of the Grand Commercial Bank,
said: 'We hope that after the Presidential election the overall
environment will improve and the stock market will revive. with
continued strong traditional business and improvement in non-core
areas, we should boost our earnings up to NTdollars 988 million.'

New private banks' deposits and loans
(NTdollars billion)

                            Deposits  % change  Loans  % change

Grand Commercial Bank         77.1       33%     70.4     30%
Dah An Commercial Bank        68.9       26%     68.8     26%
Union Commercial Bank         73.8       28%     68.0     23%
The Chinese Bank              72.5       21%     70.6     20%
Far Eastern Int'Bank          54.0       33%     52.4     23%
Asia Pacific Bank             66.4       25%     54.5     19%
Bank SinoPac                  75.6       42%     68.2     34%
E Sun Bank                    82.7       37%     73.9     35%
Cosmos Bank                   82.6       24%     75.9     19%
Pan Asia Commercial Bank      66.7       14%     65.0     20%
Chung Hsing Bank              66.4       26%     65.7     23%
Taishin Intern'l Bank         80.6       38%     73.5     27%
Fubon Commercial Bank         69.3       16%     66.5     21%
Our Bank                      70.6       28%     67.1     30%
Bao Dao Commercial Bank       72.2       29%     65.7     34%
En Tie Commercial Bank        52.0       46%     50.6     34%

USdollars = NTdollars 27.4) As of 31 December 1995

Source:  Bureau of Monetary Affairs, Ministry of Finance;
Economic Daily News



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "23"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

TAIWAN: STORM DAMAGE

Taiwan's financial authorities offered a draft programme to strengthen
the supervision of monetary institutions as part of an effort to
rebuild confidence in the island's financial sector in late December.
It had been racked by several scandals in the latter half of 1995, one
of which led to the censure of the central bank governor.

The series of scandals began in late July with a NTdollars 20 billion
run on the Changhua City Fourth Credit Co-operative after exposure of
embezzlement by its general manager for stock speculation that
ultimately led to the co-operative's absorption into the Taiwan Co-
operative Bank (TCB). Since then, a number of farmers associations'
credit branches have also experienced bank runs.

No sooner had this storm calmed than a NTdollars 10 billion run hit the
Taipei-based International Bills Finance Co (IBFC) in early August in
the wake of the arrest of a 29-year-old IBFC dealer on charges of
forgery and embezzlement in another stock market speculation scandal,
which included the state-run Bank of Taiwan among its victims.

In early December, the private Overseas Chinese Bank (OCB), in which
the finance ministry is the largest stockholder with 14.7%, suffered a
run of over NTdollars 10 billion when local media reported that a bank
shareholder had allegedly borrowed more than NTdollars 6 billion
without adequate collateral.

Former OCB executive director Liang Po-hsun, a construction tycoon, was
forced to resign his executive post in the wake of the scandal and the
bank was stabilised with the aid of a rescue package by local banks,
but may face prosecution.

Although the impact of these events has so far been limited, their
occurrence has sparked official and private concern for the health of
the financial system and criticism of alleged slow reaction and poor
supervision on the part of monetary authorities.

In September, the Executive Yuan (cabinet) approved administrative
punishments for 54 officials in connection with the Changhua and IBFC
scandals, including Deputy Finance Minister Chen Mu-tsai and Deputy
Central Bank of China Governor Chin Cheng-hsiung.

The Control Yuan, the highest government watchdog organ, followed by
voting on 29 December to censure Central Bank of China Governor Sheu
Yuan-tung and six other acting or retired officials of the Bank of
Taiwan for the IBFC affair. Moreover, Premier Lien Chan instructed the
finance ministry and the central bank to develop a plan to intensify
monitoring of the island's over 4,000 financial institutions. On 28
December, Finance Minister Lin Chen-kuo and Central Bank of China
Governor Sheu Yuan-dong issued a draft programme to intensify
inspection and monitoring of over 4,000 financial institutions and
dealing with financial crises through a new division of monitoring
responsibilities among the finance ministry, the central bank, the
Central Deposit Insurance Corporation (CDIC) and local governments.

Under the plan, the Taiwan Co-operative Bank will no longer supervise
basic level financial institutions, such as credit co-operatives or
farmers and credit branches of fishermen's associations.

From 1 July 1996, the CDIC will monitor such institutions which have
joined the insurance deposit programme, and local governments (namely,
the Taiwan Provincial Government and the Taipei City and Kaohsiung
City) will be responsible for supervising non-CDIC member institutions
in their districts.

Responsibility for monitoring and crisis management over the island's
banks (including overseas branches) will be divided as follows:

* The Ministry of Finance will monitor new commercial banks established
after 1991 and the state-managed Farmers' Bank of China, the Chang Hwa
Commercial Bank and the Taiwan Enterprise Bank;

* The Central Bank of China will supervise the rest of the domestic
banking sector, including the state-run Chiao Tung Bank, the Export-
Import Bank of China, the Bank of Taiwan, the Land Bank of Taiwan, the
TCB, the Hua Nan Commercial Bank, the First Commercial Bank, and the
International Commercial Bank of China (ICBC).

Lin stated that, beginning 1 July 1996, branches of foreign banks
originating in Europe, the Americas and Africa will be inspected by the
finance ministry, while the remainder will be monitored by the central
bank.

The finance ministry will monitor the entire insurance sector, while
the central bank will oversee inspection of all bills finance
companies.

Lin also said that the deputy finance minister and deputy CBC governor
will jointly head a MOF-CBC financial inspection oversight committee
that will be empowered to adjust the method and rate of inspections.

Lin added that top executives of financial institutions will be
required to attend inspection meetings and that the finance ministry
will push to have internal auditors responsible not to management but
to the boards of directors or examiners to improve the quality of
internal auditing.

Lin also stated that his ministry would propose a new law to separate
the credit function from the island's farmers and fishermen's
association to bring these operations under the inspection system.

Sheu added that 'this is not a division of powers but an arrangement to
enhance the effectiveness of inspection and monitoring'.

'This is the first stage of improvement of the monitoring and
inspection system,' Sheu said. 'After a year or two, we will review to
make further improvements.'

Lin said that both agencies agreed that 'establishing an unitary agency
for monetary inspection is not feasible at present'.

In the meantime, prospects for passage by the Legislative Yuan of a
proposed statute to liberalise the personnel management of state-run
banks remain dim, he noted.

Hua Nan Commercial Bank General Manager Chien Hung-tao said the
scandals serve as 'a warning that banks need to continuously upgrade
management practices'.

'The Changhua City co-operative case was clearly one of wrong-doing by
top management, while the IBFC scandal was created by a working-level
trader,' Chien noted. 'Obviously internal auditing and management
structures need to be strengthened in all banks.'

Chien added that Hua Nan was now adopting a policy of moving employees
to new posts every two to three years and urging branch managers to
heighten awareness. 'Times are no longer so relaxed as before and you
can't blindly trust employees,' he warned. One banking analyst noted
that the finance ministry feels that 'it would be very difficult to get
statutes on firewalls to control affiliated trading between financial
units of conglomerates passed by the Legislative Yuan now as such
proposals would spark sharp opposition from the private banks'.

However, the analyst related that the finance ministry and central bank
'are already surveying conglomerate assets and their utilisation
quietly, even if they will not release such information openly'.

'But if the banking and other laws aren't revised, such problems will
continue to haunt the financial system,' he warned.

A watershed may occur, for good or ill, shortly as many analysts
anticipate a major reshuffling of the finance ministry and central bank
when a new cabinet is appointed.

President Lee Teng-hui is obliged to appoint a new premier in early
February in response to last December's election of a new Legislative
Yuan, but any premier confirmed by the legislature in February will
play a caretaker role through Taiwan's first direct Presidential
election on 23 March, after which the new president will have the
option of naming a new premier.

In the meantime, depositors may be finding their own solution to
uncertainty. According to central bank data, basic financial
institutions lost nearly NTdollars 175 billion in deposits from August
to November last year, while deposits in the island's postal savings
system rose over NTdollars 83 billion since July to reach a record
NTdollars 1.94 trillion by des lower interest rates.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "24"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

TAIWAN: SIX FOR THE HIGH JUMP

The government's highest supervisory body, the Control Yuan, decided to
censure Central Bank of China Governor Sheu Yuan-dong and five other
serving or former officials of the central bank and the Bank of Taiwan
in connection with the International Bills Finance Co (IBFC) scandal
last December.

The Control Yuan's impeachment case said that Sheu, who was Bank of
Taiwan chairman until last May, mismanaged personnel relating to the
BoT trust department and did not exercise proper control over the trust
unit.

The Control Yuan brief stated that such mismanagement had sown the
seeds for the subsequent scandal as the former IBFC trader Yang Jui-yen
illegally borrowed NTdollars 39 billion from the BoT trust department.

Sheu declared that he would not resign, and he and the five other
persons impeached denied the charges. 'There are many misunderstandings
and claims not in accordance with fact (in the impeachment),' said
Sheu, who said he will put his case to The Committee on the Discipline
of Public Functionaries of the Judicial Yuan, which will now consider
the degree of punishment.

Professor Yin Nai-ping of the Department of Banking at Taipei's
National Chengchi University said the impeachment amounts to accounting
'to the public for the flurry of financial scandals'.

Yin noted that Sheu would probably not be faced with a severe penalty
'as he was not directly involved in the IBFC case and in fact the
central bank and the finance ministry coped with that scandal
relatively effectively'. He aded: 'But it will definitely hurt his
reputation.'



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "25"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

ASIA NOTES: CHINA'S MARKET LAUNCH

China passed another important financial landmark on 1 January, with
the launch of its unified interbank market.

The new system, being operated by the Foreign Exchange Trading Centre
in Shanghai, enables local banks and financial institutions to lend or
accept short-term deposits of one day up to less than four months.

It is using the same computer network as the foreign exchange market,
linking 35 cities in China. On the first day of trading it linked 27
cities.

'It is a very important step forward with respect to China's financial
reforms,' comments Benny Chiu, research manager of HongkongBank China
Services. He believes all the local banks and financial institutions,
such as investment and trust companies, will use the new market.

Stanley Wong, treasurer of Standard Chartered Bank in Hongkong,
believes that the development of the interbank market system and of
stabilised interest rates will enable a yield curve to be established,
which will in turn enable a forward market for the renminbi to be
developed.

Foreign banks are barred from doing renminbi business and so do not
have access to the new interbank market.

Until now China has had regional interbank markets with differing
operations and mechanisms. The Shanghai market was estimated to have
handled R200 billion (dollars 24 billion)of transactions last year.

Chiu explains that the new national market provides more structure and
formality by unifying the regional markets under the same regulations
and operations. It will also provide more market-based interest rates.

On 1 April, The People's Bank of China will start open market
operations formally, by which it will be able to offer interest rates
and control money supply.

This will enable the authorities to exercise macro-economic control of
the implementation of monetary policy, says Chiu.

Wong explains that, prior to the new system, local banks in China have
tended to lend or borrow among themselves on a city-by-city basis or on
a bilateral basis, lending and passing on surpluses or liquidity among
themselves at bilaterally agreed interest rates.

Difficulties arose in moving liquidity from one city to another. For
example, a shortage in Shanghai could not be readily met by a surplus
in Beijing.

This resulted in a disparity in interest rates, which ranged between 10-
15%.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "26"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

ASIA NOTES: INDONESIA WIDENS BAND

Bank Indonesia (central bank), in a further liberalisation of
Indonesia's currency, widened the band within which the rupiah would be
freely traded from early January. The Bank has also issued guidelines
for a new regulation allowing banks to do derivatives transactions in
foreign exchange and interest rates, but not in securities and bonds.

The rupiah now trades within a 3% range in the intervention band, up
from 2%, that is, about 66 rupiah around an announced mid-rate, set by
Bank Indonesia against a basket of currencies. The Bank has also
created an inner 2% 'convergence' band, effectively within the 3% band,
for transactions with the finance ministry and government.

Bank Indonesia's recent band widening is the latest in a series which
began in December 1993. The shift creates more autonomy and flexibility
for the implementation of monetary policy.

Bank Indonesia is also pursuing a policy of depreciating the rupiah to
the US dollar by 4-5% a year to maintain export competiveness, since
the country still has a big current account deficit estimated by the
government at dollars 7.94 billion in fiscal 1995-96, or about 3.8% of
gross domestic product.

John Flint, treasury manager with Hongkong and Shanghai Banking
Corporation in Indonesia, comments that, given that interest rates in
other Asian countries, such as Thailand and Malaysia, have come down
quite aggressively so far this year, 'the chances are that people
looking for yield enhancement trades will move a little bit more to the
rupiah now.'



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "27"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

ASIA NOTES: WELCOME TO BURMA

The Burmese military government announced in late December that it will
allow foreign banks with representative offices in Rangoon, the
capital, to set up joint ventures with private Burmese banks. It is
reported that foreign banks would have to provide at least 35% of the
equity capital.

The invitation seems to have met with a lukewarm response from most
foreign banks in the country. Foreign bank sources say that most of the
22 foreign banks with representative offices would prefer to have full
branch operations.

Standard Chartered Bank, while looking at the options available, has no
immediate plans to do anything more than run its representative office,
says John Brinsden, resident director for institutional banking for the
sub-region.

Brinsden believes that the Burmese government's move in allowing joint
ventures with foreign banks is 'the first step down the road to their
eventually allowing foreign banks to actually run full branches there -
but that could be another two years or so.'

Besides the 22 foreign banks that already have representative offices,
a further 10 have been issued licences to open such offices. Of the 32
banks, most originate from Asia. The rest include four French banks;
Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corporation and Standard Chartered from the
UK; and Bank of Nova Scotia from Canada.

Burma has two state-owned banks, 11 non-exchange private banks and four
exchange private banks. Government related agents account for a large
number of the shareholders in the four exchange private banks.

The biggest constraint on growth and foreign investment remains the
repressive military government, which in November rejected requests by
the opposition National League for Democracy (NLD), headed by Aung San
Suu Kyi, for dialogue in a constitutional convention. Burma's ruling
military junta has consistently refused to recognise the results of the
1990 general elections, in which the NLD won 80% of the vote.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "28"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

MACAU: BEIJING BOUNTY

Like Hongkong, Macau is an anomaly in Asia. The enclave, on the South
China coast, represents one of the last two vestiges of European
colonialism in the Chinese empire. In less than 18 months' time it will
be the last such outpost, as the sovereignty of Hongkong returns to
China.

Macau's own transition back to Chinese rule will not occur until 1999
and most observers agree that this will be far smoother than even the
most optimistic predictions for Hongkong's return to the Middle
Kingdom.

These political developments will have repercussions on the banking
sectors of the two regions and on individual banks. The most pressing
credit risks of banks in Hongkong are derived from their vulnerability
to uncertainties surrounding the upcoming transition. Macau banks are
likely to be indirectly affected and this will become one of the most
significant issues for the banks in the coming years.

As a regional and international financial centre, Macau has been
conclusively overshadowed by the breathtaking growth of Hongkong. In
contrast to the British authorities in the territory, which adopted a
laissez-faire policy with regard to financial and banking affairs,
Portugal restricted banks from operating in the enclave, at least until
1982.

During that year, the monetary authorities in Macau implemented a new
banking law which eased restrictions on foreign banks setting up shop
in the enclave and in the following five years, about 10 such banks
opened branches. At the end of 1995, the banking sector comprised six
locally-incorporated banks and 18 foreign banks. Nevertheless, the
difference in the size of the two banking systems is immense: Macau's
total banking assets are just 2% the size of Hongkong's.

Ironically, China's flagship financial institution, the Bank of China,
is by far the largest bank in the enclave, accounting for 33% of the
banking sector's total assets. Moreover, it is the dominant shareholder
of the largest locally-incorporated bank, Tai Fung Bank.

The growing presence of the Bank of China in Macau reflects the closer
ties between the mainland and the enclave in the lead-up to 1999. This
was further manifested on 16 October, 1995 when the Bank of China began
issuing Macau bank notes. Until then, Banco Nacional Ultramarino (BNU),
the enclave's de facto central bank, was the only bank to perform such
an activity. In the wake of this landmark note issue, the Bank of China
is expected to play a wider role in Macau's monetary affairs, in much
the same manner that it has and continues to do so in Hongkong.

Banks in Macau share many of the same strengths and weaknesses as
locally-incorporated Hongkong banks. They enjoy strong profits derived
largely from handsome earnings on their mortgage lending activities.
With the property market at this stage reasonably strong and
characterised by a low level of defaults, they have been able to boast
strong asset quality. At the same time, however, the banks in Macau
exhibit a noticeable lack of diversification in their assets.

Like their Hongkong counterparts, they are engaged overwhelmingly in
just two business activities: trade finance and property-related
lending. This has been accentuated by the flight of various
manufacturing concerns to South China in search of lower operating
costs. Therefore, while their asset quality now may be strong, the
underlying quality of their assets is quite weak and renders them
vulnerable to a change in the fortunes of the property market. This
issue will become particularly salient in light of both Hongkong's and
Macau's sovereign transition.

As a consequence of the oversupply of residential apartments in Macau,
local banks have been continuing their expansion into South China,
principally through trade finance and syndicated lending, and this has
seen their risk exposures to the region correspondingly rise. The
proportion of China-related credits on Macau banks' books is also
likely to increase in line with growing integration between the enclave
and the mainland and a potential easing of China's monetary policy.

Although they share many of the same characteristics, banks in Macau
are less profitable, less liquid and not as well capitalised as their
Hongkong counterparts. Lending accounts for a greater proportion of
their asset bases, but they have a slightly higher share of loans and
advances geared towards lower risk yet lower yielding trade financing.
On a regional scale, their performance as a group, measured by a
composite weighting of their profitability, liquidity and capital
adequacy is only slightly above average*.

Further opportunities essentially lie in South China, as will become
evident, given the limited prospects for expansion locally. This was
highlighted in the first three quarters of 1995 with the total loans of
the banking sector growing by a very subdued 4.5% compared to the same
period of 1994.

The relationship between banks in Hongkong and Macau go beyond shared
characteristics and operating similarities. Macau's pataca is pegged to
the Hongkong dollar and in a few year's time the territory and the
enclave will be part of the same sovereign state.

In 1983 and 1984, when Sino-British negotiations regarding the future
of Hongkong were at their most tenuous and Hongkong was in the midst of
a recession, this prompted runs on a number of Macau banks.

Given that the Hongkong dollar is pegged to the US dollar, Macau's
interest rate cycle closely follows both Hongkong's and America's. In
1994 and most of 1995, this gave rise to a difficult operating
environment for local banks, with interest spreads being slightly
squeezed.

The close relationship and intricate link between Hongkong and Macau
will clearly be demonstrated over the next two years, with developments
affecting banks in Hongkong likely to have a ripple effect on Macau
banks.

If the socio-political situation of Hongkong or South China takes a
turn for the worse, Macau banks are likely to suffer considerable
hardship. This is despite the fact that Macau's own transition to
Chinese sovereignty is expected to be rather smooth in light of the
fact that relations between Beijing and Lisbon have been more
harmonious than those between London and Beijing.

Portugal even offered Macau back to Beijing in 1974 after the former
turned socialist. Macau's transition is almost regarded as an aside in
comparison to the international attention Hongkong and 1997 is
receiving. The enclave's value in terms of strategic financial
performance is far less than the territory's.

Macau banks will be operating in a period of uncertainty in the
intermediate term for geopolitical reasons clearly beyond their
control. Nevertheless, following an increasingly closer degree of
integration between the enclave and South China, the banks' assets are
set to expand if the economic conditions are ripe. At this stage there
is unlikely to be a sharp shift in the composition of the banks' loan
books and thus mortgage lending and trade finance will very much
continue to characterise their business activities.

In this context will be the growing influence of the Bank of China both
in its actual operations in the enclave and greater say in Macau's
monetary affairs. In the meantime, the world is watching events
unfolding as its high profile neighbour which will undoubtedly have a
significant impact on developments in Macau.

*The Best Banks in Asia published by Thomson BankWatch, December 1995.

Chris Tang and Andrew Seiz are senior analysts at the Hongkong office
of credit rating agency Thomson BankWatch.

Selected industry averages Macao and Hongkong banks

Hongkong                        1994      1993     1992

Return on average assets (%)    2.07      2.06     1.75
Return on average equity (%)   21.59     22.36    22.79
Leverage (times)                9.30      9.59    10.18
Quasi-liquid assets ratio (%)  47.74     48.97    51.38

Macau                           1994      1993     1992

Return on average assets (%)    1.97      2.05     1.72
Return on average equity (%)   29.31     33.89    33.03
Leverage (times)               13.50     14.31    17.08
Quasi-liquid assets ratio (%)  37.55     31.66    36.53

Source:  Boletim Oficial de Macau

Banks in Macau
31/3/95
Patacas million

                                   Total      Total        %
                                  assets    deposits    change

Bank of China                     37,361     26,326       6.6
Banco Comercial Portugues         25,285     20,499     266.7
Banco Nacional Ultramarino        13,941      7,151      21.3
Banco Tai Fung                    12,800     10,398      24.5
Banco Portugues do Atlantico      10,722         52     -99.6
Banco Seng Heng                    6,716      6,074      39.2
Banco Totta & Acores               5,505      2,390     -32.1
Banco Comercial de Macau (Asia)    5,319      4,031      13.6
Banco Luso Internacional           4,052      3,453      39.6
Banco Weng Hang                    3,789      3,103      22.0
Hong Kong Banking Corp             3,458      2,885       9.8
Banco Delta Asia                   1,873      1,423      18.0
Banco Nacional de Paris            1,498        223     -21.5
Overseas Trust Bank                  961        883     101.3
Guangdong Development Bank           870        423     208.5
Banco Citibank                       741        719     -14.7
Standard Chartered Bank              632        569     -12.2
Banco da America (Macau)             512        335       2.5
Deutsche Bank                        469         54     -54.5

                                   Total        %    Annualised
                                   loans     change    profit

Bank of China                     15,758       3.04     113.4
Banco Comercial Portugues          2,178      -9.30      12.9
Banco Nacional Ultramarino         3,550     -12.46      23.8
Banco Tai Fung                     5,701      12.03      76.6
Banco Portugues do Atlantico       1,077       51.8      12.9
Banco Seng Heng                    3,539        5.4      21.8
Banco Totta & Acores               1,917       -7.3      16.1
Banco Comercial de Macau (Asia)    2,903       18.7      10.2
Banco Luso Internacional           2,402       16.8      16.2
Banco Weng Hang                    2,091       15.7      20.8
Hong Kong Banking Corp             2,363       -2.6      19.5
Banco Delta Asia                   1,027       28.1       1.9
Banco Nacional de Paris              682       29.2       2.2
Overseas Trust Bank                  445       21.5       4.4
Guangdong Development Bank           280      136.7       0.1
Banco Citibank                         6      -51.8      -0.4
Standard Chartered Bank              455       -1.9       3.1
Banco da America (Macau)             364       32.7       3.9
Deutsche Bank                        444       30.8       2.0
dollars = 7.988 patacas (3/95)

Source:  Boletim Oficial de Macau

Market share of banks in country of origin

Country               % of assets

Portugal                  44.5
China                     28.0
Macau                     21.8
Hongkong                   3.2
Other                      2.5

Source:  Thomson Bankwatch



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "29"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

LATIN NOTES: ZEDILLO'S BIG BAILOUT

The loan restructuring at Mexico's leading bank Banamex marks a turning
point in the Zedillo government's effort to resolve the post-
devaluation crisis in the financial system.

Proponents of this move view the Banamex agreement as a big step toward
ending the year-old crisis, but critics fear the deal establishes a
precedent for mushrooming subsidies to the banking industry.

At issue is the government's agreement in mid-December to issue 10-year
bonds to Banamex for dollars 2 billion in Banamex loans, acquired by
the official bank deposit insurance agency Fobaproa. Payments on an
estimated 43% of the loans sold to Fobaproa were already past due, with
most of the remaining debts classified as high-risk and many expected
to become non-performing during 1996. The Banacci financial group that
controls Banamex will increase its capitalisation by dollars 1.1
billion during 1996.

Even critics of the deal agree that this will enhance the quality of
Banamex's loan portfolio and substantially improve its capital ratio.
At the time of the deal, Banamex management estimated that gross past-
due loans had increased from Mexdollars 15.3 billion at end-September
to more than Mexdollars 17 billion by December. The loan sale to
Fobaproa reduced the bank's past-due loans by more than a third; the
ratio of past-due to total loans outstanding fell from 12.8% at end-
September to 9% or less.

Banamex's commitment to a capital increase should boost its capital
adequacy ratio from 10.4% in December to 15% when recapitalisation is
completed this year. About half of the dollars 1.1 billion capital
infusion is expected to be raised through equity and debt issues in
capital markets; over dollars 500 million will be generated from
internal funding sources.

The biggest concern raised by the Banamex operation is the precedent
that it establishes for expanded federal support for bank restructuring
this year.

The quid pro quo of government purchase of troubled loans in exchange
for bank commitments to recapitalisation was established in mid-1995 by
federal agreements to buy dollars 1.5 billion debts from Probursa and
Serfin.

But the extension of the bank-support programme to the country's
largest - and one of its most financially sound - financial
institutions signals that all banks will be offered the option of
negotiating a similar agreement.

Banco Mexicano, a financially solid subsidiary of the Invermexico
financial group, followed Banamex with a deal in late December to sell
dollars 900 million in loans to Fobaproa and pledge a capital increase
of dollars 500 million by the end of 1996.

Questions over the scale of the government's open-ended fiscal
commitment to bank bail-outs will intensify in the wake of the Zedillo
government's decision to extend the ADE programme - which subsidises
interest relief for individual and small-business debtors - by three
months to end-April.

About 75% of an estimated 2.1 million problem loans targeted for ADE
relief - mainly credit card and mortgage debt - had been restructured
by year-end 1995. The hike in interest rates in the fourth quarter has
magnified the cost of the subsidy for the fixed concessionary rates
applied to restructured debts, and the extension appears certain to
push ADE costs above the dollars 2.3 billion budgeted.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "30"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

LATIN NOTES: BANESPA GOOD HEALTH RECIPE

The Cardoso government's decision to end the year-old federal
intervention in Sao Paulo's troubled state bank Banespa provides a
symbol of the improving economic and banking outlook for Brazil.

While the return of Banespa management to state control marks a setback
for reformers who favoured outright privatisation, most analysts credit
the Cardoso government for implementing long overdue measures to slash
staffing and restructure assets that have left Brazil's largest state
bank in better financial health.

The Banespa action in mid-January helped a resurgence in economic
confidence, fuelled by further progress on the government's agenda for
social security, fiscal and administrative reforms that underpin its
stabilisation and growth programme.

A flurry of concern in mid-1995 over deterioration in the current
account balance and inflation has faded as the trade account has
returned to surplus and price growth has slowed. Monthly surpluses in
the second semester narrowed the trade deficit for the first 11 months
of 1995 to dollars 3.1 billion, while consumer inflation in 1995 fell
to a 22-year low at 23.2%.

And with international reserves hovering near dollars 50 billion, the
real was holding firm above 0.97 units to the dollar in January.

The banking industry should benefit from the improving economic
environment as stabilisation in current account and inflation trends
widens the central bank's room for easing interest rates lower in 1996.

President Fernando Henrique Cardoso's has indicated that he will move
cautiously in cutting interest rates. But with GDP growth this year
expected to approach 5% and minimal risk of an inflation resurgence,
banks should show steady growth in lending activity over 1996.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "31"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

LATIN NOTES: NOW, WHERE WERE WE?

Argentina's commercial banks began this year roughly where they left
off in December 1994, before the Mexican crisis triggered a plunge in
peso osits as Argentine investors scrambled to protect themselves from
devaluation risk by seeking safety in dollars.

After bottoming out around dollars 37 billion in March 1995, Argentine
bank deposits have clawed back lost ground to reach dollars 45.1
billion in peso and dollar holdings - about the level on the eve of the
Mexico scare.

Investors' persistent preference for hard currency is evident in the
steady climb of dollar deposits to more than dollars 24 billion, some
dollars 3.2 billion higher than peso deposits in the banking system.

Industry analysts expect growth in peso and dollar deposits to continue
as economic growth recovers, setting the stage for a revival in dormant
corporate lending business by the year end. The fall in consumer
inflation to less than 2% in 1995 points to further decline in interest
rates from their March 1995 peak.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "32"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

MEXICO: NO EASY RECIPE

Q The Mexican government has built an extensive - and costly - safety
net of programmes to prevent the considerable liquidity and asset
quality blems of the banking industry over the past year triggering a
wider crisis in the financial system.

What has been the level of government financial assistance to the banks
over the past year and how much will it need to allocate to support
programmes in 1996? Also, how would you characterise the government's
current policy on bank intervention, especially in the light of recent
moves regarding Inverlat and Banamex?

A Preventing or containing a financial crisis is not an end in itself.
The ultimate goal of the authorities should always be the protection of
the real sector of the economy and, thereby, the welfare of the
population. However, an immediate objective is maintaining and
strengthening the financial system, which has the banking system at its
core. This is essential to enable banks to efficiently perform their
main role, credit intermediation, without which the functioning of any
modern economy would be impossible.

Managing financial crises is never easy, nor susceptible to recipes of
general application. However, there are some basic principles to be
observed, among which the following must be included: preventing the
development of systemic risk; avoiding an unwarranted expansion of
central bank credit; shunning political and other pressures to bail out
stockholders of financial institutions while, at the same time,
protecting the legitimate interests of both creditors and borrowers;
minimising the fiscal costs that may be inherent to the policies
adopted to overcome the crisis and, if feasible, distributing these
costs over a number of years, and interfering the least possible with
the normal functioning of markets.

In order to deal with the impact of the December 1994 devaluation on
commercial banks a comprehensive package was adopted and is currently
being applied. The components of the package are the following: a
dollar liquidity facility; a temporary capitalisation
programme(PROCAPTE); adoption of the Investment Unit (UDI) scheme to
manage the problem of accelerated, and not contractually foreseen,
amortisation of credits in real terms caused by inflation; easing of
some restrictions concerning participation in the capital of commercial
banks in order to attract new investors, both foreign and domestic;
acquisition of a fraction of banks' loan portfolios in a two to one
ratio of new capital paid in by stockholders, so as to provide an
incentive for banks to maintain adequate levels of provisions and
capitalisation; strengthening of supervision; and a debtor support
programme(ADE) to encourage additional loan restructuring, prevent the
development of non-payment practices, provide interest relief and offer
a legal truce to debtors.

The projected fiscal cost represents a net present value of Mexdollars
90.8 billion (dollars 12.1 billion), equivalent to 5.5% of estimated
GDP for 1995. The fiscal cost of the ADE programme in 1995 was absorbed
via the application of a fraction of the fiscal surplus generated in
that year. The remainder, an amount which in net present value terms is
equivalent to 4.7% of 1995's expected GDP, will be generated gradually
throughout the life of the programmes. A portion of this cost will be
financed by the commercial banks themselves.

Direct intervention in troubled institutions has been limited to a few
cases. Recourse to this sort of action by the National Banking and
Securities Commission takes place only to the extent that other
options, such as merger or outright sale, are viable at all or within a
reasonable term. Banks' stockholders lose their investment, or see
their participation diluted, should the state, through FOBAPROA, become
an owner. In that eventuality, FOBAPROA would only be a temporary owner
as it would immediately proceed to find new suitable shareholders.

Q Monetary policy has been the focus of considerable controversy and
debate over the past year. Some complain that an excessively tight
policy threatens to deepen the recession, others feel the fall in the
Cetes (Treasury Bill) rate last September may have been too rapid.

What are the primary objectives for monetary policy in 1996 and what
benchmarks has the Banco de Mexico established for money supply growth?
A As stated in the Law of Banco de Mexico, the primary objective of
monetary policy is price stability. Consequently, it is imperative that
monetary policy in 1996 be aimed at fostering the convergence of the
public's inflation expectations towards the objective announced by the
government. To this end, central bank policy should be defined in terms
of a variable under its control and which the public can easily
monitor. For 1996, as in the previous year, Banco de Mexico decided to
set a limit on the increase of its net domestic assets. It is expected
that the expansion of the demand for base money in 1996 will be in the
order of Mexdollars 18 billion. The needed growth of the supply of base
money will originate from the accumulation of net international
reserves and a maximum increase of Mexdollars 15 billion in net
domestic assets of the central bank.

In its monetary programme for 1996, a widely distributed document,
Banco de Mexico announced quarterly limits on the growth of its net
domestic assets.

These limits take into account the seasonal behaviour of the demand for
base money and the expected path of net international reserves
accumulation.

It must be stressed that in accordance with the stabilisation programme
adopted by Mexico, monetary policy, combined with other measures taken
by the Federal Government, has been geared towards attaining, among
others, two very important objectives: a steady reduction of the
inflation rate and lower interest rates. The latter, however, will not
be achieved by artificial means but rather as a consequence of
generating expectations of declining inflation. It is a mistake to
compare, as some analysts do, the level of the Cetes rate in the most
recent primary auction (about 41%) with the rate of past annual
inflation observed at end-year 1995. It is prospective inflation that
matters. If the market expects lower inflation in the future, it is
only natural for nominal interest rates to fall.

Q The Zedillo government established a 1996 consumer inflation target
of 20.5% and GDP growth target of 3% in the document accompanying the
federal budget last November. Do you see the inflation target as
realistic and how will the central bank balance the conflicting demands
of curbing inflation and stimulating growth during 1996?

A Mexico's experience, in line with those of many other countries,
confirms that monetary policy makes its best contribution to economic
growth and employment when it is aimed at achieving price stability.

Banco de Mexico will assuredly contribute its full efforts in order to
accomplish the economic programme's 20.5% annual inflation objective.

Nonetheless, having an explicit inflation target does not necessarily
imply that the central bank is making a projection of future price
behaviour. It is a well-known fact that a central bank cannot directly
control changes in the general price level. Its influence over
inflation is indirect, through the effects of its actions on aggregate
demand. Furthermore, there are several variables, not under the
influence of central banks, which have a marked incidence on the
behaviour of prices. In sum, the proper monetary policy is a necessary
and useful, although not sufficient condition to ensure the attainment
of an inflation target.

To the extent that the average exchange rate in 1996 coincides with
that included in the programme, and indirect taxes, prices of goods and
services produced by the public sector, foreign inflation, and
international prices of raw materials remain roughly in line with the
projections in the economic programme, an annual inflation of 20.5% is
within reach. At any rate, the monetary programme was designed on the
basis of the 20.5% inflation assumption and will not be modified.

Q The peso's devaluation of more than 120% from December 1994 to year
end 1995 has ushered in a sweeping overhaul in exchange rate policy.

What is the Banco de Mexico's current exchange rate policy, what
criteria will guide future interventions and to what extent will the
Bank permit the peso to depreciate during 1996 especially with the
government's stated goal of an average exchange rate of 7.7 new pesos
to the dollars?

A On 22 December, 1994 Mexico adopted a floating exchange rate regime.
From mid- March to October 1995, Banco de Mexico did not intervene in
the foreign exchange market. However, during the last two months of
that year it did so four times in order to reduce unwarranted
volatility in the market.

Like most central banks, Banco de Mexico recognises that occasional
interventions may be necessary to smooth out erratic movements in the
exchange rate. Sporadic interventions do not mean that Banco de Mexico
has a real exchange rate objective. The market determines the exchange
rate and, therefore, the latter is by definition an equilibrium rate.
In that sense, the exchange rate can be neither undevalued nor
overvalued.

In order to present the 1996 Budget to Congress, which includes items
denominated in foreign currency, the government had to have an estimate
of the average nominal exchange rate for the year. However, this
estimate, 7.7 pesos per dollar, should not be interpreted as a goal. It
is not a revealed specific support level for the peso which the central
bank is bound to defend.

Q Do you believe that the existing central bank law goes far enough in
establishing and protecting the Banco de Mexico's role as an
independent monetary authority?

A In August 1993, Congress approved an amendment to the Mexican
Constitution whereby the central bank was granted autonomy. The new law
for Banco de Mexico was passed and came into effect on 1 April 1994.

For autonomy to be effective, the central bank must have control over
all of its credit operations. Thus, the Constitution states that no
authority may order Banco de Mexico to grant financing, either through
credit of any sort or through acquisition of assets.

One of the foundations of the autonomy of Banco de Mexico is the
independence of judgment of the persons responsible for conducting the
bank's affairs. Thus, its administration has been entrusted to a five-
member board chaired by a governor. The governor is named for a six-
year term starting at the beginning of the fourth calendar year of the
six-year presidential term, while the four deputy governors are
appointed for overlapping eight-year terms, each one being designated
every two years.

Thus, the composition of the board assures the stability and continuity
of policy that is brought about by a long-term perspective in the
setting of policy. Board members can only be removed for reasons of
serious offence, as defined in the law.

Existing central bank legislation in Mexico indeed goes far enough in
protecting the central bank's role as an independent monetary
authority.

Critics should read the pertinent Mexican legislation and modify their
characterisation of Banco de Mexico as an institution subservient to
the federal government's economic and political interests.

Those who claim that in spite of the respective legal provisions
autonomy has not been effective in practice bear the burden of proof.
Such assertions overlook the fact that for a long period Banco de
Mexico has not granted net financing to the federal government.

At times, critics seem to argue that central bank autonomy means having
the power to select the exchange rate regime. In Mexico, as in nearly
all countries, that decision rests on the government.

Q Do you believe that present international support (from the US, IMF,
World Bank and other institutions) is sufficient to preserve exchange
rate and broader economic stabilisation during 1996?

A In the weeks following the December 1994 devaluation, financial
markets reacted violently, as fears mounted that the government and
other borrowers would not comply with payments to non-residents due in
the short-term.

Mexico's crisis had immediate effects upon several markets, mainly in
Latin America, and there was a serious risk of systemic repercussions.
The gravity of the situation called for exceptional international
assistance. Thus, a financial package was put together with the help of
the United States, Canada, the International Monetary Fund and the Bank
for International Settlements. This package has allowed Mexico to
comply with its obligations and has thus facilitated the stabilisation
of financial markets. To date, Mexico has drawn dollars 20.8 billion
dollars net, far less than originally estimated, and in all likelihood
will not need additional support. As early as May 1995, renewed
possibilities for placing Mexican paper in international markets have
emerged and are gradually increasing.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "33"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

GHANA: RERUN THE GOLD RUSH

Long known mainly for its gold and cocoa exports, Ghana has
restructured and diversified its economy enough to go from backwater to
bona fide emerging market in ten years.

In a business climate that is already flourishing by Africa's humble
standards, new opportunities are arising in what is being called the
continent's most ambitious privatisation effort. The Jerry Rawlings
government is working closely with the World Bank to sell off the
country's largest bank, two smaller ones it also owns, and other key
state assets in communications, transport, insurance and other sectors.

No matter how much promotion is done, no one expects it will be easy to
convince potential buyers to invest in Africa. But the run-up is
nevertheless providing extensive advisory work for the handful of
strong privately owned banks that already exist in Ghana. Add the heavy
demand for financing that the country's private banks already face,
plus the related business they see via the small but growing local
stock market, and you have a serious operational challenge for the
people who run them.

The busy environment has begun attracting experienced international
talent to Accra, where a decade of sustained 5% annual gross domestic
product (GDP) growth has brought Mercedes SLs, satellite dishes and
cellular phones popping up alongside the more traditional trappings of
African life.

In have come people like CJ Best, a veteran US banker who arrived in
1994 to manage CAL Merchant Bank under the auspices of an international
public/private sector co-operative venture called the African
Management Services Co. (AMSCO). 'It's an exciting time to be here,' he
said. 'The whole economy has become much more dynamic. Ghana has the
potential to become a focal point for all of Anglophone West Africa.'

From headquarters in Amsterdam just across from the ING tower, AMSCO
uses a combination of government and corporate funds to help owners of
promising African companies locate new full-time managers with the hard-
to-find skills they need. It then provides them with training grants
and networking opportunities throughout their contracts to help build
competitiveness in their firms.

CAL was launched by a private Ghanaian group that had IFC financing in
1990 when the government first allowed private competition in banking.
Since then it has built up dollars 39.4 million in assets and strong
local market shares in trade finance, capital markets and advisory
services. It needed a general manager who could build it into an
institution that top clients in New York and London would use.

For that AMSCO found them Best, who had specialised in African finance
for more than 20 years at Chase Manhattan, the New York branch of
United Bank for Africa, and elsewhere. His job is to help build CAL's
growth into the international merchant bank of choice at a time when
Ghana is poised to attract additional private investment from abroad.

He plans to devote much of 1996 to giving all his employees
comprehensive training through resources provided by AMSCO's Management
Development Fund, whose donors include bilateral aid agencies from the
US and Europe, and hopefully turn the bank into a globally competitive
institution that will set a precedent for Ghana and all of Africa.

'A lot of my work involves training by example, both on questions of
overall management and specific needs such as credit analysis, all the
various elements of risk and so on,' he said.

'We've historically provided a lot of letters of credit to Ghanaian
companies, and now are building up a corporate finance group that
should be at full strength in about 12 months.'

CAL is a rarity in Ghanaian banking in that it has no government
ownership.

It and the other local niche players which deal with an international
clientele such as Ecobank, Databank, and the local affiliates of
Barclays and Standard Chartered, have a unique vantage point on the
planned privatisation of the country's largest financial institutions.
They are closely involved in plans to prepare larger competitors for
sale under contracts funded by the World Bank, which recently said the
small private banks were 'more adept and efficient at financial
intermediation' than those the government owns.

Topping the for-sale list is Ghana Commercial Bank, the country's
largest with dollars 141 million in Tier One capital, almost half of
the country's banking assets, and an established international
presence.

Two smaller domestic lenders, Social Security Bank and National
Investment Bank, also are on the block. The idea is to bring the
government shareholding down to 40% in each case, with 30% being listed
on the stock exchange and another 30% going to a foreign strategic
partner who can bring in new management sophistication and an
international network to support the country's growing export strengths
in gold, timber, cocoa and other commodities.

All three banks could spell interesting opportunities if offered at the
right price. But investors are wary of 1994's 70% inflation and 40%
currency devaluation against the dollar, and few international banks
have shown interest lately in buying minority stakes in emerging
markets. Except for South Africa, they seem unwilling to take on
Africa's risks, especially in the wake of the Meridian-BIAO collapse.
That leaves much promotional work for the World Bank-funded advisory
teams.

Best's team at CAL, for example, is working with Johannesburg-based
Nedcor and KPMG Peat Marwick to get National Investment Bank ready for
sale.

Another South African institution, Standard Bank, is working with
Coopers & Lybrand on a similar effort for Social Security Bank, while
Credit Commercial de France and Price Waterhouse are working on Ghana
Commercial Bank. No one yet knows if any eventual buyers can be
attracted from Europe, Asia, the US, South Africa, or anywhere else, or
what sort of incentive packages they might require.

'If any place in Africa outside of South Africa is attractive to
international commercial banks, Ghana would be,' said World Bank
financial sector specialist Elie Saleeby. 'But the question is whether
their strategic plans leave them in a mood for buying anywhere.'

The privatisations are intended to be the crowning achievement of the
Financial Sector Adjustment Programme (FINSAP), a restructuring effort
that has received dollars 200 million of World Bank funding since 1987.
It has prompted big changes in Ghana's state-run institutions,
including a cleaning up of balance sheets through transfer of non-
performing public and private sector assets to a government trust,
reform of daily operations and introduction of new prudential
regulations.

'Noteworthy achievements have been made in Ghana,' Saleeby said. 'It is
a financial sector where significant efficiencies have been introduced,
although there is still more to be done. It's emerging fast, and like
all emerging markets there will be hiccups from time to time. But the
greatest challenge is to maintain momentum, and they've done a fairly
good job of maintaining it so far.'

The goal is to get Ghana's leading banks up to international standards.
The World Bank argues that can only come with the participation of top
international partners as core investors. Emerging market bank watchers
say such transactions can be a good way for the host institution to
obtain valuable capital, access to new management, and global
operational links that it cannot get at home.

Polish export finance specialist BRE, for example, sold a 21% stake to
Commerzbank a year ago, thus gaining 'a leg up on its domestic and
international competition' and a reputation as 'the most innovative
Polish bank' in the view of Creditanstalt Investment Bank analysts. ING
and Allied Irish Bank hold similarly sized chunks of other Polish
banks, and in December GE Capital Services paid dollars 87 million for
a controlling 32.5% stake in Hungary's Budapest Bank, which Credit
Suisse had considered but then rejected a year earlier.

That, though, was Europe. Africa may be of far less interest to
strategic investors of that calibre from Western Europe and the US,
perhaps opening a door for banks from South African banks to buy their
way into Ghana. How much it would cost is unknown, but sources close to
the process say the transactions could take another year or more to
conclude, and may require deferred payment plans of other sizeable
incentives. The Rawlings government has meanwhile already floated 30%
of Social Security Bank on the local stock exchange, and now may do the
same with the two other banks on its list.

Meanwhile, CS First Boston and Ecobank have also just begun World Bank-
funded advisory work on the upcoming privatisation of Ghana Telecom,
set to be the biggest divestiture since 1994's dollars 450 million sale
of part of the state holding in Ashanti Goldfields to portfolio
investors through a GDR and local capital market issue. Ghana Airways
and the Tema oil refinery are also set for sale. It all adds up to big
business for the country's few private banks.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "34"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

BARCLAYS TESTS BARCLAYZONE

Barclays Bank has launched a three-month pilot to test the acceptance
of an interactive share dealing branch system. The touch-screen
multimedia system, called BarclayZone, provides a two-way video link
between the customer and Barclays Stockbrokers based in Glasgow. It
provides information, advice and facilities for share registration and
dealing. The pilot will take place in three branches and will test
customers' appetite for such a service with the possibility for
extension to other services such as taxation services, wills, unit
trusts, portfolio management and travel or health insurance.

A successful pilot will also see BarclayZone sites opening in airports,
train stations and out of town shopping centres.

BarclayZone has accounted for a 'significant investment'. It was
developed by Barclays Multimedia, a division of Barclays Group
Operations Technology, which was set up in mid-1992 by Joseph de Feo,
head of Barclays' IT department. It is the latest in a series of remote
banking services that were launched by Barclays in 1995.

Those included a multimedia kiosk developed in conjunction with Thomas
Cook to provide travel and related financial services, a home shopping
service via the Internet called BarclaySquare and a home banking
service via PC for personal customers, called Barclays PC Banking,
available at the end of this month.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "35"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

REUTERS LAUNCHES KOBRA

Reuters, the news, information and dealing room systems' vendor, has
launched a software package, Kobra, to provide users with tools to
create their own information selection, manipulation and display. Kobra
enables users, with a constant standard display, to mix information
from different information sources on one screen.

Based on object-oriented technology, whereby programs are broken up
into modules (objects) and functions, Kobra integrates different types
of information (data, text and graphics) in real time.

Kobra comes in four different versions targeting different levels of
user.

Run mode provides users with access to pre-arranged displays.

Montage mode is for more specialised users to build their own displays.
Link mode builds on functionality provided by the Montage mode but
provides links between items coming in from different sources.

Development mode is designed as a toolkit for creating objects that can
be used on any of the other levels of workstation.

Reuters has also ventured further into the information superhighway by
acquiring a 2.5% stake in Yahoo, a software browser for the Internet.
This extends Reuters' policy of supplying news services on a wholesale
basis to various Internet suppliers (including Yahoo, the Microsoft
Network and Compuserve); a relationship analogous to Reuters supplying
news services to newspapers.

Peter Thomas, director media relations, Reuters, says: 'We see the
Internet as an opportunity for us but, as everybody else, we continue
to research the best way for it to be utilised'. He continues: 'Because
of its performance and security issues it is not something that we can
directly use at this stage, but technology is moving very fast'.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "36"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

PRICE OF LOTUS NOTES CUT

Lotus Corporation has changed the pricing structure of its leading
messaging and groupware product, Lotus Notes, which is used by more
that 3.3 million people. The wholly-owned subsidiary of IBM (The
Banker, 7/95, p89), has cut the price of the desktop version of Lotus
Notes by more than half (58%) in an attempt to 'accelerate sales and
deployment' of the product.

However, Lotus has increased the price of the Notes server products,
required to run Notes in the network environment, to bring them more in
line with other client-server products which use a lower client cost
and a higher server cost, according to Jim Moffat, communications'
product manager, Lotus (UK). Before the announcement the client and the
server products' pricing structure was the same.

'Because of the performance enhancements to the product, we are
supporting many more users for our server, and because customers buy
many more clients than servers, the cost of ownership is actually going
down drastically,' says Moffat.

The announcement came prior to the shipment of Notes Release 4 which
started last month in the US and Europe. The product includes new
features such as intelligent agents to make it easier to store, and
navigate through, information; Internet access via the InterNotes Web
Navigator; and tools for developing Web applications. Lotus also has a
new Notes Mail client.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "37"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

NEW DERIVATIVES MESSAGING STANDARDS

SWIFT, the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication,
has introduced a new series of derivatives message standards. In
conjunction with the International Swaps and Derivatives Association
(ISDA), the trade association for over-the-counter derivatives, SWIFT
has introduced message standards for single currency interest rate swap
confirmation, cross currency interest rate swap confirmation and
interest rate reset confirmation.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "38"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

TELERATE LIVE CHANGES

In separate announcements, Dow Jones Telerate announced that it is
amalgamating its dealing room television service, Telerate Live, with
the service transmitted by its majority owned subsidiary, European
Business News (EBN).

Telerate claims that under the new arrangement the price for the
service will be free and the coverage of the service will be extended
from the UK to include the Continent. The announcement also means that
Telerate no longer needs pay EBN to produce its TV service. Production
is now shared with Flextech, a subsidiary of US's TCI, which owns 30%
of EBN.

Dow Jones will continue to support Dow Jones Investor Network the
forerunner for Telerate Live which is broadcast in the US.

Bloomberg, on the other hand, has announced the availability of its
dealing room television service to the European market. It intends the
service to be transmitted to all its customers' terminals free of
charge. Bloomberg believes the pricing structure will encourage more
people to take its terminals.

There is an appetite for such TV services in the dealing room but price
is a key issue. Dow Jones Telerate may have miscalculated by charging
for their service. A city insider adds: 'I do not think that Dow Jones
developed separate programme material that was so new in its content
and presentation that made it of value to the City'.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "39"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

BOLERO CHOOSES SWIFT

Bolero, a pan-European initiative for the automation of commercial
trade documentation, has selected SWIFT to build the main component of
its system, the central registry. The registry, which sits at the heart
of the Bolero system, is designed to store and maintain information
about all transactions going through Bolero.

The announcement comes following the withdrawal from the scheme of the
previous central registry developers, Cable & Wireless, on the grounds
that they were hoping to set up their own competing service.

Cable & Wireless had participated in, and partly sponsored, the Bolero
project and pilot which comprised 25 multi-national organisations and
six banks.

The project was designed to prove the technical feasibility of the
automation of bills of lading.

Other sponsors included the European Commission which paid 50% of the
estimated ECU3.7 million pilot and Unisource (an alliance between the
telecoms suppliers of Sweden, Holland, Spain and Switzerland). The
pilot came to a successful end in mid-September.

The Bolero User Association Bank users

Banque Nationale de Paris    MeesPierson
Barclays Bank                National Westminster Bank
Chase Manhattan Bank         Rabobank Nederland
Citibank                     Royal Bank of Scotland
Commerzbank                  SBC-Warburg
Credit Lyonnais              SE-Banken
Deutsche Bank                Societe Generale
Generale Banque              Standard Chartered Bank
HSBC Holdings                Svenska Handelsbanken
ING Bank                     Westpac Banking Corporation



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "40"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

TFS PARTS FROM SYNTEGRA

Thomson Financial Services (TFS) has pulled out of its year old
partnership with Syntegra, the systems' integration division of British
Telecom. The partnership was set up after the Bank of England's
appointment of Syntegra and Swift as network providers to the UK
securities industry's electronic share settlement system, Crest.

Syntegra and TFS entered the agreement on the proviso that Syntegra
would develop the SettleNet service whereas Thomson would at a later
stage bring expertise and added value to that service.

Explains Kevin Milne, director Thomson Financial Services:
'Unfortunately, despite our best efforts to reach a detailed contract
with Syntegra, we have been unable to do so. It now looks as though
Syntegra's policy has changed so that an agreement with TFS no longer
looks possible'.

Syntegra was surprised by Thomson's announcement but did not feel the
announcement would affect its positioning which it claims stands at
around 60% of the Crest networking market.

Crestco, the company that owns Crest, has commented that the break-up
does not affect the development of Crest, scheduled to go live on 15
July 1996.

On 15 January network trials began. During that time workstations were
rolled out.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "41"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

TECHNOLOGY: CONVERT OR CRASH

When European political leaders confirmed the timetable for European
Monetary Union (EMU) at the December Madrid summit, media coverage
focused on the currency's new name and on which countries might meet
the macro-economic convergence criteria by 1999.

Little or no attention was devoted to the practical question of whether
the banks will be ready to meet the timetable. But, whatever the
political and economic hurdles which EMU must overcome, the challenge
of making the necessary changes to computer systems within the banking
industry may prove to be its most serious handicap.

As the sector is already dogged by a constant stream of software
failures, the risk of development problems on IT projects on the scale
of EMU preparation is considerable. This problem will be exacerbated by
a demand for specialist IT skills, which will be in limited supply.

So it is imperative that immediate action should be taken to prepare
for the conversion of banks' computer systems to handle a single
currency, if the deadlines for EMU are to be met. However, continued
uncertainty over the details of the currency changeover is impeding
progress.

EMU will involve largescale enhancement or rewrite of multiple systems
across most parts of a bank, all of which must interrelate and complete
within the same ambitious timescale.

To say there is a significant systems delivery risk is an
understatement - experience suggests there is a certainty of major
systems development failure in many banks and a very high likelihood of
knock-on impact on other projects and business functions. Moreover, if
a software development fails once an irrevocable commitment is made to
EMU, there will be no fallback option if a bank intends trading after E-
Day.

Nor will these likely failings be isolated incidents. The transition to
EMU will be exposed to the weakest link in the chain. If any one member
of a payments network is behind, for example, then an EMU-compatible
network cannot go live. Similarly, if a particular segment of the
banking industry in a given country is not ready, then conversion to
the new currency at the retail level cannot take place.

Failsafe approaches to systems development do exist. However, they
usually involve more protracted development timescales and their
adoption would jeopardise the ambitious deadlines for EMU.

A typical big bank has hundreds of separate systems in operation, each
with its own natural life cycle. The additional step of adapting these
systems for EMU may invalidate previous decisions regarding investment
priorities and shorten the shelf-life of individual systems.

For larger banks, the development costs of preparing IT systems for the
single currency are therefore expected to exceed ECU60 million.

However, following recent cutbacks, banks have little spare capacity in
IT development. For this reason, EMU investment needs to be
incorporated into IT planning cycles as a matter of urgency.

It is important that banks undertake both a 'top down' and a 'bottom
up' assessment of the systems impact of EMU, to arrive at a realistic
understanding of the changes required and a credible assessment of the
timing and resourcing implications.

A recent report, European Monetary Union - critical IT supply-side
issues, produced by CGS, evaluated the demand which EMU will place on
the IT services industry, and whether the industry has the capacity to
meet this demand.

The only comprehensive estimate of the systems cost of EMU to banks
stands at ECU5 billion. Based on this figure and on assessments derived
from experience of working on EMU projects in Germany, the Netherlands
and France, CGS has modelled the likely pattern of demand for IT
services.

While concluding that demand is unlikely to exceed the capacity of the
IT services industry, the CGS findings reveal that considerable
uncertainty still remains because:

* estimates of the demand itself are shrouded in doubt;

* the supply of appropriate IT resources cannot be turned on at will;

* the timing of this sudden demand surge coincides with other demand
peaks.

Although European political leaders have agreed upon the timetable for
EMU, the structures necessary to support the unification process remain
ambiguous and undecided. As yet no legal framework exists and there is
scarcely more clarity now than a year ago on the crucial question of a
dual currency operation.

Moreover, little work has been done to estimate how the demand for Euro-
denominated accounts will affect different sectors of the economy. Even
the characteristics of the new currency itself - such as interest
calculation and capitalisation rules - remain undefined. So to estimate
the full scale of the technological transition with any accuracy is
extremely difficult.

The costs of currency changeover published to date are minimum
estimates only and, in the manner of all such calculations, will tend
to creep upwards as detailed requirements become clearer. Indeed, as
figures were based on the assumption of a Big Bang conversion and a
period of dual currency operation now seems more likely, IT costs are
likely to be inflated by at least 50%.

One thing is certain, however: IT resources are not interchangeable
commodities and specialist skills in limited supply are likely to
present real supply side bottlenecks, despite theoretical capacity in
the IT industry as a whole.

First, larger banks and retail banks are more likely to use in-house
developed systems than smaller and wholesale banks. The danger will be
where internally developed old systems, supporting core parts of the
business, require major redevelopment to accommodate EMU. These are the
very systems where banks may be least able to turn to external
resources to make the necessary changes.

Second, for industry segments such as international branch banking, and
functional areas such as treasury, the critical path for EMU will be
the changes made by package vendors.

From an EMU perspective, packaged software, which is written to be
flexible, is likely to accommodate change more easily than much of the
old bespoke software in banks. Vendors typically have limited financial
resilience, however, and may be reluctant to act until the uncertainty
surrounding EMU is eliminated. And there will undoubtedly be a small
minority of package vendors who experience problems in implementing the
necessary changes for EMU.

As these problems will become clear only late in the day, affected
banks will have little opportunity to develop alternative systems.

Given the scale of effort demanded, it is reasonable to expect banks
across Europe to respond to the prospect of a single currency with a
frenzy of detailed planning and impact assessment. Unfortunately,
progress is far from uniform. This is in part a question of political
geography. In Germany, the Netherlands and France, for example, CGS is
working with banks which have a 'sleeves up' attitude to EMU, based on
a conviction that it will happen. By contrast, at least one UK clearing
bank has devoted neither time, thought, nor resources to the issue,
based on a conviction that, for the UK at least, EMU will not happen.

All European banks face the same dilemma: they can wait until 1998 to
discover whether their country will join EMU, when it will be too late
to implement the systems changes, forcing a negative decision; or they
can invest now for an outcome which may not arise.

It is unclear whether governments, or even banks themselves, appreciate
just how large an effort is involved in preparing banks' IT systems for
EMU, or indeed the urgency of moving on to a war footing today to
ensure that the necessary changes are properly planned and executed.

It is essential that institutions such as central banks and banking
federations should seek to encourage a more coordinated approach to
currency changeover, if the deadlines for the single currency are to be
met.

The first step should be the establishment of guidelines for banks to
assess the systems impact of EMU, combined with milestones at which
banks must explain their plans and monitor progress.

Early warning systems should also be established to enable problems
within individual institutions to be identified swiftly and rectified
before the point of irretrievable breakdown is reached.

Finally, contingency plans should be set in place, perhaps including
software rescue services, temporary bureau processing, or systems loans
between banks.

The significance of IT preparation for EMU should not be
underestimated.

Otherwise, come 1998, some countries may find themselves unable to
participate in EMU, irrespective of their success in achieving economic
convergence criteria.

IT preparation may seem a mundane consideration in comparison to the
continuing debate on the economic and political implications of EMU.

Nevertheless, it is an indisputable fact that no country will be able
to proceed with EMU unless its national banking community has made
sufficient progress in making the necessary modifications to computer
systems.

John Rushton is senior manager for CGS, a European computer services
company



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "42"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

TECHNOLOGY: EUROPE'S IT BOOM

The European IT software and services market is forecast to grow 8% a
year for the next five years, boosting market size to more than dollars
130 billion by the year 2000, according to Input, a global intelligence
and consulting firm.

In another report published in January, European Software and Services
Market - Competitive Analysis, 1995, Input ranks the market shares of
the leading European software and service vendors.

In 1994, the top 20 vendors accumulated revenues of dollars 29.6
billion or 35.7% of the total European market of dollars 83.3 billion.

The report highlights IBM's domination in Europe, which holds the top
slot in France, Germany and the UK. However, it has had its position
eroded in the Nordic region by the formation of groups through
acquisition, for example, Celsius in Sweden; by forceful niche players
in Denmark; and robust defence of their markets by local vendors in
Finland and Norway.

US vendors such as CSC, Andersen Consulting and EDS continue to
dominate tenders for big contracts, except for SAP of Germany.

In the Netherlands, national vendors - Philips, BSO-Origin, Raet,
Roccade, Getronics - have recently announced alliances to extend their
geographical reach and extend their service portfolios.

The report also highlights the emergence of new entrants, for example,
telecommunications vendors, such as MCI and AT&T, which continue to
extend their range of services.

They have done this either through acquisition, for example, MCI
acquired SHL for dollars 1 billion last year; or by the creation of a
professional services unit internally, for example, AT&T Solutions.
AT&T is now in the throes of a major restructuring.

The report observes that some vendors are relationship builders rather
than technology experts. They are using 'value-based pricing' to
differentiate themselves from the competition and establish long-term
relationships with clients based on improvement in business, rather
than IT, metrics.

Among banks worldwide, expenditure for outsourcing, systems integration
and network services is growing at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR)
of 15%, says Input in a study of worldwide banking information
services.

Outsourcing is increasing at a CAGR of 19%, since banks are now using
outsourcing to handle business functions, network management and
desktop services as well as application and platform systems
operations.

A recent survey by Information Week of the biggest information systems
spenders in Europe in 1995 put three banks among the top 10: Barclays
Bank was the third biggest spender with dollars 1.3 billion; ABN Amro
Holdings was fifth with dollars 960 million; and Deutsche Bank was
ninth with dollars 814 million.

Leading European software and services vendors
Europe, 1994

                                                   Estimated
                                                     sector    Market
                                        Country     revenue     share
Rank     Vendor                         of origin   (dlrs m)     (%)

 1    IBM                               US            7,890       9.5
 2    CGS                               France        2,025       2.4
 3    Siemens Nixdorf International     Germany       1,905       2.3
 4    Digital Equipment Corporation     US            1,765       2.1
 5    Reuters                           UK            1,755       2.1
 6    EDS                               US            1,585       1.9
 7    Microsoft                         US            1,260       1.5
 8    ICL                               UK            1,150       1.4
 9    Bull                              France        1,115       1.3
10    Andersen Consulting               US            1,065       1.3
11    Computer Associates               US              955       1.1
12    Sema                              France          950       1.1
13    Finsiel                           Italy           905       1.1
14    Olivetti                          Italy           895       1.1
15    Oracle                            US              815       1.0
16    SAP                               Germany         800       1.0
17    AT&T                              US              795       1.0
18    Hewlett Packard                   US              735       0.9
19    Datev                             Germany         640       0.8
20    CSC                               US              635       0.8
Top 20 Total                                         29,640      35.7
Total Market                                         83,300     100.0

Source:  Input



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "43"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

TECHNOLOGY: FRAUD BUSTERS

Last September three fraudsters were jailed for a pounds 120,000
swindle which involved the first home-made high street cash dispenser.
More than 300 bank and building society customers were fooled by the
Halifax 'card cash' dispenser which had been carefully built into the
front of an equally fictitious mortgage broker's premises in East
London.

According to Moira Lavery of lawyers, Dibb Lupton and Broomhead, not
one of the victims realised, as they tried in vain to withdraw cash,
that their personal identification numbers and card details had been
secretly recorded to make counterfeit cards, later used to plunder
their accounts.

While these fraudsters were caught and were jailed for up to four
years, the fake cash dispenser they built highlights the lengths
fraudsters will go to and the ingenuity used against financial
institutions and the public.

The Lebanese loop, a piece of camera film inserted into an automated
teller machine (ATM), is another ingenious device to defraud
cardholders.

For Lorna Harris, head of the fraud prevention unit of the UK's
Association for Payment Clearing Services (APACS), the struggle is not
to get complacent and to be ever vigilant against new types of fraud.
Although plastic card fraud can never be fully eradicated, considerable
progress is being made in limiting losses.

In the UK, plastic card fraud losses have declined rapidly in recent
years since the peak in 1991 when losses reached pounds 165.5 million.
In 1994 fraud losses fell to pounds 96.8 million , 25% lower than in
1993, and Lorna Harris says the 1995 figure is expected to show a
further downward trend.

Why the improvement? APACS attributes the success to better co-
operation between banks, retailers and the public and the banks'
authorisation strategy introduced in 1992.

Before then about 10-12% of all plastic card transactions required
authorisation but, since the banks got together and developed an
approach across all retail sectors from April 1994, some 30% of all
card transactions are authorised and fraud losses in certain retail
sectors have fallen as much as 75%.

For banks, fraud is not seen as a competitive issue and the UK banks'
willingness to co-operate with each other, along with the existence of
an umbrella body such as APACS, is viewed as critical to recent
success. Also, the negotiation of a tariff reduction with British
Telecom lowered the cost of authorisation calls for retailers and added
to the spirit of co-operation.

In other countries, card fraud has been rising and global figures for
Visa show a worldwide confirmed fraud total of dollars 675 million for
the year ending June 1995. The US accounts for 58.2% of this figure.
Many countries, however, the US included, do not have an inter-industry
umbrella organisation such as APACS in the UK and many believe that the
lack of such a coordinating vehicle has been the reason behind growing
losses in these countries.

New approaches are being used to limit card losses which are still
dominated by lost/stolen cards which make up 71.1% of the latest UK
losses. The emergence of 'hot card' checking has become invaluable in
cutting fraud.

With 5,000 cards lost or stolen every day out of a total of 86 million
cards issued in the UK the problem for issuers, retailers and customers
has been growing with retail outlets, such as petrol stations, being
the most fraud prone, accounting for around a quarter of all losses.

In the petrol sector, with a high volume of low-value transactions, the
use of on-line authorisation has proved inappropriate and 'hot card'
checking, using a simple swipe mechanism, has proved very effective. A
cashier can tell within seconds whether a credit, debit or cheque
guarantee card is being used fraudulently.

In the last three years hot card files and hot card broadcasting have
helped to combat fraud and provide a low-cost alternative to on-line
authorisation.

The market leader, CardClear, uses terrestrial television networks to
transmit data on lost/stolen cards to retailers and hopes to have 5,300
installed sites by 1997.

CardClear managing director, Brian Raven, says hot card broadcasting
has been endorsed by the UK banks for use in the petrol sector and
since October 1993 Barclaycard's losses (largest UK card issuer) in
that sector have fallen by 54%. Raven also believes that cross-border
fraud is growing (from 13.2% of all losses in 1992 to 21.7% in 1994)
and that the market need for hot-card broadcasting will expand.

CardClear hopes to use satellite broadcasting to carry its service into
continental Europe for use by European banks on a pan-European basis.
In January it announced a three-year agreement with UK petrol retailer,
Mobil, to install its hot card system in Mobil's 700 retail outlets
throughout the country. And Raven hopes to provide a range of
information services to retail and other market sectors .

One recent card innovation, however, does not appear to have been that
effective. The photocard has been described more as a novelty than a
fraud prevention tool and surveys from Norway and New Zealand indicate
that it has no more advantages than a card without a photo.

While two leading banks in the UK have introduced photocards, the take-
up has only been a modest 30% and industry statistics show that only
500,000 photocards have been issued, amounting to just 0.6% of the UK
market.

Sophisticated new technology is also expected to provide significant
improvements in combating card fraud, with new products to be launched
soon.

'Europay believes that neural networks are an important element of its
risk management strategy, along with the introduction of smart cards,'
says Patrick Nelson, business development manager for the UK and
Ireland for Europay International, Europe's leading international
payments organisation.

'Counterfeit fraud is still very much a risk for card issuers and
acquirers across Europe and many local systems are unable to deal with
this problem.

'Europay's new neural net fraud prevention system, set for launch in
the first quarter this year, identifies likely patterns of fraud based
on a merchant's international activity.

'This means that, unlike other neural network systems that analyse
cardholder behaviour, Europay's system is able to flag suspicious
purchases without any delay to the cardholder at the point of sale. By
focusing on fraudulent or targeted merchants such as stores selling
brands of upmarket Swiss watches, the system has the potential to
prevent 12% of international fraud volumes.'

Nelson explains: 'Europay chose neural network technology to complement
its existing fraud prevention measures as it can be quickly adapted to
take into consideration changing circumstances and does not require
strict models to be imposed from the outset. For the past 12 months
Europay has been working with Nestor to refine its system by using data
collected from clearing payment transactions.

'After rigorously testing the system on its mainframes to make sure it
can cope with huge volumes of data, Europay is now in a position to be
able to deliver the system to members either as a stand-alone product
or to complement the technology they have developed themselves.

'By tailoring the system to meet the individual requirements of each
bank, Europay is confident that neural network technology will play a
key role in fighting fraud across Europe.' The smart card also
represents another big step forward in fraud prevention.

France already has a 'chip' card in action which has proved hugely
successful against crime. But it lacks international compatibility. In
the UK, a strategic approach to add chips to plastic cards has been
established through APACS. The so-called ICC project is expected to
have a chip card in production by the end of 1997.

Although the chip project was prompted by concerns over fraud, and the
realisation that magnetic strip technology was reaching the end of its
life cycle, APACS soon became aware that the industry costs of
introducing the new chip technology could not be justified on projected
fraud savings alone.

APACS notes that the recent growth in electronic commerce has placed a
new imperative on financial institutions to be able to offer secure
payment services. The Internet is a prime example of the need for such
secure payments.

Chip-enabled plastic, as such, is a good entry point as the card is a
useful mechanism for transporting the chip which, in turn, is good
technology for storing the tokens necessary for secure services.

The UK aims to have 50% of its point-of-sale terminal base converted to
chip delivering 65% by value of UK transaction turnover by the end of
the millennium. It is anticipated that the whole of the ATM network
will be converted in a similar period or earlier.

The project, which includes the active involvement of the major
schemes, Europay (representing Mastercard), Visa and Switch should
provide a quantum leap in card security.

Smart cards will provide the future technology for the payments
industry.

Initially, experts suggest, the new cards will probably be programmed
with a signature comparison facility, along with an ability to check
the card user's pin code.

But if the technology improves, so-called biometric information could
be included, possibly involving a finger-print scan, dynamic signature
verification, back of hand vein checks, retina scans and - perhaps one
day - voice recognition. This will certainly give tomorrow's fraudsters
plenty to ponder.

Trends in UK plastic card fraud

Pounds millions fraud losses

1990                125.6
1991                165.5
1992                165.0
1993                129.8
1994                 96.8

Source:  APACS



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "44"></A>Copyright
THE BANKER via NewsNet
February 1, 1996

THE BOTTOM LINE

The outlook for European economies and financial institutions over the
short, medium and long term bears considerable scrutiny. Uncertainties
and unknowables notwithstanding, the prospect of much faster change
than many people believe or can absorb is, or should be, of major
concern. The fall of communism in the late 1980s led to a cataclysm in
central and eastern Europe; the spillover, the spectacular economic
growth in Asia, and the pervasive impact of technology are factors that
many in western Europe may not have fully taken on board.

As historian Eric Hobsbawm noted in Age of Extremes: 'Perhaps the most
striking characteristic of the end of the twentieth century is the
tension between the accelerating process of globalisation and the
inability of both public institutions and the collective behaviour of
human beings to come to terms with it.'

Although western Europe is not alone in wrestling with these issues,
history and tradition weigh heavily on those in the EU; radical change
will not come easily. Already this year the spectre of economic
weakness and reduced growth has spread across the continent and touched
the strongest economy, Germany. Recent figures showing rising
unemployment, lower growth expectations and expected larger budget
deficits have altered perceptions of Germany and, as a result, Europe
overall.

Analysts believe the near term risk in Europe is one of deflation as
countries, while continuing to keep a hold on inflation, struggle to
meet Maastricht convergence criteria for European economic and monetary
union (EMU) and strong core currencies erode competitiveness.

However, the risks are also much broader. Much is at stake and monetary
union is only one aspect of a Europe needing to reposition itself in a
fast-changing global environment.

But EMU represents the prime challenge now and 1996 is critical if
union is to proceed. By the end of this year experts believe it will be
clear whether January 1999 will be the genuine starting date, and if
the project is viable.

A consensus appears to be emerging that a small group of countries
could start, but that both Germany and France would have to be
included, as anything less than two major economies would not be
acceptable. Will the convergence criteria be met? Some recent views
suggest that Germany and France are now likely to have deficits in 1997
of 3.3% of gross domestic product (GDP), in excess of the official 3.0%
criteria, but that governments would not object to such modest
overshooting.

The problem comes if the current economic downturn persists and the
deficits rise to the 4% of GDP range. Governments would then find it
difficult to accept such large overshootings, even if other criteria
were more or less acceptable. Does Europe, from the handful of
countries that could make 1999 to those which cannot, have the will to
meet the targets and strive for long-term goals?

Alexandre Lamfalussy, president of the European Monetary Institute, the
forerunner of the European Central Bank, made encouraging noises in
late January. 'European citizens are just as mature and well-informed
as financial market operators. Over time experience has taught them to
assess the effects of economic policy decisions from the viewpoint
which goes beyond the short term.

'They are, therefore, aware of the overriding necessity of bringing the
rising trend of public spending on social security, health care and
pension schemes under control - because they know that in the long term
these increases will jeopardise the whole of our social welfare
system.' Unfortunately, Lamfalussy appears more hopeful than realistic.
Evidence suggests that, except perhaps for the Germans, governments,
the public and financial institutions are not well aware of the long-
term implications of EMU and have scarcely addressed the issue beyond
narrow, parochial parameters.

Most banks appear not to be technically prepared even if the political
go-ahead is given. And what will be the relationship between the
handful of countries that could make 1999 and those which do not?

Uncertainties multiply and even if Lamfalussy's optimistic opinion of
'European citizens' is accepted, much still needs to be done to make
the partnership between the political decision-makers and the private
sector on EMU really work. There is little evidence to show that
financial institutions are taking a proactive stance on anything to do
with EMU.

Can a wait and see policy work? If the 1999 start founders, as it
might, and delays are ruled unacceptable, as is likely, the lack of an
EMU process will have severe long-term implications. EMU, like it or
not, is Europe's response to globalisation and if a void ensues then
Europe will be the loser.

Looking longer term to 2006, what are the prospects? The only
certainties appear to be that Asia will not stand still and that
technology will continue to reshape employment. Since the industrial
revolution technology has shifted employment upstream; today that
process is accelerating and politicians' rhetoric that more education
is needed belies the fact that fewer real jobs in certain sectors are
being created and fewer are likely to be created.

EMU represents a long-term strategy for Europe. It may not be perfect
but if governments, the public and also banks do not take a proactive
approach there will be no strategy. Europeans need to look to their
future and act accordingly.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>
